MEMOIRS OF Denmark, Containing the LIFE and REIGN Of the Late K. of Denmark,
Norway, etc. CHRISTIAN V.

TOGETHER With an Exact Account of the Rise and Progress of those Differences
now on foot betwixt the Two Houses of Denmark and Holstein Gottorp; with all
the Remarkable Circumstances thereunto belonging, taken from Authentic Letters
and Records;

By J. C. Med. D. Fellow of the Royal Society, and a Member of the College of
Physicians.

LONDON, Printed, and Sold by John Nutt near Stationers' Hall. 1700.

THE EPISTLE DEDICATORY TO Her Royal Highness THE Princess ANNE OF DENMARK.
May it please Your Royal Highness,
I Here present to You a Prince, whose Memory, as well by reason of his Noble
Qualifications, as of the Honor he had to be Allied to You by the strict Ties
of Blood (being the Only Brother to Your Royal Spouse) cannot but be very
sacred to You. If there be any thing in Sympathy, it is certain, that a Soul so
Great and Noble as His, would disdain to court the Patronage of any other
Person, than Your Royal Highness, whose Eminent Station, You are placed in by
Providence in this Realm, Entitles You in a most peculiar manner to it. It is
this, that has enboldned me to lay the following Treatise at Your Highnesses
feet; which without this Plea, I should look upon as an impardonable
Presumption. And upon this Occasion, I know, I should enter upon the Theme of
Your Royal Virtues; but as the Illustrious Rank You bear in these Kingdoms has
rendered them so Conspicuous to the eyes of All the World, as to be beyond the
due Praises of a private Hand, so I will rather deviate from the common Road of
our Modern Dedicators, than fall under the Censure of having undertaken a
Task, I acknowledge my self unable to perform. I will only say thus much in my
own behalf, that, as by the exact Harmony that is betwixt both Your Royal
Highnesses, You set a Pattern of Conjugal Love to the Whole Kingdom; so Your
Goodness, which is so diffusive to all, and has gained to You the Hearts of
many Thousands, could not but be so prevailing with me, as to implore Your
Protection, which if You will be pleased to afford me, under the shelter of a
Prince, whose Life and Reign is the Chief Subject of the ensuing Treatise, You
will at once, give an ample Testimony to the World, of the High Value You put
upon his Memory, and raise the Author's Ambition to the highest pitch of
Ambition, he ever could pretend to, in affording a Generous Acceptance to his
Endeavors, which without that, he looks upon, as altogether disproportionable
to the Greatness of the Subject he Treats of. I will end with this hearty Wish,
that That Conjugal Harmony, which ties both Your Royal Highnesses Hearts with
an indissoluble Knot, may be Everlasting; and as by Your Moderation and
Goodness You are become the Darling of these Nations, so may the happy Effects
of it, redound to Your Both sides Satisfaction, to the Happiness of Your Royal
Offspring, and the Welfare of these Nations. This is the most fervent Wish and
Desire of him, who begs Leave once more to subscribe himself

Your Royal Highnesses Most Humble, Most Faithful, And devoted Servant, J.
Crull.

THE PREFACE.
I Thought I could not pitch upon a more seasonable Juncture to expose the
following Memoirs to Public View, than this, when the Differences betwixt the
two Houses of Denmark and Holstein Gottorp (which make up a considerable part
of them) are likely to kindle a War in the North. I was also persuaded, that I
could not easily hit upon a more favorable opportunity, than this to vindicate
in some measure, the Memory of a Brave and Generous Prince, from the Aspersions
cast upon him some Years ago by a certain Person, who, as he is generally
supposed to have had but a very slender insight into the Affairs of the North,
The Author of the Account of Denmark, 1692.
by reason of his being unacquainted with the Language and true State of those
Countries, so had by his own Confession, taken many things, he tells us with so
much Assurance, upon the Credit of others; Besides, that the ill Conduct he is
charged with by the Danish Court, which drew upon him the Indignation of that
Prince, whose Life and Reign we have given you an Account of in the following
Sheets, may give us some Reason to suspect, that Revenge and Malice might have
a considerable Share in those Suggestions, some of which, to speak the Truth,
contain more Bitterness than is consistent with the true Genius of an unbiased
Historian. It was not my Province at this time to enter upon an Examination of
any of the Particulars of that Kidney contained in the said Treatise; my
Opinion being, that by giving a true Account of the Chief Transactions of the
Life and Reign of this Prince, together with what attended them, and that from
authentic and unquestionable Authority, I should be able to put things in a
true light, leaving the rest to the Judgment of the impartial Reader.

As I have not the least Engagement to the Danish Crown, either by Birth,
Interest, or upon any other account, so I have taken all imaginable Care, to
represent Matters without Passion or prepossession, as will be easily
discernable by all such, as will take the pains to compare the Reasons alleged
and inserted here, on both sides, founded altogether upon authentic Letters
and Abstracts of the Records of those Countries. To represent to the Reader the
whole Matter in Contest betwixt those two Houses, in as full a View as the Bulk
of this Treatise would admit of; I thought it absolutely requisite to trace the
very Original of those Differences, which make so much Noise in the World at
present, as in the Introduction, I have endeavored to show the steps that were
made toward that Revolution, which was the Consequence of that War, which
reduced the Kingdom of Denmark to the very brink of destruction, the Effects of
which, it is sensible of to this day.

For the rest, there are three different Instances in this Treatise of the
Mischiefs which always are the unavoidable Consequences of intestine Divisions.

The Nobility of Denmark made it their Business for several Ages together to
Aggrandize their own Power, by suppressing both the Royal Prerogatives, and the
Liberties of the other Estates; all the fruits they reaped by it, were to
involve the Kingdom into such Troubles, as had almost proved fatal to it, and
ended in the Total Ruin of their so much admired Greatness.

On the other hand, the Commonalty of Hamborough, not contented with a
reasonable Share (allotted them by the fundamental Constitution of that
Commonwealth) in the Management of the Government, were for clipping the
Senates Authority, to Aggrandize their own, the Consequences of which were,
that finding themselves entangl'd in unsurmountable Difficulties, they
furnished a fair Opportunity, for the Danish King to renew his old Pretensions
(which, to confess the Truth, are none of the worst) and to back them with Fire
and Sword; The issue of it was, that the Mischief fell upon the heads of those,
who had been the Chief occasion of it; though at the same time the remainders of
those Dissentions are not rooted out to this day, and consequently the same
Danger attends them. So certain it is, that whenever the Foundation-stone, upon
which the Frame of the Government is built, is either removed or weakened, the
Structure must of necessity fall, be it soon or late.

I need not enlarge my self much upon the Third, which are the Differences
betwixt Denmark and Holstein Gottorp, the Effects of it have made too much
Noise in our Age, as not to be remembered; What advantage did Frederick the
present Duke of Holstein's Grandfather get, by first removing the
Foundation-stone of the ancient Unions betwixt those two Families, in siding
with Sweden against Denmark? Besides the devastations of his Territories during
that War with Sweden, which had almost proved fatal to Denmark; his Son
Christian Albert paid dearly for the so much coveted Title of Sovereign, being
forced to live in Exile for near fourteen Years together; whilst the House of
Denmark raised vast Sums out of his Dominions, to make themselves some Amends
for what they had suffered by his Father's siding with their Enemy; though it
must be confessed on the other hand, that this was a slender Recompense for the
Loss of so many fair Provinces, wherewith they were forced to buy their Peace
from the Swedes: A remarkable Instance of what Danger attends those Alterations
in a State, which strike at the root of its Constitution, the determination of
the Differences begun and continued for near fifty years ago, being but now, in
all likelihood, left to the longest Sword.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Introduction. Page 1 CHAP. I. Of the Condition of the Kingdom of Denmark,
at the time of King Christian V, his Accession to the Throne. p. 29 CHAP. II.
Of the Origin of the Differences, betwixt Denmark and the House of Holstein
Gottorp. p. 37 CHAP. III. The Occasion and Causes of the Differences betwixt
Denmark and the House of Holstein Gottorp. p. 42 CHAP. IV. What occasioned the
Rupture betwixt the late King of Denmark, Christian V. and Christian Albert the
late Duke of Holstein Gottorp. p. 53 CHAP. V. An Account of the Rupture betwixt
King Christian V. King of Denmark, and Christian Albert Duke of Holstein
Gottorp. p. 58 CHAP. VI. The ensuing War betwixt Charles XI. King of Sweden,
and Christian V. King of Denmark and his Allies. CHAP. VII. The true State of
the Difference arisen betwixt Christian V. King of Denmark, and Christian
Albert Duke of Holstein Gottorp, after the Treaty of Rensburgh, till the Treaty
of Fountain-Bleau and Attena. p. 83 CHAP. VIII. An Account of the Siege of
Hamburgh, undertaken by King Christian V. in the Year 1686. p. 90 CHAP. IX. Of
the Differences arisen betwixt King Christian V. and the young Duke of Holstein
Gottorp, after the death of his Father Christian Albert. p. 98. CHAP. X. The
Character of King Christian V. His Court, the Royal Family, and some other
Matters relating to His Person. p. 145 The Conclusion. p. 153
Errata's.
Page 30. in lieu of Frederick Aemilia. read Prederick Emilia. ibid. in lieu of
King Charles XII. r. Charles XI.

MEMOIRS OF Denmark.
THE INTRODUCTION.
THose who have applied themselves to make the most Exact Scrutiny of the
ancient Monuments, do unanimously agree in this, That, as the Northern Kingdoms
are the most ancient in Europe: So, Denmark may contend for Antiquity with any
of the other Northern Monarchies; though for want of Authentic Records amongst
those Barbarous Nations, their first Origin and the Great Deeds of their
Monarchs are buried in Oblivion. Frotho III. is Famous among the ancient
Northern Monarchs, who Reigned some time before our Savior's Birth, and Styled
himself King of Denmark, Sweden, Norway, England, and Ireland, being the first
who Assumed the Title of King of the Vandals (inhabiting that Part of Germany,
which is now called Pomerania and Mecklenburgh) retained by the Kings of
Denmark, as well as those of Sweden to this day. It is beyond all Dispute that
Gotrick (Successor to his Brother Sigifried, the then King of Denmark) did
Assist Witiekind Duke of the Saxons, against Charles the Great the Roman
Emperor.

About the Year 846, The Christian Religion introduced in Denmark.
under the Reign of King Erick, the Christian Religion was first introduced in
Denmark, by the Means of Ansgarius Bishop of Bremen; but was not Established
there, till under the Reign of Gormo II. who being Vanquished by the Emperor
Henry, Sir-named the Fowler, was forced to grant the free Exercise of the
Christian Religion in Denmark. His Grandson Sueno Otto Conquered some Part of
England, who being succeeded by his Son Canute II. Sir-nam'd the Great, he
completed the Conquest of this Island, and was King of Denmark, England, and
Norway; but having divided these three Kingdoms betwixt his three Sons, to wit,
Harald, who had England for his Share, Canute who succeeded him in Denmark, and
Sueno, who was King of Norway, he thereby so weakened their Power, England
Conquered by the Danes.
that the Successor of Harald, Hardiknutt, was chased out of England, and
Magnus King of Norway made himself Master of Denmark. Among the succeeding
Kings of Denmark, Waldemar II. was the most Potent, who succeeding his Father
Canute VI. (who after he had forced the Princes of the Vandals to do him
Homage, revived the ancient Title of King of the Vandals, among the Kings of
Denmark) brought the Countries of Esthonia, Livonia, Curland, Prussia,
Pomerania, Rugen, Mecklenburgh, Holstein, Stormar, Ditmarsen and Wagern under
his Subjection, most of which, however, soon after Revolted from the Crown, and
were Reunited with the German Empire.

After his Death the Kingdom of Denmark was miserably torn to pieces by the
succeeding Kings, who dethroned one another, according as they were backed by a
stronger Party, till after an Inter-Regnum of seven Years, the Danes were
forced to recall Waldermar III. the Son of their Banished King, Christopher II.
He in some measure restored the decayed State of the Kingdom by chasing the
Holsteiners out of Denmark, and Re-uniting Shonen and Gotland with the Crown.
His Grandson Olaus VI. born of Margaret his Daughter, and Hacquin, King of
Norway, was the first who united the two Northern Crowns of Denmark and Norway,
The Crowns of Denmark, Norway, and Sweden united.
as his Mother Margaret, who succeeded him in both those Kingdoms (he dying
very young) afterward joined with them the Crown of Sweden, pursuant to an
Agreement made in the Year 1396, for this Purpose by the Estates of these three
Kingdoms at Calmar. And here I cannot pass by in silence what some Modern
Authors have attempted to persuade the World, The Account of Denmark 1692.
That the Crown of Denmark was anciently Elective; whereas it is most evident,
that (not to mention those Times before Christianity was introduced in that
Kingdom) ever since the Reign of King Sigifried, who reigned about the Year
800, till the Death of this Queen Margaret, which happened in the Year 1412;
The Danish Monarchy anciently Hereditary.
(being the space of above 600 Years) this Crown has been in a perpetual lineal
Succession of one Family, that the same has been devolved to the Females, and
several times divided and disposed of by the last Will and Testament of those
Monarchs. And it may well deserve our particular Observation in this place,
that under the Reign of Erick the Pomeran, who succeeded Margaret (being her
Sisters Daughter's Son and a Foreigner) the States then insisted the first time
upon their Right of a free Election, when he was endeavoring to establish
Bogislaus, his Cousin German in the Throne; This being the first Step made by
the Nobility to enlarge their Power, both above the King and the other Estates,
which they effected afterward by Degrees, when the Oldenburgh Family in the
Year 1448, (after the most ancient Race of the Danish Kings was extinguished in
Christopher III. Erick's Sisters Son, and Successor) ascended the Throne; which
excessive Increase of the Power of the Nobility proved the Real Occasion of
that remarkable Revolution, which happened but a few Years before the Accession
to the Throne of Christian V. whose Life and Reign is to be the Chief Subject
of this Treatise.

But to come to the Oldenburgh Family, from whence the present King of Denmark
is descended.

This House derives its Origin from the Famous Wittekind, one of the ancient
Kings of Saxony, who after having very Valiantly defended his Country against
that Potent Emperor Charles the Great, for the space of thirty Years, and
being forced to Surrender himself to his Conqueror, was about the Year 785,
converted to the Christian Faith, and for his Great Services done afterward to
the Emperor, made Great Duke of Saxony: He died fighting Couragio^sly against
the Suevians, Origin of the Oldenburgh Family.
fo the Emperor, in the Year 800, and was Buried in the Church of Angria, from
whence his Body was Translated to Paderborn by his Greater Nephew the Emperor
Henry, Sir-nam'd the Fowler.

As to the Succession of the Earls of Oldenburgh before they were advanced to
the Royal Dignity, it is to be observed, that one Hajo, descended from the
Dukes of Frisia, married Rixa the Daughter of John Earl of Oldenburgh, Great
Grandson of Walpertus, who was Son of Wigbert the Son of the above mentioned
Duke Wittekind. This Hajo had by his Wife Rixa, an only Son, called Elimarus,
who after the Decease of Frederick his Cousin German, became Earl of
Oldenburgh. He was succeeded by Elimarus II. his Son, and had for his Successor
Christian, Famous for his Bravery, especially in his Wars against Henry,
Sir-nam'd the Lion, Elector of Saxony. After him was Earl of Oldenburgh,
Christian his eldest Son, who being murdered as he was Traveling to
Jerusalem, having no Issue, was succeeded by Maurice his younger Brother. This
Earl retiring into a Monastery, left the Earldom to his Eldest Son Otho; who,
dying likewise without Issue, was succeeded by Christian II. his third Brother,
the Second being a Canon of Cologne and Bremen. After his Death, John his
eldest Son, was Earl of Oldenburgh and Delmenhorst. After his Death, Conrade
his only Son, was Earl of both the before mentioned Earldoms, who was
succeeded by his eldest Son Maurice; but he leaving only two Daughters behind
him, the Succession to both those Earldoms was devolved to Theodorick the
Eldest Son of Conrade, by a second Adventure.

This Theodorick, Sir-nam'd the Fortunate, after the Death of his first Spouse
Adelheda Delmenhorst, Sister to Nicholas, Archbishop of Bremen, by whom he had
no Issue, taking to his Wise Hedwig, Widow of Balthazar, Duke of M^^^lenburgh,
and Sister to Gerard and (...), Dukes of Sleswick and Holstein, had by her
several Children, among whom, Christian, being the eldest Son, not only
succeeded him in the Countries of Oldenburgh and Delmenhorst, but was also
afterward, to wit, in the Year 1448, at the Recommendation of his Uncle
Adolph, Duke of Sleswick and Holstein, elected King of Denmark, by the Estates
of that Kingdom, the Right of Choosing a King being devolved to them, after the
ancient Race of their Kings was extinguished.

This Christian had great Contests with the Swedes and Norwegians, Christian I.
who had chosen one Charles Cnutson their King; but the Differences of the last
being Composed, and he invested with the Crown of Norway, he forced the Swedes
likewise to Crown him King of Sweden, in the Year 1458. And his Uncle Adolph,
(whose Heir he was) dying without Issue, he succeeded him in the Dukedom of
Sleswick and Earldom of Holstein; which was afterward, to wit, in the Year
1474, by the Emperor, erected into a Dukedom, King Christian having bought out
the Claims of Gerard and Otho, Earls of Shauenburgh, to those Countries, by
giving to the last 43000 Florins of Gold, besides some other Possessions; and
to the first 50000 Marks of Silver, and the Earldom of Oldenburgh (reserving
however, the Title to himself) as an Equivalent for his Share in those
Countries. Having likewise Incorporated Stormar, Wagern, and Ditmarsen, with
the Dukedom of Holstein; his Style was: King of Denmark, Norway, and Sweden; of
the Goths and Vandals, Duke of Sleswick, Holstein, Stormar, Wagern and
Ditmarsen; Earl of Oldenburgh and Delmenhorst, which he left to his Successors,
and is the Style of the present King of Denmark, except that of Sweden, which
the Kings of Denmark have laid aside since the Separation of those Crowns. The
Order of the Elephant.
He was in the Year 1474. (being then at Rome) invested with the Knightly Order
of the Elephant, which he afterward introduced in Denmark, at the Wedding of
his Son. The Badge of the Knights of this Order is an Elephant with a Castle on
its Back, set with Diamonds, and hung on a watered Skycolour'd Ribbon, worn in
the same manner as the George is in England. The Tombs of the Danish Kings.
This King also built that Magnificent Chapel in the Cathedral of Roshilt,
where are to be seen the Tombs of the succeeding Kings of Denmark.

After his Death, John, King John.
his third Son (the two eldest being dead before) was declared King of Denmark
and Norway, and not long after, likewise of Sweden, but was forced to fight for
the Possession of it with Steen Sture, who headed a strong Party against him,
which War was finished at last to his Advantage. He also divided the Dukedom of
Holstein with his younger Brother Fredrick, from whom are descended the present
Dukes of that Name.

He was succeeded by his eldest Son Christian II. in the Kingdoms of Denmark
and Norway, Christian II.
who, like his Father, was obliged to Contend for the Crown of Sweden with
Steen Sture, Regent of that Kingdom; who being at last slain in an Engagement,
King Christian exercised great Cruelties against his Heirs and Adherents, whose
Estates, he bestowed upon the Danes and other Foreigners, being backed by
Gustave Trolle, the then Archbishop of Sweden, which so exasperated the Swedes,
that as soon as they understood that the Jutlanders were in Rebellion against
him, they took this Opportunity to chase the Danes out of the Kingdom, under
the Conduct of Gustave Erickson, afterward their King; and the Danes being
Encouraged by the Example of the Swedes, renounced likewise their Allegiance to
him, King Christian Deposed.
and Elected Fredrick I. his Uncle (being the fourth Son of King Christian I.)
in his stead.

It was under the Reign of this King the Danish Nobility made the greatest step
toward that Geandeur they attained to afterward, which at last proved their
Ruin by that Remarkable Revolution, which happened in that Kingdom within these
forty Years. Increase of the Power of the Danish Nobility.
For, the Danish Nobility being grown Rich with the Spoils they had made in
Sweden during the Union of the Northern Crowns under one Head, laid hold of
this Opportunity; after they had withdrawn themselves from the Obedience of
Christian II. to Assert their pretended Right of Election, and, whilst
Christian and Fredrick were contending for the Crown, to prescribe such Rules
to the last, as to advance their own Power, both above the Royal Prerogatives
and the other Estates. King Fredrick I. was by all understanding People looked
upon as a Prince who had a greater Share of Piety than Policy when he suffered
the Reformation of Luther to be introduced in that Kingdom, at a time, when the
Nobility were already overgrown in Riches and Power; it being evident, that,
the Power of the Bishops and Prelates, who hitherto had kept up in some measure
the Balance, being fallen with their Revenues, this must needs be the greatest
Step that could be made by the Nobility, toward the advancing themselves not
only far beyond the Clergy, but also above the other Estates. It is easily to
be imagined, that, the Royal Prerogatives being once brought into so narrow
Bounds as they were, and the Clergy's Authority in a manner quite abolished,
the Corporations alone were not able to resist long against those, who sitting
at the Helm, had the Chief Management of all Affairs o^ Moment, and the
Peasantry, having for the most part an entire Dependence on the Nobility, as
being partly their Tenants, partly their Vassals, were not in a Condition of
making so much as the least Show of Resistance against those, who were their
Lords and Masters. Thus indeed the Name of the four ancient Estates of Denmark,
to wit, the Nobility, Clergy, Citizens, and Peasants remained, whilst all the
Authority and Power was effectually lodged in the First, which in the
succeeding Reigns did increase to such a degree, as proved intolerable to the
other Estates, and brought the whole Kingdom to the very brink of Destruction,
as we shall have occasion to show hereafter.

King Fredrick I. dying in the Year 1533, Christian III
was succeeded by his eldest Son Christian III. but not without Great
Opposition from Christopher Earl of Oldenburgh and the Lubeckers, who being
backed by several Provinces, and especially by the Bishops, left no stone
unturned to restore King Christian II. (then a Prisoner in the Castle of
Calenburgh) to the Throne; but with the Assistance of Gustave King of Sweden,
and of the Danish Nobility, he overcame those Difficulties, The Protestant
Religion Established in Denmark.
and after he had made himself Master of Copenhagen (the Capital City of
Denmark) he deposed the Bishops, and established the Protestant Religion
according to the Doctrine of Luther, upon the same Foundation, which remains to
this day in Denmark.

The Nobility in the mean while were very careful to lay hold of this
Opportunity to increase their Power, to such a degree, that not only the whole
Senate of the Kingdom, and all the other Great Offices of the Court were in
their Possession, but also did claim a Right to all the rest of any Moment, and
a Privilege to be consulted with all in the Disposing of all Offices of Trust
or Profit, though to be given to Noblemen. Excessive Power of the Nobility in
Denmark.
Nay they did not stick here; for they claimed a Prerogative, and actually
exercised the same, of Appointing Magistrates in most Cities of the Kingdom,
and by Depriving the rest of the Estates (both Citizens and Clergymen) of their
Rights of purchasing any Lands, had brought them under an entire Subjection.
They had carried Matters to such a pitch, that if by Mortgaging or otherwise,
any Lands happened to fall into a Commoner's hands, he was obliged by a yearly
public Proclamation to proffer them to Sale to the Nobility, upon the same
Terms as he was possessed of them. It is very natural to imagine, that thereby
the Citizens and Peasants were forced to depend on them, as the Possession of
the Lands of the Kingdom entitling them to the Rights of Patronages, the Clergy
was fain for the most part, to dance after their Pipe.

They continued to play the same Game under the Reign of his Son and Successor,
King Fredrick II.
Fredrick II. who being a mild Prince, and entangled in a War with Sweden, and
the Ditmarsians was not in a Condition to oppose their encroaching Power.

He dying in the Year 1588, Christian IV.
was succeeded by his Son Christian IV. who being a Brave and resolute Prince,
made some steps toward redressing the Grievances, occasioned by the overgrown
Power of the Nobility, after he had made an Honorable Peace with the Swedes,
Is disappointed in his Designs of Clipping the Wings of the Nobility.
who were forced to redeem Calmar and Elfsburgh with Money. But being made
General of the Circle of the lower Saxony, he was unfortunately entangled in
the Civil Wars of Germany; and having received a Signal Overthrow near
Kings-Luttern, saw himself reduced under a Necessity of making the best Terms
he could with the Imperialists, in the Year 1629. This Disgrace having broken
all his measures at home, the Nobility, who dreaded his Courage, were for
thwarting his Designs upon all Occasions, especially by exempting themselves as
much as possibly could be from Taxes and other Burdens, which consequently
falling altogether upon the Commons, who were not alone in a Condition to
provide for the Security of the Kingdom, this encouraged the Swedes, then
flushed with their Victories in Germany, to fall with an Army first into
Holstein and Jutland, and afterward into Schonen, in the Year 1642, with such
Success, that they had likely to have endangered the whole Kingdom, if the
Danes, Chiefly by the extraordinary Valor of their King, had not made hard
Shift to defend themselves, till by the Mediation of France, a Peace was
concluded in the Year 1645, at Bosembro, by Virtue of which the Danes were
forced to surrender Gothland, Oesel, and Jempterland to the Swedes; and the
Hollanders, who had assisted the Swedes with Ships, took this Opportunity to
regulate the Toll of the Sound, which they lowered to one Moiety of what it was
before, acording to the Danish Book of Rates, made some Years before; so that
what with this, and the Losses of the unfortunate Wars with the Emperor and
the Swedes, this King, who died in the Year 1648, left Things in great
Confusion.

The Calamities of these two unsuccessful Wars, Intrigues of the Nobility after
his Death.
being Chiefly attributed to the Nobility, who had the Management of all
Affairs of Moment, they were so far from abating any thing of their
Pretensions, that, they sought for nothing more than a fair Opportunity to
enlarge them. It is to be observed, that King Christian IV. had married several
of his Daughters by a second Adventure to some of the Chiefest of the Danish
Nobility, thereby to link them the more firm to his Interest, which proved
quite contrary to his Expectations. For, these being strengthened by this
Alliance, were for Excluding Fredrick III. second Son of the said Christian IV.
(after the Death of Christian his elder Brother) from the Crown, and for
setting up Wolmar, his younger Son, by a second Adventure, being backed by a
great part of the Nobility, who were for Fishing in Troubled Waters, and did
not question but to find their Account in widning those Domestic Dissentions,
or at least, to Aggrandize their own Power. It Is true, they could not compass
their Design, as to the Advancement of Wolmar to the Throne, yet they thus far
got the Point, that, before they would receive Fredrick III. for their King,
they reduced the Royal Prerogatives, as well as the Condition of the Commoners
into so narrow Bounds, that of the first there was nothing but the bare Title
left; and the last were Excluded from all, not excepting Military Employments;
so that in the succeeding War with Sweden, it was looked upon as the greatest
Novelty in the World, to see a Commoner above the Station of a Captain in
Denmark; and the Nobles now began even to refuse to Allow these Taxes, which of
late Years, they had paid by way of Voluntary Contributions, by which means the
whole Burden of supporting the Charges of the Government, being laid upon the
Shoulders of those, who had the least Share in the Management of Affairs, and
of the Profit, the Weight of it grew unsupportable to them.

In the mean while, King Fredrick III. enters in a War against Sweden.
K. Fredrick III. having happily surmounted those Obstacles, and looking with a
very jealous Eye upon the prodigious Progresses made by the Swedes in Poland,
did at the Instigation of the Hollanders, attack them, promising himself great
Success by their Assistance, at a time, when the Swedish Forces were at a great
distance, and much weakened by many Engagements against the Poles and Tartars.
But Charles Gustave, the Swedish King marched his Troops with such incredible
Swiftness, notwithstanding the badness of the Season, into Holstein and
Jutland, that before the Danes could be Reinforced by the Dutch and the rest
of their Allies, Great Success of the Swedes.
he carried all before him, and took the Fortress of Frederick's Vdde by Storm:
In the next following Year, 1658, there happening an Extraordinary Frost, he
marched over the Ice, first into the Isle of Fuhnen, where he surprised the
Danish Troops, who little dreamed of their Enemy; from thence taking his way
over Langland, Laland, and Falster, with little Opposition from the Danish
side, into Zealand. K. Fredrick III. astonished at this prodigious Success of
the Swedes, occasioned Chiefly by the Miscarriages of his Danish Commanders,
thought it the most prudent way to divert this imminent Danger of losing All by
purchasing a Peace with the Loss of Part of the Kingdom; Pursuant to which
Resolution, Peace of roshilt.
a Peace was Concluded at Roshilt, by virtue of which the Danes surrendered to
the Swedes, the Countries of Halland, Bleckingen and Shonen, the Isle of
Bornholm, and the Cities of Bahus and Drontheim in Norway; and the Duke of
Holstein Gottorp, was declared independent from the Crown of Denmark. But this
Peace had not the desired Effect; for whilst the Estates of Denmark were
contending among themselves where to lay the Fault of the late Miscarriages,
which was Chiefly attributed to the Nobility; and the Emperor, Elector of
Brandenburgh and Hollanders, were underhand encouraging the Danes to renew the
War with Sweden, as soon as they should have quitted the Country, or be engaged
again with Poland, resolved to be beforehand with them; The War renewed betwixt
Denmark and Sweden.
for which Purpose, having embarked his Forces in Holstein, under Pretense of
going toward Dantzick, he landed unexpectedly in Zealand, using for a
Pretense, that he was come to Compose the Differences arisen betwixt the King
and the Nobility; he ordered his General Wrangel, to attack the strong Fortress
of Cronenburgh, whilst he in Person laid Siege to the Capital City of
Copenhagen, where he knew the Royal Family, greatest part of the Nobility, and
their Riches were enclosed.

The Nobles finding themselves and the whole Kingdom reduced to this Extremity,
Siege of Copenhagen.
and that all their Safety consisted in the Defense of this City, began at this
time of Danger to change their Tune, and to Court those at a high rate, whom
they had despised and oppressed before; they promised the Citizens of
Copenhagen a Vote in all public Consultations, a Privilege to purchase Lands
and Lordships, and to enjoy them with the same Rights as the Nobles did, and to
be Burdened with no Taxes, unless such as the Nobility did pay, and that not
without Public Consent; Besides which, they were to be free from all
inquarterings of Soldiers in time of Peace, and their Children to be Capable
of bearing all Places of Honor and Profit equally with the Noble men's Sons.
These and such like Encouragements, but especially the Presence of their King,
who animated his Subjects with an incredible Constancy and Bravery at all
times, and in all places, where the danger was greatest, had so powerful an
influence upon the Minds of the Inhabitants, that they disputed every Inch of
Ground with the Swedes, Bravely defended.
being resolved rather to be buried in the Ruins of their City than to submit
their Necks to a Foreign Yoke; but their brave Resolution would perhaps have
stood them in little stead, if the Dutch Fleet, which with incredible Bravery
fought their Way through the Sweedish Men of War and several strong Chains, that
opposed their Passage, had not come very opportunely to their Relief, which
obliged the Swedish King, The Siege raised.
after he had in vain Stormed the City, to raise the Siege.

The Danes seeing themselves relieved from this Danger, which threatened the
utter Destruction of their Monarchy, and being reinforced by the Imperialists,
The Swedes defeated.
Polish and Brandenburgh Auxiliaries, fought the Swedish Army with such success
near Wiburgh in the Isle of Fuhnen, that they cut off their whole Infantry, and
made most of their Horse Prisoners of War. There happened not long after
another sinister Accident to the Swedes which made them lay aside all thoughts
of Conquering their Neighbors; for their Brave King Gustave Adolfe, happening
to die on the 23d of February, in the Year 1660 they clapped up a sudden Peace
with the Poles at Oliva; and the Danes seemed resolved to pursue the Advantage
they had got, yet by the Mediation of England, France and Holland, a Peace was
concluded betwixt the two Northern Crowns at Copenhagen, much upon the same
Conditions with that made at Roshilt, two years before, except that the Isle of
Bornholm, and Drontheim in Norway remained in the Possession of the Danes.
Peace of Copenhagen.


It is no difficult matter to judge that so unfortunate a War had reduced the
whole Kingdom to a Miserable Condition; to redress which, Assembly of the
Estates of Denmark.
and to provide for the Payment of the Soldiers, the King called together an
Assembly of the Estates toward the beginning of October, which began with grea
Animosities, and consequently with no small Contests betwixt the Nobility and
Commons; the last laying the Calamities sustained by the last War, and the
Occasion of their impending Danger, chiefly at the door of the Nobles, who
sitting at the Helm, had by their Miscarriages opened a door to the Enemy, by
which to enter into the Heart of the Kingdom without opposition; On the other
hand the Nobles appeared so little concerned at the public Calamity, that though
they knew the Country exhausted of Money by so unexpected an Invasion, they
would not abate an Ace of their pretended Prerogatives, but were resolute to
lay the whole burden sof Discharging the Soldiers, and repairing the Losses
sustained in the last War upon the Shoulders of the two other Estates, to wit:
The Commonalty and Clergy. This, I say, caused very warm Debates in the
Assembly, those, who had behaved themselves with so much Bravery in the Defense
of their Capital City and the whole Kingdom, fearing, not without reason, that,
after the Danger was passed, they should be bereaved of the fruits of their
Victories, and the privileges promised to them in time of Imminent Danger by
those very Nobles, who now setting aside all other Considerations, did,
according to their wonted Custom, consult more their own Grandeur than the
present exigency of Affairs. This made Nanson, President of Copenhagen and then
Speaker of the Commons, break out into very smart expressions, representing to
them in what manner those who had been so instrumental in delivering their
Native Country from a Foreign Yoke were likely to be treated by those very
Persons, who had been the occasion of all the Calamities the Kingdom had
groaned under, for these many years past; and that the least satisfaction they
could make at this time, was, to bear an equal Share in those Taxes which must
of necessity be Levied to supply the public Necessity, and to confirm them in
those Privileges, granted not long before, when any dangerous Enterprises were
to be undertaken. The Nobles finding themselves touched in the most sensible
part, and unwilling to abate any thing from their former Grandeur, by suffering
those, whom they looked upon no otherwise than their Vassals, to speak with so
much Boldness; made very severe and bitter Replies to the Speaker, and one Otto
Cragge, a Man of Great Authority among the Nobility, did not stick to tell
them; That they being no more than Slaves, ought to use more Respect to the
Nobility who were resolved to maintain their Right to the utmost.

Nanson the Speaker perceiving the Commons to be highly offended at these
words, by a loved Murmur which run all over the Hall, arose from his Seat, and
briskly replied, That he was well assured the Commons would not take the name
of Salves from the Nobility, which they should soon be convinced of to their
Cost. Difference betwixt the Nobility and Commons.
After which the Assembly broke up, and the Commons Marched in good order to
the Brewers Hall, there to consult how to suppress the Insolence of the
Nobility.

Nanson then reassumed the former Theme, representing to the Commons, how by
the mismanagement of the Nobility, who had Lorded it over the King and People,
they were reduced to those Calamities, they had undergone; of which he gave
them several Instances, which were as yet in fresh Remembrance; and among the
rest, that of the Castle of Cronenburgh, which being the strongest and most
considerable Fortress of the whole Kingdom, and provided with a sufficient
Garrison and suitable Ammunition was furrendred by the three Governors (being
Danish Noble Men) to the Swedish General Wrangel, merely out of Fear, he
having, by discharging his Cannon and other demonstrations of Joy, deceived
them into a Belief, that the City of Copenhagen was taken by the Swedish Army.
He represented to them with what an undaunted Courage they had seen their King
bear the public Calamities as well as his own, and, how often he had exposed
his Person, for their Preservation; and therefore proposed as the only Means to
avoid the same Dangers they had lately groaned under, and to deliver themselves
from the Tyrannical Yoke of the Nobility, to settle the Crown upon the Ancient
Foundation, by declaring the Succession Hereditary, and putting the Absolute
Power of governing the Realm into the King's Hands. This Proposition being
approved of by a General Consent both of the Commonalty and Clergy, the
execution of it was appointed against next Morning; the super-Intendent Swan,
who Headed the Clergy, and Nanson in the mean while communicated their Design
to Hannibal Seastede, then Chief Minister of State, and a great Politician. By
which means the King received notice of the Intensions of the Commons; but such
was his Modesty, as to declare, that he could not but be extremely well
satisfied with their Resolution of making the Succession Hereditary, provided
the Nobles could be prevailed upon to concur with them; but that he never
desired to be Absolute, nor did think it Beneficial for the Kingdom, which
thereby might be exposed to danger hereafter.

The next Morning no sooner appeared, but the Nobles, over secure in their own
Grandeur, and not in the least imagining that those, whom they had been used to
Tyrannize over at pleasure, durst attempt a thing of such a Nature, met, as
usual, in the Council House, in hopes, that the Commons, after their first Heat
was spent, would be ready to submit to what should be proposed to them. But
scarce were they entered upon the Business to be debated that day, when word was
brought, that the Commons were Marching toward the Council Chamber to desire
their concurrence, in making an Offer to the King, of a Hereditary and
Sovereign Dominion.

It is easy to imagine, how great was their Surprise in so nice a juncture,
considering especially that they had no leisure to consult what was to be done
in this present Exigency; In the mean while, the two Estates being headed by
Nanson, entered the Hall, where the Speaker told them in a short Speech, That
the Commons, after mature deliberation, how to deliver the Kingdom from the
many Oppressions and Calamities it had suffered of late years, had found this
the only and most expedient Remedy to render the Succession Hereditary, and to
Enlarge the Royal Prerogatives; That they desired their speedy concurrence in
the Matter, which if they refused, they were resolved to do it without them.
You might have read the Surprise occasioned by so unexpected a Proposition in
every Man's Face, those who the day before had carried themselves so Insolently
toward the Commons, now looking upon one another with dejected Countenances,
finding now too late, that those whom they had looked upon as Slaves, had put
themselves in a Condition to be their Masters, by engaging the Court, Clergy
and Army into their Party. In the midst of those Distractions, the Commons
insisting peremptorily upon an Answer, they told them, that what had been done
by the Commons in favor of the Royal Family and the Public Good, was very
acceptable to them; That they were willing to concur with the Commons in so
good a Work, but desire only some small time, to consider, how to proceed with
that Precaution, as was absolutely requisite for the Accomplishment of a Thing
of such vast Consequence.

Whilst these Debates lasted, the Nobility had found means to send some
Deputies to Court, (unknown to the Commons) who being admitted into the King's
presence, told him in the Name of the whole Body of the Nobility; That the
Proposition made to them by the Commons, of making the Monarchy Hereditary, had
been so sudden and unexpected, that it was impossible for them to proceed in an
Affair of such Moment with so much Deliberation, Offer of the Crown to be
Hereditary to the Heirs Males.
as the Case required; but that however, to show their Readiness in Concurring
with the other Estates in any thing which might be thought conducing to the
Public Good, and the Advancement of the Royal Family, they were sent to make a
Tender of the Crown to be Hereditary for the future to His Majesty and His
Heirs Males; which as it proceeded from a pure Sense of their Gratitude to His
Majesty, so they hoped he would accept of the Offer, and engage the Commons to
join with them in so Great and U^eful an Undertaking, by such Methods, as were
usually practiced in Conventions, when Affairs of Great Moment were to be taken
in hand.

The ^ing received this message with an unparalled Presence of Mind, The
Kings answer.
and without showing the least Alteration either in his Countenance or Action,
he told them with a great deal of indifferency, That the Offer they were come
to make him, could not but be very Acceptable to him, provided it had been
without that Limitation, by which the Females were excluded from the
Succession; that, if they would look back into their own ancient Histories,
they could not but be sensible, that the Government of the Females had not been
looked upon by their Ancestors with the same eyes as they did; that this
Consideration was so prevailing with him, that he hoped, they would not take it
amiss, if he could not accept of their Offer at this time, under those
Restrictions; not that he intended to prescribe them Rules in a Case, which he
was sensible was in their Disposal, but advised them to take it into more
serious Consideration; which done, he should be willing to concur with them in
any thing, which should be approved by the General Consent of the Convention,
as conducing to the Advancement of the Public Good.

This Answer of the King has furnished sufficient Matter to the Politicians to
reflect upon the Conduct of the Nobility, it being agreed on by all hands,
that, provided they had at this Juncture made a seasonable Tender of an
Hereditary Crown, without Exclusion of the Females, and had with a Courage
becoming their Grandeur, joined with the Commons in making this Offer, they
might for the rest, have obtained what they pleased from the King, or at least
prevented their Ruin, by preserving some of their Privileges and Liberties, it
being evident from the King's Answer, given to Hanibal Seastede, after the
first Intention of the Commons was known, that his Aim was not at the Absolute
Sovereignty, but (as he told the Deputies of the Nobility) to have the Crown
settled upon the same Terms as it had been enjoyed by his Ancestors; but the
Nobles being distracted with the Surprise of the suddenness of the Thing, and
the Consternation occasioned by the imminent Danger of parting with their
illgotten Prerogatives, they, whilst they let slip this Opportunity of saving a
Part, were the unhappy Instruments of losing the Whole, as will appear out of
the Sequel of this History.

For, whilst they were in Expectation of the Return of their Deputies, the
Commons, who began to be suspicious of this Delay, showed a great deal of
Impatience, and when the Nobles desired a little more time to consult about an
Affair of so Great Weight, the President told th m roundly; That the Commons
were not so blind, as not to perceive that these were only Shifts, invented by
the Nobility, to gain Time and Opportunity to thwart their Design; That
therefore, if they were willing to join with them in the Resolution taken by
the Commons, they were ready, if not, they were resolved to make the Offer
without their Concurrence; which the Nobles, being unwilling to comply with,
the Commons, headed by the Bishop and the Speaker, went forthwith to Court, The
Commons offer the Hereditary S^veraignty to the King.
where, being conducted by Hanibal Seastede, the Chief Minister of State, into
the King's Presence; the Bishop, in the Name of the Commons, offered in a set
Harangue, the Hereditary Crown, and an Absolute Sovereignty without Limitation
to the King, with an Assurance, that they were ready to make good this Offer
against all Opposers, with their Lives and Fortunes, as believing it the only
Means to redress their Grievances, and to secure the Public Good.

The King told them, that such a Tender as this could not but be Grateful to
him, especially from his Subjects, who had given him such ample Testimonies of
their Fidelity and Valor so lately, in defending his Person, Royal Family and
the Kingdom; that all this should remain in constant Remembrance with him, and
they might rest assured of his Royal Protection, and all the Encouragement due
to the Merits of such good Subjects; But it was absolutely requisite, before he
could accept of their Offer, the Nobles should concur with them (as he had all
the Reason to believe they would) in this Point, for which Reason, it would be
necessary they should continue their Session, till the Nobility, after a mature
Deliberation, might join with them in settling the designed Establishment.

Whilst these things were transacting at Court, The Nobility in great
Distraction.
the Nobles were at the greatest Plunge what to resolve upon at this critical
Juncture; They knew the Commons were gone to Court without them, and their
Deputies had brought them by this time the unwelcome News of their ill Success,
which put them into such a Distraction, that it was resolved, to Adjourn the
further Debate of the Matter till next day. In the mean while, some of their
Body, who began to dread the Event, took this Opportunity to slip privately out
of Town. This was not so secretly done, but that some of the leading Men of the
Adverse Party, having got Scent of it, and fearing that the rest, encouraged by
their Example, might frustrate their Design, by retiring into their respective
Countries, it was proposed to the King, as the only Means to prevent the
breaking up the Session in a tumultuous manner, to Order the Gates of the City
to be kept shut up, till the Matter might be brought to a Conclusion; Orders
being accordingly sent to the Governor Schacht (who was in the Interest of the
Commons, and had signalized himself lately in the Defense of the City) it was
immediately put in execution, by the Town Mayor.

Most of the Nobles happened to be the same Afternoon at the Funeral of one of
the Chiefest Danish Senators, Their Surprise.
which in those Northern Countries are Solemnized with a great deal of Splendour
and very good Cheer; Whilst they were driving away Sorrows by letting the
Bumpers go round briskly, enters the Town Mayor (he being also invited to
assist at the Solemnity) and, after the first Glass, told him who sat next to
him at the Table, that the Gates of the City were shut up; so odd and
unexpected a piece of News being soon Whispered round the Company, they began
all on a sudden to change their Countenances, being seized with dreadful
Apprehensions; and looking upon the Town Mayor no otherwise than the Messenger
of Death, they began one after another to ask what Destiny was prepared for
them; The Mayor, who was scarce able to keep his Countenance (when he saw those
who had so lately Lorded it both over King and People, seized with a Panick
Fear upon such an Occasion as this) told them, that they made a wrong Judgment
of the King's Intentions, whose Actions had been always such, as not to give
them the least room, to suspect any sinister Accident; that indeed the Gates
had been shut by the King's Special Order, but that he believed they needed not
fear any thing, the King's Intention being, that they should pursue the Public
Business they were met about.

This Answer of the Mayor seemed in some measure to revive their drooping
Spirits, but did not remove the Remnants of Fear; For, considering with
themselves, that if they should persist any longer in their Refusal of
complying with the Commons, they might lay hold of this Opportunity to revenge
themselves for the Wrongs received at their hands, by calling them to an
Account for those many past Miscarriages, and the ensuing Calamities, which
they were sensible they would lay at their doors, especially at this Juncture,
when they were backed by the Court and Army. The apprehensions of these
dreadful Consequences, (which were not altogether groundless) being more
prevailing upon them than the Consideration of the Loss of their Privileges
and Liberty, it was judged absolutely necessary (after some short
Consultations, such as the Time and Place could allow of) that since they had
missed the last Opportunity of making Terms for themselves, Their Compliance
with the Commons.
to make an Absolute Resignation of all, by complying with the Commons; of
which Resolution they gave immediate Notice, by some deputed out of their own
Body, to the King and the other Estates.

The King having accepted their offer, and willing that the Homage should be
performed with all the Solemnity that possibly could be upon so extaordinary an
Occasion, ordered every thing to be got ready for it, in order to which, a
large Scaffold was erected in the place before the Palace, upon which the King,
Queen and Royal Family being mounted on the 27. October, and placed upon Chairs
under Canopies richly Adorned, received the Homage of the Senators, They
Surrender their privileges and liberty.
Nobility, the Chief of the Clergy and Commons, in the presence of the Citizens
of Copenhagen and the Garrison, who appeared all in Arms in their best Apparel.

It was one of the most surprising things in the World, to see those very Men,
who but a few days before had carried things on with so much Haughtiness, to
resign so tamely at once all their Privileges, which they had been raising to
that pitch of Greatness, as to become insupportable to the Kingdom, by a
continued Series of Designs for several Ages past; it being very remarkable,
that among all these Persons of Quality and Birth, there was not one, who,
during those three days, that were taken up with making the necessary
Preparations for this Solemnity, attempted by protestation or otherwise, to
show his Sense of the Loss of their Power and Liberty, for which they stood
Chiefly indebted to their own ill Conduct and Insolent Behavior.

I was the more willing to trace the true Origin of the Ancient Danish
Monarchy, and the Causes of its Various changes, to show the World by what
Steps the Nobility arrived to that pitch of Greatness, which at once proved the
Occasion of their Fall, and of many other Mischiefs which have either preceded
or attended it, and which will insensibly lead us into the better knowledge of
the true State of Affairs, under the Reign of their late King Christian V.
whose Life and Reign we are to give you an Account of in the following
Chapters; from whence it will appear, that, as at the beginning of his Reign he
found the Kingdom involved in no small Troubles, occasioned by the discontents
of those who could not be so soon forgetful of their Darling Grandeur, and by
the Danger from a Potent neighboring Enemy, so he struggled through all these
Obstacles with an uncommon Constancy, till he left the Kingdom in a much better
Condition to his Son, Frederick IV. who lately ascended the Danish Throne.

MEMOIRS OF THE LIFE and REIGN OF Christian V. Late KING of Denmark and Norway,
etc.
CHAP. I. Of the Condition of the Kingdom of Denmark, at the Time of King
Christian V. his Accession to the Throne.
KING Frederick III. had by Sophia Aemilia of the House of Lunenburgh, a
Numerous Issue, to wit: Two Princes and four Princesses. The eldest was
Christian, born in the year 1646, on the 15th of April, in the Castle of
Flensburgh, whilst his Father was yet Archbishop of Bremen, his Grandfather K.
Christian IV. being his Godfather. The second Anna Sophia born in the year
1647, Married to the then Elector of Saxony, John George in the year 1666. The
third Frederick Aemilia, was born in the year 1648. Married in the year 1667.
to Christian Adolph the late Duke of Holstein Gottorp. The fourth Gulielmetta
Ernestina, Born in the year 1650, given in Marriage to Charles the late Elector
Palatine of the Rhine. The fifth was George, Born in the year 1653, and Married
to the Lady Anna Stuart, second Daughter of James, then Duke of York and
Albany. The youngest Vlrica Eleonora Sabina, Born in the year 1654, Married to
Charles XII. the late King of Sweden.

King Frederick III. after he saw himself delivered from his Foreign Enemies by
the late Peace, and from the intestine Divisions by the late remarkable
Revolution, applied all his Care in restoring the decayed State of the Kingdom,
by new modelling his Army, and putting his Frontier Places in a State of
Defense. The Education of his eldest Son Christian he committed to the
Management of Otto Skade, his Governor, one of the Senators of the Kingdom;
and to the Sieur Mathesius, his Tutor, afterward Danish Resident in the City
of Dantzick.

In the Year 1655, the said Prince was by the States of Denmark declared
Successor to his Father Frederick in that Kingdom; and soon after received
Homage accordingly at Wiburgh in Jutland: The States of Norway following their
Example, performed the same in the following Year 1656, at Christiania, the
Capital City of that Kingdom; whither he was sent in the Year 1661 (the next
after the Great Revolution) with a good Squadron of Men of War, under the
Conduct of the then Lord Treasurer, Hanibal Seastede, the Lord Chancellor
Reets, and the Archbishop Hans Swana, to receive Homage of the States, as
Hereditary Prince.

But King Frederick having observed in this young Prince a most particular
Inclination to Martial Exploits, during the last Siege of Copenhagen, where
being animated by the undaunted Constancy and Bravery of his Father, K.
Christian V. Travels.
he had given such singular Proofs of his active Spirit, as far surpassed his
Age; and being desirous to give all possible Encouragement to his Noble
Designs, which were to improve himself by Traveling in foreign Countries, he
sent him abroad in the Year 1662, under the Conduct of Christopher Parsberg, a
Person, who had signalized himself by his Great Experience in the Management of
Matters of the highest Moment, in Consideration of which, he was afterward
dignified with the Title of an Earl, and that of Vice Chancellor of Denmark.
They took their Way by Land through the united Provinces, and the Spanish
Netherlands, where after having taken a View of the Chief Cities of those
Provinces, they arrived at Calais in France, toward the beginning of
September, where being met by several Yatchs, sent by Charles II. then King of
England, they took the first Opportunity of Transporting themselves into this
Kingdom, and arrived safely in a few days after at London. Here he received the
Compliments of the Chiefest of the English Nobility (being lodged in
Exeter-House, and defrayed at the King's Charge) and having visited both our
Universities, and being created a Knight Companion of the most Noble Order of
the Garter, he returned, after a Stay of two Months, by the Way of Dover into
France. There was at that time residing in Paris, in the Quality of Danish
Ambassador Extraordinary, the beforementioned Hanibal Scastede, who, had made
himself remarkable by his Conduct in Managing the late Revolution in Denmark.
Prince Christian was lodged in the said Ambassadors Palace, where he received
the Visits of all the Princes of the Blood, and of the Duke of Orleans, the
French Kings own Brother in particular; and before his departure from that
City, was presented by the King with a Sword and Belt set with Diamonds. After
a stay of twelve Months in France, he left Paris, in order to pursue his
Journey to Italy, but by special Command from his Father King Frederick, was
stopped at Grenoble, to return through Germany.

Among other Courts of the Princes of the Empire, he visited that of William
Landgrave of Hessen Cassel, where he fell in Love with that incomparable
Princess Charlotta Aemilia, the Daughter of the said Landgrave; so that after
his return into Denmark, he would not rest satisfied till he had obtained his
Royal Father's Consent to Marry that Princess; which Match was consummated at
the Royal Seat of Amalienburgh, on the tenth day of May in the year 1667.

King Frederick III. happening to die toward the latter end of the year 1669.
was succeeded by his eldest Son Christian V. who found the Kingdom involved in
great Troubles, by reason of the ill State of the Kingdom, quite exhausted by
the late unsuccessful Wars, and the heavy Taxes which were of Necessity to be
laid upon the People to Maintain a sufficient Force against the Danger that
threatened them from an Enemy, whose Power being increased of late, by their
losses, they had all the reason to Fear would for the future Improve the
Ancient Hatred betwixt those two Northern Nations, to his Advantage. For, after
the Swedes had once found Means to untie the Knot of that Union which was in
former Ages made betwixt these Northern Crowns, The State of Denmark after the
death of King Frederick.
they made such Encroachments upon their Neighbors, as (by degrees) to render
themselves formidable to all Europe; whereas some Ages before, they were scarce
in a Condition to Cope with Denmark alone. For they Wrested Carelia out of the
Hands of the Muscovites which serves them for a Bulwark on the side of Finland;
the like they did with the Provinces of Ingermanland, Esthen and Liefland, all
very Fertile Countries, the last being the Granary of Swedeland. The City of
Riga, the Capital of Liefland, Situate upon the River Duina, being of the
utmost Consequence to the Swedish Crown, by reason of its Commerce with
Muscovy, Lithuania and Courland. But what is to be looked upon as the most
Considerable of all, were their late Conquests on the side of Norway and
Denmark; in the first they had extended their Limits to the Mountains that
divide that Kingdom from Sweden, by making themselves Masters of the two
Provinces of Jempterland and Hchrendahlen; in the last they had Guarded their
Frontiers by the Conquest of the Provinces of Halland, Bleckingen, Shonen, and
Bahus; the three first of which being Situate on the other side of the Sound,
and the last just above it, and consequently Opposite to the Danish Shore. The
Kingdom of Sweden, which formerly lay Exposed to the Danes for above fifty
Leagues together, has, by making the Sound the common Foundary of their
Dominions on that side, secured it self against any Attempt of the Danes,
which, as the Case now stands, cannot be undertaken thereabouts without a vast
Charge and great Hazard.

The Acquisitions of the Swedes in Germany, have been looked upon by some as of
no great Consequence to them, by reason of their great distance, they being not
to be succored by that Crown, but by the Baltic; which occasioned a warm
Debate among the Swedish Senators, at the time of the West phalian Treaty; some
among them being of Opinion, that because they could scarce be maintained
without a great deal of Trouble, they would rather be a Burden, than an
Advantage to them; and advised therefore, that another equivalent would turn to
a much better Account, than those remote Provinces, which, in time, by the
Jealousy of its Neighboring Princes, might entangle them in a foreign War, at
a great distance from Home. But those who were of another Sentiment, urged,
that they ought not to let slip so favorable an Opportunity to get a firm
footing in the Empire, by annexing those Provinces with the Kingdom of Sweden,
which would entitle them to a considerable Share in the Management of the
Affairs of Europe; that by being possessed of the strong City, and Port of
Wismar, and the Maritim Cities of Pomerania, they had a fair opportunity to
increase their Naval Strength, and to keep a Communication in the Baltic. But
what most of all turned the Balance on the side of the last, was, that from
the Dukedom of Bremen, they might attack Denmark in its most sensible and best
Part on the German side, where the Territories of both the Northern Crowns are
divided only by the River Elbe.

The Danes had been made sensible of the Truth of this Maxim to their Cost, in
the late War of 1657, 1658, the Smart of which was so fresh in their Memory,
that King Christian V. immediately after his Accession to the Throne, made it
his Chiefest care to put his Military Affairs into such a Posture, as to be
able to Cope with so potent a Neighbor, whenever occasion should offer; for
which purpose, he ommitted nothing which he thought might contribute to the
Defense of the Kingdom, by raising and repairing Fortifications in all such
Places as were most exposed to the Attacks of an Enemy, and introducing a good
Martial Discipline among his Troops, under the Command of experienced and
faithful Officers, being for the most part Germans. But there was another
Obstacle, which, as it was near home, so it was the more Dangerous; This was
the Jealousy conceived at the Proceedings of the Duke of Holstein Gottorp, who
owing his Sovereignty over the Dukedom of Sleswick, obtained by the Treaty of
Roshilt, to the Swedes, was supposed to stand in a good Correspondence with
that Crown, the better to maintain himself in the Possession of it. It Is true,
the Danes endeavored by giving one of their Princesses in Marriage to the said
Duke, to link him again to their Interest; but as the Ties of Matrimony very
seldom stand in competition with Interest (especially among Princes) so this
Alliance was so far from answering the desired Effect, that the Danes found
every day new Matter of Jealousy at the Duke's Proceedings, which at last broke
out into a Rupture, which is not composed to this day; And these Domestic
Divisions having been in agitation for above these twenty Years last past, and
are at this time the Chief Entertainment of Europe, we will trace its Origin in
the following Chapter.

CHAP. II. Of the Origin of the Differences betwixt Denmark, and the House of
Holstein Gottorp.
To search to the root of those Diferences, we must go back as far as the Year
1449, when Christian I. Earl of Oldenburgh and Delmenhorst, being elected King
of Denmark and Norway, (and afterward likewise of Sweden) Adolph his Uncle by
the Mother-side, was Duke of Sleswick and Earl of Holstein, the first being a
Fief of the Crown of Denmark, at least five hundred Years before, the last a
Fief of the Empire. Adolph dying without Issue, King Christian I. succeeded him
both in Sleswick and Holstein, and he dying in the Year 1481, left two Sons
behind him, John, who succeeded him in the Northern Kingdoms, and Frederick,
who was afterward elected King of Denmark, instead of the deposed King
Christian II. Son to King John. After the Death of King Christian I. Dorothy of
Brandenburgh, his Queen Relict, being a very Politic Woman, who had a most
powerful Influence upon the Estates of those Dukedoms, and being extremely fond
of her younger Son, proposed to the said Estates, that by virtue of a peculiar
Privilege granted to them by King Christian I. at the time of his Accession to
the Throne of Denmark, and afterward to the Dukedoms; and according to his
Last Will and Testament (the last of which was found defective) it was in their
Power to choose, which of his Sons they liked best, for their Prince. John the
elder Brother, at the Assembly of the Estates in the City of Kiel, represented
to them that his Mothers Demand in behalf of his younger Brother Frederick, was
directly opposite to the Feudatory Laws both of Denmark and the Empire, by
virtue of which the eldest Son had an unquestionable Right of Succession, which
had been confirmed by the Practice of many Ages. He alleged, and not without
great Reason, That the Northern Crowns being then elective, if by a more
powerful Interest, or any other Sinister Accident his Posterity should be
excluded from these Crowns, they would be left destitute, whilst the younger
House enjoyed the Inheritance of Great and plentiful Territories. These
Reasons, founded upon true Matter of Fact, wrought so powerfully upon the
Estates (who before were for excluding John from the Succession) that to
satisfy in some measure the just Demands of the eldest Brother, and to show
their Passion for the younger, and the Queen his Mother, they pitched upon this
Expedient, to divide the said two Dukedoms, Share and share alike, betwixt the
two Brothers. But their fundamental Constitution, being built upon this Bottom,
that they should for ever remain entire, without being divided or dismembered,
the said Division was made under certain Conditions of a perpetual Communion
and Union, of which we shall have occasion to speak frequently hereafter.

Duke Frederick being after the Deposition of his Nephew King Christian II.
Elected King, the two Dutchies of Sleswick and Holstein were reUnited with the
Crown of Denmark, and the States being by this Time made Sensible of the
Inconveniences arisen from this Division, (though under the strictest Union that
could be) obtained from the said King Frederick, immediately after his
Accession to the Throne, to Sign an Act, confirmed by his Oath, That those
Dutchies should for ever after be one inseparable entire Body. But his Son and
Successor King Christian III. a Prince, who had a great deal of Tenderness for
his younger Brothers, did, notwithstanding this, fall into the same Error; and
in the Year 1544, make another Division of those two Dukedoms betwixt himself
and his two Brothers, John and Adolph; the youngest of all, whose Name was
Frederick, being provided for by several good Ecclesiastical Benefices, viz.
with the Bishoprics of Hildesheim and Sleswick; besides that, he was
Co-adjutor to the Archbishop of Bremen: and John the second of the Brothers
happening to die not long after without Issue, his Share was again divided
betwixt King Christian III. and his Brother Adolph, the Founder of that Branch
of the Family, which is called, the Holstein Gottorp Line.

The whole World being surprised at this Division, Union betwixt Denmark and
Holstein.
contrary to the express Act and Oath of King Frederick I. And the Estates
exclaiming against a Procedure, which struck at the very Root of their
fundamental Constitution; K. Christian III. thought by founding this Division
upon the Basis of a strict Communion and Union, to satisfy both his Father's
Intention and his own Inclinations, which were bent to favor his Brothers. For
this purpose, it was agreed, not only betwixt the King and Kingdom of Denmark
and the said Dukes, but also betwixt the several Dukes in respect to one
another (as the Words of the said Union in the low Saxon Tongue express it in
plain Terms) That there should be a perpetual and inseparable Union in the
Duchy of Sleswick, and a Communion in the Dukedom of Holstein; by virtue of
which (besides, that the first remained a Fief of the Crown of Denmark) each
had his Share allowed him, which was left to his proper Management in reference
to all private and Domestic Affairs, as also to the Inferior Courts of
Justice; But as to what related to the Superior Courts of Judicature, as to
the calling together the States, Imposing and Collecting of Taxes, as also all
other Matters relating to the Public Exercise of the Government, all those, I
say, were by Virtue of this Union to remain in Community among them; for which
purpose it was thought most expedient, to settle a High Court of Judicature,
unto which all Appeals were to be brought, and in which Sentence was to be
given both in the King and Duke's Names, in which each should Choose a President
in his turn, every other Year.

King Christian III. being Sensible, Reasons for his Union.
that without the greatest Injustice in the World, he could not dismember the
Dukedom of Sleswick from Denmark, being the Bulwark of that Kingdom on the
German side, thought by this Means to Preserve the Sovereignty of it to that
Crown, and by the strict Tie and Union of a joint Government and Mutual Defense
betwixt them, to provide for the Security of his Posterity. This is that Famous
Union, made in the Year 1533, betwixt the King and Kingdom of Denmark on one
side, and the Dukes of Holstein on the other, as the present Duke of Holstein
Gottorp's Ministers would have it; whereas the Danes allege that it was not
only made betwixt the King and the Duke's, as King, but also as Duke of
Sleswick from those Words in the Patent of the Union; Wherefore we altogether,
one for another, both sides, as likewise each in his own behalf, etc.

This Union was Confirmed, The Union renewed.
Enlarged and Explained in the Year 1623, betwixt Christian IV. King of
Denmark, and Frederick Duke of Holstein Gottorp, when, among other things it
was expressly Agreed on, That their Posterity should be obliged to renew this
Union at the time of their first Accession to the Regency, as is manifest from
the Copy of the said Union, Printed by the Duke of Holstein Gottorp's Order, in
the Year 1696. This Union and good Intelligence continued for above a Hundred
and fifty Years betwixt those two Houses; and, if any Differences happened,
they were made up by an Amicable Composition, according to the Tenout of the
Union, (of which there are several Instances) till about fifty Years ago, the
Foundation of those Differences were laid by Frederick Duke of Holstein
Gottorp, in receding from the Original Union, and siding with that Famous
Warrior, Charles Gustave, King of Sweden.

CHAP. III. The Occasion and Causes of the Differences betwixt Denmark and the
House of Holstein Gottorp.
THE Precautions taken by the Ancestors of those two Houses, to Unite them both
in Point of Interest and Government, did at last prove too Weak to subsist
without a remarkable Interruption; For, after Christina Queen of Sweden had
abdicated that Kingdom, Charles Gustave her Cousin, Prince Palatine of
Deuxeponts succeeded her; a Man of whom it must be confessed, that he was
Endowed with all Qualifications, becoming a King; but withal of an unmeasurable
Ambition, Ambiti n of Charles Gustave King of Sweden.
and whose Designs were as great as ever any of the greatest Hero's of
Antiquity: To confirm which, I cannot pass by in silence, what Monsieur Terlon,
who was Ambassador of the French King to both the Northern Crowns, about that
time, says in his Memoirs concerning Charles Gustave King of Sweden, who
speaking one day of Denmark and Norway in his presence, said: As soon as I have
Conquered them, all the other Princes and States will be glad to be quiet, and
not trouble themselves to Restore the King of Denmark; and whilst they are
busy to outvie one another by Traffic, I will find a way, what with the
Alliances already made, and some others, to unite those Conquests with, and
Establish my self so well in Sweden, as to make all the Neighboring Countries,
nay even those at a great distance, dread Us. He used often to say, and so
would the Earl of Slippenbach, continues Monsieur Terlon: When I once have made
My self Master of the North, I will go with a very Potent Army and Fleet, like
a second Alaric, to Italy, to force Rome to submit its Neck once more under the
Yoke of the Goths. And to speak the Truth, if we reflect upon the Great
Enterprises of this King, his Actions were altogether sutiable to the Character
given him by this Ambassador; that he was as active in the Cabinet Council, as
he was in the Camp.

Among other Projects which were contrived to compass his Great Designs, His
Marriage with the Duke of Holstein's Daughter.
one of the most refined Pieces of Policy, was his Marriage with Hedwig
Eleonore, the Daughter of Fredereick Duke of Holstein Gottorp; For, being
sensible that without the Conquest of Denmark, he could not promise himself any
Considerable Success against the Empire, he did not question, but by this
Alliance to draw that Duke into his Party; by which Means he might facilitate
his Conquest on that side, and bereave the King of Denmark, in some measure, of
the Communication with the Princes of the Empire; or, at least to put such a
Thorn in his Foot, by the Neighborhood of this Duke, as would disenable him to
stir, whilst he was putting his Design in execution against Poland.

For, His Wars in Poland.
no sooner had he secured himself on that side, but he began to make
Preparations for the Enterprise against the Poles, upon a very weak Pretense;
and notwithstanding they sent an Ambassador to his Court, who offered all the
Satisfaction that reasonably could be desired, and that in very submissive
Terms; he, not long after entered that Kingdom with his Army, where he carried
All before him: These incredible Progresses, but especially his Conquests in
Prussia, opened the Eyes of All the Princes of Europe, who now began plainly to
see, that his Aim was no less than to be Master of the Whole Baltic. Frederick
III. King of Denmark, and the Elector of Brandenburgh, being most nearly
concerned, by reason of the Neighborhood of their Territories, the first upon
the Continent of Sweden, the second in Pomerania and Prussia, to stop the
Carrier of his Victories, entered into an Alliance for that purpose, being
underhand backed by the Emperor and Hollanders: Pursuant to which, King
Frederick III. who had all the Reason to fear, that the Storm would fall upon
him next, began the Fray, by entering the Dukedom of Bremen.

King Charles Gustave, (...) betwixt ^^^^ark and ^^eden.
finding himself attacked so near home, thought it more for his Purpose to
suspend the Execution of his Designs in Poland, than to run the Hazard of
losing his Conquests in Germany; for which Reason, having left some Forces in
Prussia, under the Command of his Brother, John Adolph, he marched with all the
rest toward the River Elbe, leaving the Brave Ragotzi, Prince of Transylvania,
to the Mercy of the Poles. King Frederick III. did flatter himself, that the
Union of their Families might be more prevailing with the Duke of Holstein,
than his Affinity with Sweden; and that therefore the Swedish Troops, tired
with the Fatigues of many Engagements and a long March, would not be in a
Condition to act for a considerable time, in a Place, where few or no Magazines
were erected for their Subsistence; But he found to his Cost, that there had
been a secret Correspondence betwixt those two Princes against his Interest for
a considerable time before; For, in lieu of opposing their Passage, he provided
them with all Necessaries, which enabled them afterward to push their
Conquests into the very heart of Denmark.

The Ministers of Holstein Gottorp, did excuse the Duke's not opposing their
Passage, by the Necessity he lay under at that time of preserving an exact
Neutrality betwixt two Enemies more Potent than himself, Reasons of the Duke of
Hostein
to preserve his Country from an imminent Devastation; but the before mentioned
Monsieur Terlon, 1 Tom. Mem
seems to have unfolded this Riddle, when he says: The Duke of Holstein,
besides his near Affinity to the King, (Charles Gustave) was in a strict
Alliance with Sweden; and it was he, that expressly sent his own Secretary, the
Sieur Pauli, to his Son-in-Law in Poland, to give him an Account of what was
transacting in Denmark. And in another Passage, speaking of the Brandenburghers
having taken Gottorp, he adds these Words: The Duke of Holstein now found to
his Cost, 2 Tom. Me^r
that the War he was engaged in, barely on the Account of his Daughter being
Married to the Swedish King, would prove the Ruin of his Country. Which makes
him also affirm for a positive Truth, that, when he saw the said Duke Frederick
at the time of the second Rupture betwixt Denmark and Sweden, the Duke told him
with Tears in his Eyes, that he now foresaw what was likely to befall him, to
his unspeakable Grief; and truly not without great Reason, adds Terlon; for
this War would inevitably break, past all Reparation, that Union with Denmark,
which it had been his true Interest to preserve; as on the other side, it was
the Interest of the Danish King to keep a good Correspondence with the Duke of
Holstein. Certain it is, that in this War, where he was only made use of, as a
Tool and a Pretense, his Country was likely to suffer more in one Campaign,
than could be repaired in several Years after the Peace was made. Besides, that
the Danes Answer to this, that the Neighborhood of the Danish Troops would
soon have delivered the Duke of that Fear, at a time, when the Swedish Army was
not in a Condition to make head against them, they allege several undeniable
Instances of the manifest Breach of this pretended Neutrality, some of which we
shall have occasion to speak of anon.

It would be both too tedious, and beyond our present Purpose to enter upon the
Particulars of this War, the only Matter of Moment, worth our taking Notice of,
being, that it ended with the Peace of Roshilt, Peace of Roshilt.
in which these following Articles were inserted in favor of the Duke of
Holstein, viz.

That all past Things should be buried in Oblivion.

That Satisfaction should be given to the Duke concerning his Pretensions,
according as should be judged equitable, and that within a certain limited
time. Pursuant to this Agreement, the Duke sent his Commissioners to
Copenhagen, who in their Master's Name made these following Demands:

1. That the Duke should be discharged from his Vassalage: 2. That the King
should surrender to him the Balliage (they call it Ampt) of Swabstede, and some
other Possessions; 3. That he should put into the Duke's hand the strong
Fortress of Rensburgh (being the only Bulwark of Denmark on that Side.) 4. That
the Joint Administration of the Regency in both Dukedoms should be abolished:
5. That the K. of Denmark should pay all the Damages the Duke had sustained in
the War; and give sufficient Caution for the future: 6. That he should pay
several hundred thousand Crowns besides, on the account of some old
Pretensions; besides several other Demands of the same Nature.
The Danes, who looked upon these Conditions as too exorbitant, refusing to
hearken to those Propositions; the K. of Sweden, whose Interest it was, by
encouraging the Duke in his Demands, to link him the more firm to his Party,
and render the Breach betwixt Denmark and Holstein irreparable, did refuse to
withdraw his Troops out of the Territories of the K. of Denmark, before the
Duke had received Satisfaction; Nay, the Duke's Commissioners did not stick to
tell the Danish Ministers in plain Terms, that they had Orders in their
Pockets, directed to the Swedish Generals, to re-commence the War, if they
refused any longer to comply with those Conditions; so, that the Danes, to rid
their hands from such unwelcome Guests, saw themselves under an absolute
Necessity of granting to the Duke of Holstein the desired Sovereignty (without
prejudice, The Sovereignty granted the Duke of Holstein.
however, to the ancient Union) the Balliage of Swabstede, and the Revenues of
the Chapter of Sleswick; besides some other Matters of less Consequence.

It is known to all the World, that notwithstanding all those Concessions on
the Danish Side, the King of Sweden found means to renew the War in the same
Year, at a time, when K. Frederick III. thought himself secure from all danger,
by the late concluded Peace, which he had bought so dearly from the Swedes,
Second War betwixt Denmark and Sweden.
with the Loss of no less than all his Provinces, situate on the other side of
the Passage of the Sound. And it was at this juncture, that Duke Frederick of
Holstein gave new Matters of Complaint to the Danes, in acting contrary to that
Neutrality he had before made the Foundation-stone of his late Transactions;
there are, besides others, two remarkable Instances given of it, which, as they
are Notorious beyond Contradiction in those Parts, so, by reason of several
remarkable Circumstances, which attended the first, deserve a place in these
Memoirs.

It is therefore to be observed, that after King Charles Gustave had taken a
Resolution to finish the Conquest of Denmark by the taking of the City of
Copenhagen, he feared, not without reason, that the Allies of Denmark might
March to its Relief, before he could be Master of a Place, which in all
likelihood would defend its self to the last Extremity; As he had taken all the
imaginable Precautions to prevent the coming of any Succors by Sea, by sending
a good Fleet into the Sound, and Barricading that Passage with strong Chains,
so the only Means to secure himself against any Attempts of the Danish Allies
by Land, was to make himself Master of the strong Fortress of Rensburgh,
situate upon the River Eyder, on the Confines of Holstein and Sleswick, but to
compass it, was a Point not as much as to be aimed at by the Swedes, at a time,
when they had not a sufficient Force thereabouts to Besiege it in form, and if
they had had, they would have met with a Brave Refistance from a Faithful and
Valiant Governor and Garrison.

The only Way then left them being to try their Fortune by another Way, the
Duke of Holstein was prevailed upon to send some of his Ministers thither to
endeavor to persuade hem by a voluntary Surrender.

Accordingly several Persons being deputed by the Duke, and amongst them the
Father of the Governor of the Place (being then in the Duke's Service) they
desired a Conference with the Governor and Magistrates of the City, without
mentioning the least what Errand they came about; so being admitted into the
City, they in a very pathetick Harangue, represented unto them the dangerous
Condition the Kingdom of Denmark was in at that time; which having moved the
Duke to take Compassion of them, had sent his Deputation to exhort them to
prevent their impending Ruin by a timely Surrender to him, which if done, he
would provide for their Security, by putting a sufficient Garrison in the
place, not questioning, but that he would obtain a Neutrality for them from his
Son-in-Law, the King of Sweden. The Magistrates thanked the Duke for his Care;
but withal, told the Deputies, that, Faithfulness of the (...) nour (...) of
R^^^burgh.
pursuant to the Allegiance due from them as good Subjects to His Danish
Majesty, they were obliged and resolved to defend the Place to the utmost
Extremity: But the Governor being a Gentleman of that Country, and a Person of
Great Honor and Bravery, looking steadfastly all the while upon his Father,
who at that time acted the Part of an Orator, told him, not without a great
deal of Passion: Dear Father, I could scarce have been persuaded to believe
that I should ever hear such a Proposition come from your Mouth, to me; Believe
me, you may at this time be glad, you are my Father; for, without that, I
should never have had Patience enough, to have heard you so long, but would
have sent you away immediately to the Dungeon, to make you sensible what
Punishment such an Insolence as this, deserves. The Father, whether moved by
his Son's Generosity, or his own Inclination, is uncertain; but he gave him
this immediate Reply: My Son, What I have said hitherto, I have done, as being
a Servant of the Duke; but what I am going to tell thee now, Take from me as
thy Father, That if thou should show the least Inclination to surrender this
Fortress, I would be the first that should call thee to thy face, a Traitor to
thy Prince, and unworthy to be called my Son. So that by the faithfulness of
the Magistrates, and the Governor's Bravery, this Commission came to nothing.

Another Instance of the Duke's Partiality, and his secret Correspondency with
Sweden, whilst Denmark was struggling for its Preservation, is alleged by the
Danes, in the following manner: Partiality of the Duke of Holstein.
It feems there was about that time a Swedish Regiment entered the Country of
Eyderstede, in which lies the Fortress of Tonningen, belonging to the Duke of
Holstein Gottorp; some of the Danish Auxiliaries having got Notice of it,
directed their March thither with a sufficient Body, to beat up their Quarters;
but the Swedes not thinking themselves strong enough to stand the Brunt,
retreated under the Cannon of Tonningen. Here they lay sheltred for some time,
till the Allies being reinforced with fresh Troops, were preparing to attack
them there; upon which, the Garrison of the Fortress received them within their
Gates.

The Danes exclaimed against this Action, as a manifest Breach of the
Neutrality, but were forced to rest satisfied with this framed Excuse, That the
Duke had bought the said Regiment from the King of Sweden; the contrary of
which appeared not long after, from a Letter of the Duke's own hand, written to
his Secretary Pauli, then residing with the King of Sweden, dated at Tonningen,
the 12th of February, 1660, in which he ordered him expressly to repesent to the
Swedish King: Is dis^^vered by an intercept^. Letter.
That he was put to a great Nonplus how to keep the said Regiment any longer
where it was; and that he would be glad to know how he should dispose of it so,
as it might tend most of His Majesty's Advantage: That he intended to have sent
it by Sea into the Dukedom of Bremen, but that in so doing he must make a
manifest Breach of the Neutrality; That therefore he desired the King's Leave
to disband them; but, that notwithstanding all this, he might rest assured,
that he would keep them in the Swedish Service to the last Extremity. It is to
be observed, that just before this Letter was intercepted, Duke Frederick of
Holstein Gottorp happened to die, whilst his Son Christian Albert, who
succeeded him, was in Person in the Swedish Camp before Copenhagen; He had not
before been a Spectator together with the King of Sweden, of the Naval Combat
betwixt the Dutch and Swedish Fleets, from the Windows of the Castle of
Cronenburgh, the first of which, being sent to the Relief of Copenhagen, fought
their Way through the Swedish Fleet, Forts and Chains, with such Bravery as
startled their Enemies, who from that time on, lost their hopes of the Conquest
of Denmark; whereupon the young Duke took Shipping immediately after, to
Tonningen, to take Possession of the Regency of the Dukedoms.

To be short, after the raising of the Siege of Copenhagen, the defeat of the
Swedes in the Isle of Fuhnen, Peace of Copenhagen.
and the Death of their Brave King, a Peace was again concluded in the Year
1660, betwixt the two Northern Crowns, by virtue of which, the Duke of Holstein
Gottorp was confirmed in his Sovereignty, but with this express Reserve: That
the ancient Unions, Joynt-Administration of the Government, the former
Covenants betwixt those two Families; and in General, all the ancient Customs
relating to those Dukedoms, should remain in full force, and to be inviolable.

CHAP. IV. What occasioned the Rupture betwixt the late King of Denmark,
Christian V. and Christian Albert, the late Duke of Holstein Gottorp.
KING Frederick III. had some Reason to believe, that the young Duke of
Holstein, having got every thing he desired, would now rest satisfied with his
new Acquisitions, and cultivate a good Understanding with Denmark for the
future, but this had a quite contrary Effect; For, the Duke thinking it not for
his Interest to conside in those, whom he had disobliged so lately, took other
measures; and in the beginning of the Year 1661, not long after the Peace of
Copenhagen, entered into a new and a more strict Alliance with Sweden.

Denmark taking the Alarm at this Proceeding, Alliance betwixt Sweden and
Hopstein.
it was represented by the Duke's Ministers, as a defensive Alliance, made for
no other Purpose but to secure their new Aquisitions against any Attempts that
might be made upon them from Denmark, there being one express Article inserted,
That the same should not be prejudicial to the Friendship betwixt those two
Families. But though it was true, that the said Alliance was penned in defensive
Terms, yet were the two Articles inserted, which would admit of no other
Interpretation, than to have been contrived to the great Prejudice of Denmark.

The first was: That in case the King of Denmark, should, beyond all
expectation, recede from the last Northern Peace, and came to the worst of the
War, which he should draw upon him by so doing; That in such a Case, the Duke
did reserve to himself all his Right and Title to the Royal Part of those
Dukedoms, both for himself and his Posterity.

The second is, That the Duke does expressly agree with his Majesty of Sweden,
That, if in Case of a Rupture betwixt the two Northern Crowns, that Part of the
Dukedoms belonging to Denmark, shall oblige its selt to stand Neuter, so, as
that not the least Injury or Danger may from thence accrue to the Swedes, the
said King obliges himself not to attack or molest them.

Both those Points could not but stick very close in the King of Denmark's
Stomach; for to pretend to secure the Succession of the Dukedoms, when there
were at least twenty Princes of the Royal Branch alive, who had an
unquestionable Precedence before the Branch of Holstein Gottorp, could not but
be considered as very foreign to a defensive Alliance; The second tending to no
less than to abalienate the King of Denmark's Subjects from the Allegiance due
to their Sovereigns, without his Approbation, as it had a near Relation to the
first, so the Danes could take it for no less than a strong Presumption to show
how eager the Duke was of getting into the entire Possession of those Dukedoms;
but the Remembrance of their late Calamities, and their unsettled State at home,
occasioned by that Great Revolution, obliged them to pass by those things till
a better Opportunity.

The Duke on the other hand, being flushed by this new Alliance, and by the
weakness of Denmark, too this Juncture as the most proper to promote his
Interest; and being put to a great Nonplus, how to maintain those Forces that
were to be kept on foot for their Mutual Defense, pursuant to this Alliance
(his ordinary Revenues being insufficient) it was proposed to Denmark, that
those Taxes, The Dukes incrcachments ^^an Denmark.
which used to be levied for the common defense of the Country, and were kept
in one common Treasury (to prevent the listing of Soldiers without the Consent
of both Parties) should not be put in the common Rank, but that each party
might have Power to collect and keep his own Share.

The Danes were not so insensible as not to perceive the Duke's Intention, but
as they were not in a Condition to break with Sweden at that time, so, after
many Contestations, they saw themselves under a Necessity to comply with the
Duke's desire in the Year 1663. under this Limitation however, that it should
be only for a certain time, and not be made use of hereafter in prejudice of
either side; for which reason also the said Treasury was not shut up, but the
Taxes raised upon the Noble Men's Estates were to be paid in there, as before.

The Duke got a remarkable Advantage by this Concession, being now at liberty
to pay his own Troops, who were to swear Fealty to him alone; besides, that the
Danes being to provide most of the Garrisoned Places (which belonged to their
Share) the Taxes were not sufficient to answer the Charges they were of
Necessity to be at.

The King of Denmark having in the mean while, in some measure, re-setled his
Affairs at home, began to make pressing Instances to the Duke, to settle the
Gathering and Management of the extraordinary Taxes upon the ancient
Foundation; but he being unwilling to part with it, new Pretensions were made,
founded upon the Patent of King Christian I. who first divided Sleswick betwixt
his Sons, John and Frederick; in which it is expressed, That the extraordinary
Tax, (called the Land Bid) should be divided equally amongst them. But this
Argument could stand them in little stead, considering that the whole Dukedom
was reunited with the Crown under King Frederick I. whose Sons (from whom both
the Branches of Denmark and Holstein Gottorp are descended) made a new Division
and Union, in which there is not the least of it mentioned. Whilst these
Contests lasted, the English and Dutch were engaged in a War in the Year 1665,
when King Frederick III. in remembrance of what he owed to the Dutch for their
seasonable Relief at the time of the late Siege of Copenhagen, gave shelter to
the Dutch East India Ships in the Port of Bergen in Norway, against the Earl of
Sandwich, the then English Admiral; who being vehemently exasperated against
him, and endeavoring to persuade the Swedes to break with Denmark, he did not
think it seasonable to push this Point of the Community of Taxes to the utmost,
but rather to link the said Duke to his Interest by a Marriage with his
Daughter Frederica Amalia, Marriage of the Duke of Holstein Gottorp.
which was consummated in the Year 1667, immediately after the Peace was
concluded betwixt England and Holland.

But it seems the Ties of Marriage were not strong enough to draw him from the
Swedish Interest; for, in the Year 1669, there being a Meeting appointed at
Hamborough betwixt the Deputies of Denmark and Holstein Gottorp, in order to
compose the Differences arisen betwixt the King and Duke of Holstein Gottorp,
on one, and the Duke of Holstein Ploen, on the other side, about the Succession
in the Countries of Oldenburgh and Delmenhorst; the Deputies of Gottorp showed
so much Haughtiness in their deportment, that the first Commissioner of the
Duke disputed the Precedence with the second Commissioner of Denmark, and
showed their Orders for so doing; and though the Imperial Commissioner, who
assisted at those Conferences, employed all his Care and Authority to terminate
those Differences in an Amicable manner, yet the Ministers of Gottorp were so
far from harkening to those Propositions, that they at several times threatened
both the Emperor and the Empire with the Swedes; so that this Negotiation
broke off fruitless.

CHAP. V. An Account of the Rupture betwixt Christian V. King of Denmark, and
Christian Albert, Duke of Holstein Gottorp.
IN the mean while King Frederick III. happening to die, his eldest Son and
Successor, Christian V. being willing at his first Accession to the Throne, to
keep a good Correspondence with the Duke of Holstein Gottorp, left no stone
unturned to compose the beforementioned Differences, with the Duke of Holstein
Ploen, concerning the Succession of Oldenburgh. For which purpose, he renewed
the Conferences (after he had refused the Offers of the Duke of Holstein Ploen,
who would have made a separate Agreement with him) representing to the Duke of
Holstein Gottorp's Ministers, how dangerous and inconsistent it was with their
common Interest to exasperate the Imperial Court, who took part with the Duke
of Holstein Ploen; but those were so puffed up with the Swedish Alliance, and
with the Assistance they expected from thence, that, when it was urged on the
Danish side, that some Regard ought to be had to the Imperial Authority, whose
unquestionable Right it was to determine those Differences, the said Countries
being Fiefs of the Empire; the Ministers of Holstein Gottorp did not stick to
tell them in plain Terms: The best Remedy against the Emperor's Authority, is
the Sword.

The King of Denmark then being convinced that the Duke had no inclination to
satisfy the just Demands of the Duke of Holstein Ploen, and fearing, not
without great reason, that those differences might one time or other Embroil
him with the Emperor, resolved to put an end to them by an Amicable
Composition. For which reason, after having made his remonstrations to the Duke
of Holstein Gottorp in Person, whilst he was at Copenhagen in the Year 1671,
and, afterward to his Ministers, that in Case they stood it out any longer, he
should be obliged to take his own Measures, Differences betwixt Denmark and
Holstein Ploen, composed.
he effectually brought the Matter to a happy Issue on his side, to the Entire
Satisfaction of the Duke of Holstein Ploen.

Things continued thus without any remarkable Alterations till the Year 1672.
when the Duke of Holstein Guttorp got himself to be included in the Alliance
made betwixt England, France and Sweden; whereupon he not only Augmented his
Forces, but also procured an order from the Crown of Sweden, directed to their
Generals in Germany, that upon the first Summons from the Duke, they should
with all the Forces they could bring together, March and Act according to the
Duke's direction.

But this was not all, for, The Duke of Holstein Gottorp renews his Alliance
with Sweden.
in the Year 1674. he renewed the Alliance made with Sweden in the Year 1661.
and went in Person to Stockholm, being accompanied Chiesly by those of his
Ministers, who were sufficiently known to be against the Interest of Denmark,
the Effects of which appeared soon after; For, the Duke of Holstein Ploen
having obtained a definitive Sentence in the Imperial Court against the said
Duke of Gottorp, he had Engaged the Swedish Court in his Quarrel, who sent
their Letters to the Government of those Countries, to oppose the Execution of
the Emperors Judgment against the Duke; all which being done at a time, when
the Swedes were in open Alliance with the Enemies of the Emperor and Empire,
gave the King of Denmark sufficient reason to guess what good he might expect
from him, in Case he should assist the Emperor, as he was obliged to do, both
as a Member of the Empire, and as an Aliy.

It was not long after that the Swedes made an irruption into the Elector of
Brandenburgh's Territories; The Swedes Irruption into Brandenburgh.
This Prince was Marched with his whole Force to the Rhine, to make Head
against the French, and kept the strong Fortress of Brisac, so closely block't
up, that in all likelihood it could not have held out till the end of the
Campaign; The French, who knew the Importance of this Place, to Preserve at
once this Fortress, and rid themselves of so formidable an Enemy upon the
Rhine, urged the Swedes; but especially some of the Grandees of the Kingdom,
who had the Chief Management of Affairs during the Minority of their King
Charles XI. to make the Crown of France some Amends for the large Subsidies
they had received by virtue of the Alliance made betwixt them; Whereupon the
Swedes entered the Brandenburgh Territories with a Considerable Army, not
questioning but by so powerful a Diversion, he would be obliged to leave his
Prey upon the Rhine, to look after his Affairs nearer Home.

The Allies in the mean while were continually Soliciting the King of Denmark
to Succor the Elector of Brandenburgh, who suffered for the common Cause, and
the Kings Inclination were altogether suitable to their desires, but being
Sensible that if he made the least Motion he must leave his Country exposed to
the Mercy of an Enemy, who had his strong Holds in the Heart of his Country;
some of the Allies did urge the King to begin with the Duke, and to endeavor
to rid his Hands of a Domestic Enemy.

But the King, who was unwilling to come to those Extremities, The Interview
betwixt the King of Denmark and Duke of Holstein.
took a Journey to Rensburgh (near which he had appointed the Rendezvous of his
Troops) with an Intention to try, whether by an Interview with the Duke of
Holstein Gottorp, a sincere Amity might not be restored among them; The Duke
Arriving at Rensburgh, the 25th of June, in the Year 1675, was received with
the discharge of all the Cannon from the Ramparts of this strong Fortress, and
all other demonstrations of Joy, usual upon such Occasions. The next day being
the 26th of June, an Express arrived with the News of the defeat of the Swedes
near Fehr-Berlin, when the King, laying hold of this Opportunity, represented
to the Duke, that he being obliged to march with all his Forces against the
Enemies of the Empire, he could not blame him, if, considering what
Intelligence he had concerning the Duke's near Engagements with Sweden, he
desired him to give him such Security, as might free him from all the suspicion
of danger; and that for the rest, he would be ready to contribute all what in
him lay toward the Composing the remaining Differences betwixt them. The Duke
having desired some time to Consider of the Matter, the Gates of Rensburgh were
kept shut up, for fear the Duke should dispatch his Messengers to his
Governors and the Swedish Generals, to prevent the Design of the Danes, which
was to make themselves Masters of his Strongholds by Force, in case he should
persist in his Refusal to surrender them into the King's hands till the
Conclusion of a Peace; which the Duke, after a deliberation of eight and forty
Hours, agreed to, and sent his Order to the Commander in Chief of Tonningen,
Tonningen Surrendered to the Danes.
to surrender the said Fortress into His Majesty's hands, which was done
accordingly.

This Action was exclaimed against by those who were no Friends to the Crown of
Denmark, as a Breach of the Royal Word, a Violation of the Laws of Hospitality,
and an Act, which being forced from the Duke, could not be obligatory on his
side. Some have added several other Circumstances of his being confined a
Prisoner to his Appartment; of his being ill used, The account of Denmark 1692.
and put in fear of his Life; and several other Circumstances relating to the
Treaty, concluded afterward betwixt the King and Duke: To this the Danes
answer, That the King's Intention was not in the least to put any force upon
the Duke at his coming to Rensburgh, What the Danes allege on their side.
but that much about the same time, they received the News of the Defeat of the
Swedes; Letters were sent to His Danish Majesty from one of the Allied Princes,
in which was enclosed the Copy of an Order, sent expressly before their Defeat
near Fehr Berlin, to the Swedish General Wrangel, containing in Substance, That
at the Solicitation of the Duke of Holstein Gottorp, they had thought fit for
him to march with a good Body of Troops forthwith into Holstein, in order to
prevent the King of Denmark to join with the Elector of Brandenburgh; unto
which was added, that there was a shrewd Suspicion of the City of Hamborough's
being included in the Alliance betwixt Sweden and the Duke; the Truth of the
first Assertion appears from the Apology of the Count de la Gearde, the Lord
High Chancellor of Sweden; and, as to what relates to the City of Hamborough; I
remember very well, that being at that time in those Parts, there were some
Letters, said to have been found among the Papers of the Baron Kielman, Chief
Minister of the Duke of Holstein Gottorp, and residing for a considerable time
before the said City, intimating, that a Promise of such an Alliance had been
made by the Sieur Garmers, one of the Syndies of Hamborough; upon which
application being made to the Senate from His Danish Majesty, they gave for
Answer, that no such thing had been done by their Orders or Consent, which made
Garmers to retire immediately out of the Territories of this Commonwealth, for
fear, as it was supposed, of being called to an Account for so unaccountable an
Undertaking.

These were the Motives, say the Danes, which obliged their King to secure the
Possession of the Duke's Strongholds to himself, at a Juncture, when there was
no small Prospect of Repairing the Losses they had sustained in the late War
with Sweden; but they constantly deny, that the Duke was under any Confinement,
the Gates of Rensburgh having been kept shut up, with no other Intention, than
to take away from the Duke the opportunity of preventing His Majesty's designs,
by sending his Messengers to their Enemies, till his final Resolution were
known. They positively Aver, and appeal to the Testimonies of many then
present, That the King offered to see the differences concerning the Countries
of Oldenburgh and Delmenhorst, composed, to his Honor; and that the other
Matters, especially concerning the Taxes, should be transacted by their both
sides Ministers, provided the Duke would secure to him the Possession of his
Fortresses till the end of the War; and that the King told the Duke in express
Terms, that he should have Liberty to go where and when he pleased, if he was
resolved not to comply with his desire; but, that in such a Case, he must not
blame him, if he sent his Troops immediately into his Territories, and took
such other Measures as he should find most conducing to his Safety, at this
juncture, when he was ready to assist his Allies against the common Enemy: So
that his Compliance may rather be ascribed to the Consideration of his Interest
at this time than any other Cause. The King invited him at the same time to
dine with him, and to go abroad with him after Dinner, which the Duke refused
to accept of, being extremely Melancholy; which was Chiefly attributed to the
ill News they had lately received of the Overthrow of the Swedes. Within two
days after, the King and his only Brother, Prince George, gave him a Visit,
protesting that what had past, was done with no other Intention than for their
Joint-Security's sake, and that he ws so far from desiring his Ruin, that he
should be ready for the future to do him all the good Offices he was capable
of. The Duke with a great deal of seeming satisfaction returned him Thanks,
calling God to witness, that he was very glad it was in his Power to oblige his
Majesty; and that for the future he would adhere inviolably to his Interest;
they dined the same day together, Duke of Holstein leaves Rensburg.
and the next Morning the Duke left Rensburgh under the discharge of the
Cannon, and returned to his Residence at Gottorp.

After his departure the Ministers of Gottorp, who were left behind by
particular Order from their Master, to regulate the remaining Differences, had
frequent Meetings with those of Denmark, who, in one of their first
Conferences, protested in the King's Name, that they were not met there to
constrain the Duke to any thing that was against his Will; unto which the
Ministers of Gottorp replied, that they did take it so, and, that what they
did, was done without Compulsion.

Thus, after many Conferences, a Treaty was concluded betwixt the King of
Denmark and the Duke of Holstein Gottorp, on the 10th day of July, 1675. In
which, besides some other Matters of less moment, Treaty of Rensburgh.
the Duke resigned the Sovereignty he had obtained by the Peace of Roshilt; so,
that all things were thereby settled upon the ancient Foundation of the Union
prescribed by their Ancestors. The Duke having afterward re-call'd his
Ministers from Rensburgh, after mature deliberation, not only ratified the said
Treaty, but also sent back to the King the Patent granted him by King Frederick
III. by which he was declared independent from the Crown of Denmark; The Duke^^
Ratification^ and Resignation of the Sovereignty.
he likewise writ a form of Resignation with his own hand, by which he
renounced all the Advantages he had obtained by the Northern Peace, and engaged
the Bishop of Lubeck, his Brother, to do the same.

As an overplus, he sent some time after the King was returned to Copenhagen, a
Letter written with his own hand, in which he testified his great Satisfaction
in being reconciled to his Majesty, by which means he hoped the ancient good
Correspondence and mutual Confidence betwixt their Families would be restored;
to effect which, he would be ready to contribute whatever should be in his
Power to do.

If all this, say the Danes, is not sufficient to contradict what is alleged
by some, concerning the Hardship put upon the Duke at the Treaty of Rensburgh,
why may not the Peace of Roshilt with the same Right be looked upon as a
Transaction, wherein Force had the greatest share, to wit: when King Frederick
III. being enclosed within his Capital City, by the Encouragement at least, if
not Assistance of Duke Frederick of Holstein Gottorp, was put to an absolute
Necessity of either losing all, or of redeeming some part of his Kingdoms, with
the Sovereignty granted to that Duke.

CHAP. VI. The ensuing War betwixt Charles XI. King of Sweden, and Christian V.
King of Denmark and his Allies.
WHilst these things were transacting in Holstein, the Elector of Brandenburgh,
The Swedes enter Brandenburgh.
having soon received Intelligence of the Irruption of the Swedes, who carried
all before them in a Country destitute of Defense, saw himself under an
absolute Necessity of leaving his Enterprise upon Brisac, in order to dislodge
the Swedes. These indeed pretended they did not enter the Territories of
Brandenburgh with an Intention to commit any Acts of Hostility, but only to
oblige the Elector to withdraw his Army from the Rhine, and to accept of a
Neutrality; but the Elector, who did not take these Compliments, upon the first
Notice, ordered all his Cavalry and Dragoons to march toward their Native
Country, being strengthened in his March through some of the more remote Parts of
his Territories, with some Foot, whom he ordered to be carried upon Wagons,
for the more Swiftness sake.

Thus with long and swift Marches he Arrived at a Pass called Ratenau,
Fortified and Possessed by the Swedes, Are surprised by the Brandenburghers.
who not dreaming of the Elector's being so near them were very careless in
keeping their out-Guards: The Elector finding this Opportunity suitable to his
Purpose, ordered the Place to be attack't with Sword in Hand, before break of
Day, which being done accordingly, they made themselves Masters of it, before
half the Garrison could take the Alarm, the Governor being made Prisoner
before he had time to put on his Clothes.

This done, the Elector ordered the Gates to be kept shut, so that no Body
should pass in or out, (to prevent the Enemy from getting any Intelligence of
what had past) and having called together all the Head Officers of his Army, he
told them that the only way to rid their Hands speedily of those Unwelcome
Guests, would be to Attack them before they got Notice of their Arrival; that
indeed, being only Horse, destitute of the Assistance of a sufficient Number of
Foot, they would be obliged to Fight against a well regulated Army, not without
a Considerable Disadvantage on their Side, but that he hoped their Courage
would supply this Defect; that, if they were all of his Opinion, they ought
rather to venture something, than to see their Estates wasted by a lingering
War; There being not one Man there who did not show a great deal of
Cheerfulness, and Compliance with what had been proposed by the Elector; he,
who knew, that their Main Advantage consisted in Expedition, Marched with his
whole Body toward the Enemy, who lay Encamped near a Place called Fehr Berlin,
but in so careless a manner, that it might easily be perceived, they expected
nothing less, than to be Engaged in a Battle that day, their General Wrangel,
being at the same time, with many of the Head Officers and a good Body of the
best Troops at a place called Havelbergh. The Swedes had scarce leisure to put
themselves in order of Battle, when they were attack't with great Fury by the
Brandenburghers, who being most Horse, broke in upon them both in Front and
Flank, The Swedes routed near Fehr Berlin.
(the Swedes being so posted as not to second one another in due time,) and put
them to an entire Rout, most of their Foot being Cut in Pieces; some are of
Opinion, that if their General Wrangel, (who had made himself so Famous in the
German Wars) had immediately after the Battle, joined the remainders of the
Army with his Body, they might, notwithstanding this Defeat, have Maintained
themselves in the Country of Brandenburgh; but instead of this, he Marched to
Wistock, and from thence to the Borders of Pomerania, leaving the rest to the
Mercy of the Enemies Horse, who pursued them so briskly, that very few of them
returned to the Swedish Camp.

Not long after, the Swedes being declared Enemies of the Empire at the Diet at
Ratisbon, and by the Dutch, King Christian V. having now his Hands at Liberty,
to Act wherever he should think it most Convenient for his purpose, and
considering with himself, that he could scarce have wished for a more
favorable Opportunity to recover his lost Dominions, and to reduce the Power
of the Swedes, into more narrow Bounds, than at this time, when the Flower of
their Forces being lost in their last Defeat, the Elector of Brandenburgh would
not be wanting to lay hold of this Opportunity, to rid his Hands of those
Troublesome Neighbors, by Chasing them out of Pomerania; Besides, that the
most Potent House of Luneburgh, in Conjunction with the Bishop of Munster,
Reasons which induced the King of Denmark to break with Sweden.
were making great preparations, to Invade the Dukedoms of Bremen and Verden,
Provinces under the Swedish Jurisdiction in Germany, which by reason of their
near Neighborhood to the Danish Territories (being situate all along the River
Elbe) have ever since been a great Eye Sore to the Danes. They had besides this
all the reason in the World to believe that the Czar of Muscovy would make use
of this juncture to make a most powerful Irruption into Livonia, which would
infallibly have been put in Execution, if by the sudden Death of the said Czar
(His Present Czarish Majesty's Father) the Swedes had not been delivered from
that Fear or rather impending Ruin.

These reasons, I say, were so prevailing with King Christian V. that at last
he gave Ear to the Solicitations of the Allies, and sent a good Body of Troops
the same Summer to the Assistance of his Electoral Highness of Brandenburgh,
Sends some of ^^x Troops to the Assistance of the Elector of Brandenburgh.
who were very Instrumental in furthering the Irruption, which the
Brandenburghers made into Pomerania, in spite of the Brave Resistance of the
Swedes, who defended their passes to the last Extremity, under the Command of
Otto William Earl of Koningsmark, who died afterward in the Morca, as General
of the Venetian Forces. After the Brandenburghers had got a firm footing in
Pomerania, King Christian V. set down before the City of Wismar, Besieges
Wismar.
with his whole Army, in the Month of October. This place being situate on the
Baltic, is very considerable to the Swedes, both for its strength and
Situation, this being the only place by which they can keep a Communication by
Sea, with the Dukedom of Bremen; and is consequently always provided with a
good Garrison, notwithstanding which, and the disadvantage of the Season, Is
surrendered to the Danes.
the Place was Surrendered to the Danes, after a Siege of Six Weeks, the Swedish
Fleet being not able to come time enough to its Relief.

The Dukedoms of Bremen and Verden being now destitute of all Relief, unless by
the way of the Elbe, which might easily be prevented by erecting some Forts,
and placing a few Frigots in a convenient Station, The House of Luneburgh
attacks the Swedes.
the Luneburghers made themselves Masters of those Countries without bloodshed,
there being no body there to oppose their Passage, except what was in the City
of Stade, which being provided with a good Garrison, but without hopes of being
Relieved, they reduced by Famine.

After the taking of Wismar King Christian V. bent all his thoughts to Attack
the Swedes with the utmost Vigor in Shonen, situate on the Continent, on the
other side of the Passage of the Sound; but this Enterprise being not likely to
meet with Success, till the Swedes were beaten at Sea, he continued his Naval
Preparations with the utmost Diligence, The Swedes beaten at Sea by the Danes.
and being reinforced with a good Squadron of Dutch Men of War, under the
Command of the Brave Van Tromp, they Engaged the Swedish Fleet so vigorously,
that they put them to Flight, with the Loss of several of their best Men of
War, among which was the Swedish Ship called the Crown, at that time, supposed
to be the biggest in Europe, carrying 120 Guns, and above a thousand Men; though
it is to be observed that this Mischance was occasioned rather by a Neglect,
than the Enemy, being over-set as she was tacking about by the Guns, which were
not well fastened. The Swedes lose their Admiral.
falling for the most part on one side. The Ship in which was their Admiral
Vgla had likewise the Misfortune, to be burnt after it had Fought with
incredible Bravery for several Hours, and being quite disabled, was just upon
the Point of Surrendering to the Danish Admiral, when the Dutch Admiral Van
Tromp sent two Fireships, one of which set her on Fire; This was looked upon
as an irreparable Loss to the Swedes; for of 1400 Men, that were in the Ship,
(among whom were above 300 Volunteers, most Gentlemen of Quality) there escaped
not one, the Flame being so furious, as to take away from the Enemy it self the
Opportunity of saving either the Ship or Men.

After the Danes had cleared thus the Sea of the Swedes, The Danes Land on the
Continent of Sweden.
King Christian V. being reinforced with 6000 Munsterians, Landed with an Army
of about 26000 Men at Isted in Shonen, not far from Helsingburgh, Take
Helsingburgh.
which last place he took with little Resistance; the King of Sweden, who found
himself not strong enough to oppose him, being retreated to a great distance,
till he could be reinforced with more Troops from Sweden, so as to be able to
make head against the Danes, who being now Masters of the Field took one place
after another; Take Lands Crown.
for after the taking of Helsingburgh they sat down before Lands Crown, which
after a Brave Resistance was forced to Surrender. The City of Christian-stadt
being built upon an Island in the midst of a Lake, the Garrison thought
themselves so secure against any Attempt from the Enemy, that they plied their
Cups more than their Guards, which over-security, proved their Ruin; for it
happening to be a very dry Season, and the Danes finding the Lake fordable in
some places, And Christianstadt by Asault.
passed the same, and before the Garrison could put themselves in a posture of
Defense, carried the place by Assault, Cutting all to Pieces that opposed their
Passage.

The next year did not prove altogether so prosperous to the Danes, for the
King having detatch'd a Body of 4000 Men under the Command of Major General
Duncomb to invest Halmstadt, 4000 Danes routed.
the whole Swedish Army got betwixt them and their Main Body; so that being
past all Retreating, they were forced to fight it out to the last, which they
did with incredible Bravery, most of them being slain upon the Spot, and the
rest made Prisoners of War.

The King of Sweden flushed with this Success, and having received lately a
considerable Re-inforcement out of Sweden, advanced with his Army into Shonen
to observe the Danes, who were then employed in the Siege of Malmoe; The
Swedish Army posted it self as near as they could with safety to the Danes, who
were for preventing any Relief to be sent into the Place; in this Posture they
continued for several Weeks, till what with the Coldness of the Season and the
Fatigues and Losses of a long Siege, the Danish Army being considerably
diminished, the King of Sweden attacked them near Lunden. The Battle was very
obstinate on both sides, the Swedes as well as the Danes, being animated by the
Presence of their respective Kings, and lasted from Morning till Night. The
Danes were superior in Horse to the Swedes, as these out-numbred the others in
Foot, of whom they had lost the Bravest in the Siege of Malmoe. The King of
Sweden, who commanded the right Wing of his Army, forced the Danish left Wing
to retreat over the River, Battle betwixt the Danes and Swedes.
whilst the right Wing of the Danes, commanded by their King, made the left
Wing of the Swedes shrink before them; so, that both Parties fighting with
equal Obstinacy and Advantage, the Night put an end to the Slaughter, which was
very great, there having been found near ten thousand Men slain upon the Spot.
In this Battle the King of Denmark, as well as his only Brother Prince George,
who was his constant Companion, wherever he went, signalized themselves to the
Admiration of all the Army, exposing themselves frequently to the Enemies Shot,
and leading on their Squadrons in Person, so that the Danes attributed the
Glory of having shared the Honor of the Day with the Enemy, Chiefly to their
Presence.

In the mean while the Elector of Brandenburgh, having made himself master of
all the Places of less note in Pomerania, had besieged the City of Stettin, The
Siege of Stettin.
which defended it self beyond what can be expressed, disputing every Inch of
ground with the Brandenburghers; In the mean while the Swedes, to try whether
they could withdraw the Elector from that Siege by a powerful Diversion, made
an Irruption into Prussia, by the way of Courland; but the Elector of
Brandenburgh having well secured his Passes on that side, they were forced to
return without doing any thing, having lost one half of their Army, by Gold,
Famine, and several Engagements. In the mean while the Elector pushed on the
Siege of Stettin with the utmost Vigor, which being at least reduced to the
utmost Extremity, Surrenders.
was forced to surrender to the Elector; The City of Strahlsund, the only then
remaining under the Swedish Jurisdiction in Pomerania, was forced to undergo
the same Fate; for their Magazines being burnt by the Elector's Bombs, and
being bereaved of all hopes of Relief, Strahlsund Surrendered.
they made an honorable Capitulation. The Elector of Brandenburgh being now
Master of all Pomerania, the remainder of the Swedish Forces were, according to
Capitulation, to be Transported by Sea into Sweden; but run upon the Sands near
Bornholm, where they were Shipwrack'd, and many of them drowned, the rest being
made Prisoners by the Danes; The Swedish Forces Shipwrack'^.
so that of an Army of 40000 Men (the Swedish Forces in Germany being accounted
so strong, before the beginning of this War) there returned very few into
Sweden. The Shipwracking of those Forces made a great Noise in those Parts, the
Swedes laying the Fault of it upon the Commodore, and exclaiming against the
Danes for detaining those who had escaped the danger of the Wars; The Elector
of Brandenburgh by a Declaration cleared himself and his Commander of this
Charge, which they imputed altogether to a Misfortune, it happening in a very
dark Night; as the Danes did excuse the Action by a Defect in the Pass, which,
as they say, entitled them to use those Swedes as Prisoners of War.

But we must return to the Swedes and Danes in Shonen. Both Sides having made
all possible Preparations to appear as formidable as could be the next
Campaign, the Swedes laid Siege to Christianstadt; The King of Denmark having
appointed the Rendezvous of his Army near Lands-Crown, marched (he himself
being at the Head of them) toward the Enemy, with a Resolution to give them
Battle; But finding the Swedish King advantageously posted on a rising Ground,
he did not think fit to attack him, but besieged Malmoe.

The place was provided with a strong Garrison, The Siege of Malmoe by the
Danes.
and all other things requisite for a vigorous Defense; notwithstanding which
the King of Denmark, whose Genius was always for Action, resolved to carry on
the Siege, which was done accordingly for five Weeks together; the Besieged,
encouraged by the nearness of the Swedish Army, being resolved to defend
themselves to the last Extremity; several large Breaches being made in the Body
of the Place, the King of Denmark ordered a General Assault to be given, which
was done accordingly, but with very ill Success; for though the Danes did enter
the Breach inspite of all the opposition made by the Besieged, yet those being
provided with a good Entrenchment behind the Breach, did so gall the Danes with
their Firearms, that it was impossible for them to make a Lodgment there; so
that they were forced to retreat with the Loss of 4000 of their best Men.

After this mishap the King of Denmark raised the Siege, The Danes (...) Swedes.
in order to March to Lands Crown, but was overtaken in his March, before he
could reach that place, by the Swedish Army, who having lately received a
Considerable re-inforcement, Attack't the Danes, weakened by the last Siege of
Malmoe, with such a Fury, that they were forced to retreat under the Cannon of
Lands Crown; This being the second Battle Fought bewixt the two Northern Kings,
within the Space of Twelve Months.

This Loss was over-ballanced by two Engagements at Sea, in which the Danes
were Victorious over the Swedes. For, a Squadron of thirteen Swedish Ships
coming from Gothenburgh, as they were passing through the Belt, in order to join
the Swedish Fleet, were all taken by the Danes and brought up to Copenhagen,
except one, which setting up Danish Colors, escaped through the Sound.

Not long after they had another smart Engagement with the whole Swedish Fleet,
The Swedes worsted twice at Sea.
in which the last, after the loss of several of their best Ships, were forced
to make the best of their way to their Ports.

In the mean while the King of Sweden kept Christian stadt closely block't up,
being very difficult to be Attack't in form by reason of its situation in the
midst of a Lake; The place being reduced to great Want, the Danish Army Marched
to its Relief, but finding all the Posts and Avenues well Guarded by the
Swedes, and being not strong enough to hazard a Battle, they returned without
attempting any thing; so that the place being reduced to the utmost by Famine,
was forced to surrender to the Swedes.

The Loss of this place was in some Measure made good by the taking of
Helsingburgh, (which since the Battle of Lunden was regained by the Swedes)
This was performed by a Stratagem, Helsingburgh taken by a Stratagem.
by sending a supposititious Letter to the Governor, who thereupon coming out
of the place, the same was surprised by the Danes; but they had not the same
good Luck before Bahus, which after they had Stormed in vain, they did raise
the Siege at the Approach of the Swedish Forces, that were Marching to its
Relief.

Whilst those things past in the North, the Dutch had made a great step toward
the concluding a separate Peace with France, under very Advantageous Conditions
on their side, which was actually signed on the tenth of August N. S. in the
Year 1678, notwithstanding the solemn Protestations of the Ministers of the
other Allies, The Dutch make a separate Peace at Nimeguen.
and the great dislike of the Prince of Orange; the Ratifications of the said
Treaty, being after some Contests, exchanged on the 17 of September following,
being the day when the Peace betwixt France and the Spainiards (who had been
included by the Dutch in the said Peace) was signed.

The Emperor not thinking it for his Advantage, to maintain alone the War
against France, Concluded likewise a Peace with them on the 5 of February, 1679.

The Danes and Brandenburghers seeing themselves thus left by their Allies to
the Mercy of a Potent Enemy, made most severe Protestations against the
Proceedings of the Emperor but to no great purpose; the French King declaring,
by his Ambassadors within three Weeks after, to Sir Lionel Jenkins, the
Erglish Mediator, that if Denmark and Brandenburgh did not resolve before the
end of March, to give full Satisfaction to the Swedes, he would be at Liberty
to form new Pretensions, which time was however afterward, prolonged to the
first day of May; But this Truce expired without answering the desired Effect,
the French Ambassadors insisting upon their former Demands of restoring all to
the Swedes, and would have it inserted as a preliminary Article, That the King
of Denmark should immediately release these Swedish Forces we mentioned before,
to have been Shipwrack'd near Bornholm; which being refused, they seconded
their Demands with a good Body of Troops under Lieut. General Calvo, who
passing the Rhine, forced the Brandenburgh General Spaen, to retreat toward
the River Weser; where a sharp Engagement happened near Minden, with the Loss
of a good Number of Men on both sides. But whilst the French were preparing to
attack Minden, a Messenger arrived with the welcome News that the Peace betwixt
the French and Swedish Kings and His Electoral Highness was Signed at St.
Germain, on the 19 of June, 1679, Peace with the Elector of Brandenburgh.
according to which the Elector was to restore to the Swedes all he had taken
from them in Pomerania, during this last War, except the Lands on the other
side of the River Oder and the City of Golnow; That the Swedes were to quit the
Toll they used to receive at Colberg, and some other Places in Pomerania, and
the French King to pay to the Elector the Sum of 300000 Crowns toward
reimbursing, in some measure, the vast Charge he had been at in making those
Conquests.

This being all the Satisfaction this Gallant Prince was able to obtain, the
Danes had but little Reason to promise themselves any better Terms, especially
since the House of Luneburgh having likewise made a separate Peace with France,
they were now left destitute of all Aid from their Allies. King Christian V.
seeing himself thus reduced to an absolute necessity of concluding a sudden
Peace, Lunden in Shonen was appointed for the Commissioners of both the
Northern Crowns to meet, and to endeavor to effect an Accommodation betwixt
their respective Masters, and Mr. Meyerkron was sent into France, to Negotiate
the Peace there. But what most of all hastened the Conclusion of it, was a good
Body of Horse, sent by the French King, under the Command of the Marquess de
Joyeuse, into the Countries of Oldenburgh and Delmenhorst, who exacted great
Contributions, so that the Danes being not in a Condition to resist so powerful
an Invasion, With Denmark.
a Peace was concluded betwixt France, Sweden and Denmark on the 2d of
September 1679, at Fontaine Bleau, under these following Articles:

I. That there shall be a firm Peace between the said Kings, and every thing
done during the War, to the Offense of either, to be buried in Oblivion.

II. That all Alliances made by either of the three Kings, to the prejudice of
the other, shall cease and be abolished, and they shall not make any, Articles
of the Peace of Fontaine Bleau.
which may be so for the future.

III. That Hostilities do cease, within a fortnight, reckoning from the day of
the Signing, except in Norway, where three Weeks shall be allowed, by reason of
its distance.

IV. That the Treaties of Roshilt, Copenhagen and Westphalia shall be
confirmed, with all the Instruments to them appertaining.

V. The King of Denmark promises to restore whatever he has taken from Sweden
during this War, viz. Landscorwn, Helsingburgh, Marstrand and Wismar, as also
the Isles of Rugen and Gothland, with all their dependencies.

VI. In like manner the King of Sweden promises to restore what he has taken
from the Danes during this War.

VII. That Commissioners shall be appointed by the two Northern Crowns, who
shall meet within six Months (a Minister from the most Christian King being
present) and shall endeavor to compose all Differences arisen on occasion of
Privileges and Immunities, which the Swedes pretend to in the Sound and in the
Baltic; provided that the said Privileges and Immunities do remain in full
force and vigor, the Abuses only to be corrected.

VIII. The Places to be restored to Sweden shall be delivered up in the same
Condition as they are at present, viz. Helsingburgh, Lands-crown, and all other
Places possessed by the King of Denmark in Shonen, Halland and Bleckingen,
together with Carelstadt, and the Fort on the River Swinge within two Weeks,
Wismar and the Isle of Rugen within three, Marstrand and the Isle of Gothland
within four Weeks, to be reckoned from the Day of the Exchange.

IX. The King of Denmark may take out of the Places to be restored, what Cannon
he caused to be brought into them, since they were in his Possession; but the
Cannon that were in those Places, when taken and still remain there, to be
restored with the Places. But if the King of Denmark has formerly taken out of
those Places, the Cannon that belonged to the Swedes, he shall restore the one
Half thereof.

X. All Goods and Estates consiscated during the War, shall be restored.

XI. All Persons shall be restored to the Rights and Privileges they enjoyed
before the War.

XII. The Country of Rixengen, belonging to the Count Ahlefelt, confiscated
during the War, shall be restored to him.

XIII. All Prisoners shall be released.

XIV. All such Princes as shall desire it, shall be comprehended in this Treaty.

XV. The most Christian King promises, that the King of Sweden shall ratify
this Treaty within three Months.

XVI. The most Christian King promises to ratify the same within six Weeks.

XVII. The Duke of Holstein Gottorp having earnestly desired his most Christian
Majesty to endeavor his Restitution, pursuant to the Treaties of Roshilt,
Copenhagen and Westphalia, and having assured us that he wished for nothing
more, than to be Reconciled with his Danish Majesty; The said King of Denmark,
to show his desire to put an End to the War, and all the Differences in hand,
does, at the Desire of his most Christian Majesty agree, by virtue of this
Article, That the said Duke of Holstein Gottorp shall be restored to his
Possessions, Lands, Provinces and Cities, in the same Condition as they now
are; as likewise to his Sovereignty (as it is termed) granted to him by virtue
of the Treaties of Roshilt and Copenhagen; so, that whatever has been done and
transacted since, shall not be drawn into Consequence in opposition to those
Treaty's; which, as well that of Roshilt, as that of Copenhagen and Westphalia,
shall stand and remain in their full Force, as far as they have any Relation to
the Duke of Holstein Gottorp, as if they had been inserted word by word in this
Treaty. And, forasmuch as the ancient Unions and Compacts made betwixt the two
(Royal and Ducal) Houses, are confirmed by the said Treaty's, it is covenanted
and agreed with the said Duke of Holstein Gottorp, that the said Hereditary
Unions and Compacts shall remain in their full force, and be punctually and
faithfully observed on both sides, nothing being to be done against them under
any Pretense whatever.

This is that Article of the Peace of Fountain-Bleau, which being mentioned and
confirmed in the Treaty of Altena, has given occasion to new Troubles betwixt
these two Houses; the Account of which, will be the Subject of the following
Chapters.

CHAP. VII. The true State of the Difference arisen betwixt CHRISTIAN V. King
of Denmark, and Christian Albert Duke of Holstein Gottorp, after the Treaty of
Rensburgh, till the Treaty of Fountain-Bleau, and Altena.
AFter the Conclusion of the Treaty at Rensburgh, the Duke of Holstein Gottorp,
did not remain long in the same Sentiment; the beginning was made with certain
Pamphlets, in which the Transaction of Rensburgh, were Painted in the blackest
Colors imaginable; at which the King of Denmark being extremely Surprised,
writ in very Obliging Terms to the Duke, to know whether those Things had been
done with his Consent, and, if not, to show his Resentment both against those
Pamphlets and the Authors of them. The Duke answering in very ambiguous terms;
the King sent him word, that since he denied him so reasonable a Satisfaction,
he could not take it amiss, if he did, so much Justice both to his Person and
Himself, as to secure those, who were the Authors and fomenters of those
Divisions and Mischiefs, which he protested he was constrained to by an
absolute Necessity to prevent a further Rupture betwixt the two Houses, and as
a Testimony of his sincere Inclinations toward the Duke, ordered the Garrison,
which he kept in Sleswick, to be removed from thence, offering to give him all
further Security he could desire.

The Duke was so alarmed at this Proposal, The Duke slies to Hamburgh.
that, being then at Eutin with his Brother the Bishop of Lubeck, instead of
returning to Gottorp, his ordinary Residence, he went to Hamborough, where he
was no sooner arrived, but he began to call in question the Legality of the
Treaty of Rensburgh, and within a Year and a Half after, declared it null and
void; He offered however, to receive the Investiture of the Dukedom of
Sleswick, provided the King would give him Satisfaction concerning certain
Points, which being contrary to the said Treaty, the King would not hearken to,
or at least, not before he had received the said Investiture.

Things continued for some time in this Posture, whilst the Queen Dowager of
Denmark employed all her Authority and good Offices with her Son-in-Law the
Duke, to persuade him to a Compliance with his Majesty's Desires, pursuant to
the Treaty of Rensburgh; but the Duke persisting in his former Resolution, the
King of Denmark made a Sequestration of the Ducal Share of the Dukedom of
Sleswick, alleging for his Justification, to be entitled to it, by the Duke's
being from his Vassal, become his Enemy. This Sequestration continued till the
beforementioned Peace, made at Fountain-Bleau, in which there being inserted an
Article, in Favor of the Duke of Holstein Gottorp, this gave birth to new
Troubles. For, the Duke's Ministers interpreted those Words in the said
Article, That whatever has been done and transacted since, shall not be drawn
into Consequence in Opposition to those Treaties, (to wit: of Roshilt and
Copenhagen) as if thereby all what had been transacted and agreed upon in the
Year 1675, at Rensburgh, was actually annulled and made void, without any
Exception; Whereas the Danes say, That these Words of this Article are plainly
intended no further than of what had been concluded there in opposition to the
Treaties of Roshilt and Copenhagen. Now says they, it is manifest that these
Articles of the Treaty of Rensburgh, which divest the Duke of Holstein Gottorp
of his Sovereignty, are absolutely contrary to the said Treaties of Roshilt and
Copenhagen; for which Reason also the King of Denmark has restored the Duke to
his Sovereignty, and performed every thing else, that was done before, contrary
to the said Treaties; But as to what relates to the Imposing and Collecting of
Taxes, and the common Defense of the Dukedoms, those Articles of the Treaty of
Rensburgh, says they, as they are not opposite to the Treaties of Roshilt and
Copenhagen, but have been introduced since contrary to the Union and ancient
Custom observed betwixt those two Houses, so they have not been abolished by
this Article of the Peace of Fountain-Bleau. New differences betwixt Denmark
and the Duke of Holstein.


There being at that time some Differences on foot betwixt his Danish Majesty
and his Allies, by reason of the Conclusion of the late Peace at Nimeguen, and
Denmark being extremely weakened by the vast Charges it had been at in
prosecuting the War against Sweden, this was looked upon by the Duke and his
Ministers as a favorable Juncture for them, to push the point to the utmost,
in order to obtain their End, which was supposed to be to dissolve by degrees
the whole Union betwixt those two Houses, the better to link themselves with
the Crown of Sweden. The Court of Denmark are very positive in this Point, that
they have authentic and undeniable Proofs, in their hands, by which it
appears, that the Duke at that very time entered into new Alliances for that
purpose, promising considerable Subsidies (such as were beyond his Power to
pay) to some Princes, not well affected to the Crown of Denmark, in case they
would send some Forces into the Dukedoms to back his Pretensions. Whereupon the
King of Denmark made a second Sequestration of the Dukedom of Sleswick, as far
as it belonged to the Duke's Jurisdiction, and at the same time made his
Application to the Imperial Court, to desire that some reasonable Satisfaction
might be given him, in reference to the Duke's Share in the Dukedom of Holstein.

Things remained thus without any considerable Alteration till the Year 1689,
when most of the Princes of Europe being engaged in a War against France (the
two Northern Crowns and Portugal excepted) the Swedes did lay hold of this
Opportunity, to endeavor the Restoration of the Duke of Holstein Gottorp. For
which purpose they set out a good Fleet, as did likewise the Danes to oppose
them, in case they should go about to second their Threats by Blows; The Allies
seeing that this was likely to kindle a War in the North, which must of
necessity bereave them of all the Hopes they had conceived of a powerful
Succor from thence, against their common Enemy, used all their Endeavors for
a Reconciliation; to accomplish which, the Emperor, and the two Electors of
Saxony and Brandenburgh, offered their Mediation, which being accepted of on
both sides, a Treaty was set on foot at a place called Altena, under the
Jurisdiction of his Danish Majesty, as Duke of Holstein, not above an English
Mile distant from Hamborough. Great application was likewise made to his
Majesty of Great Britain, and the Dutch, as Guarantees of the Northern Peace;
the last of which sent Monsieur Heemskerk, who in conjunction with the Envoy
Extraordinary from England, had a great hand in bringing the Matter to a
Conclusion; But above all, the pressing Instances of his Electoral Highness of
Brandenburgh, who was willing to take away from the Swedes all Pretensions of
transporting an Army over the Baltic; and the Intercessions of his Royal
Highness Prince George of Denmark, had so powerful an Influence upon the Danish
Court, that on the 20th of June old Style, Peace made at Altena,
a Peace was concluded betwixt the King of Denmark and the Duke of Holstein
Gottorp, by virtue of which, the Duke was restored to all his Possessions and
Rights (yet without the least Reparations of Damages) upon the same foot, as he
was possessed of them by the Treaties of Roshilt and Copenhagen; though the
Holstein Gottorp's Ministers have since endeavored to extend it to a much
larger Compass, of which we shall have occasion to speak more at large anon.

I will only say, that the Conclusion of this Treaty produced this good Effect
for the Allies, that the Swedish Forces continued in the Dutch Service, and, by
virtue of a Treaty betwixt England and the King of Denmark, the last sent seven
thousand Soldiers to our Assistance, which did us considerable Service, both
in Ireland and Flanders, to the very end of the War.

And upon this occasion I cannot pass by in Silence the Generous Concurrence of
His Royal Highness George Prince of Denmark, in bringing the said Treaty to a
happy Issue. It is to be observed, that Pursuant to the last Will and Testament
of King Frederick III. his youngest Son Prince George, was (besides certain
Allotments in Lands) to have the Sum of three hundred thousand Crowns for his
Share, which Sum, according to a Liquidation made betwixt his Brother King
Christian V. and Christian Alben the late Duke of Holstein Gottorp, From whence
arises the debt due to the Prince of Denmark from England.
was to be paid to the said Prince, by the last; who for his better Security
Mortgaged to him the Isle of Fehmeren, besides two or three other Balliages,
till the said Sum should be paid. Now, pursuant to the late Peace of Altena,
the Duke of Holstein Gottorp, being to be restored to all his Dominions, in the
same manner as he was possessed of them, by virtue of the Treaties of Roshilt
and Copenhagen, and he pleading his unability to satisfy so considerable a
Debt, after having been deprived of the Benefit of his Revenues, for near
thirteen Years last past, His Royal Highness Prince George, not to obstruct the
Execution of the Peace, and to contribute all what in him lay toward the
removing all occasions of further Differences, did by an unparalled Act of
Generosity, His Generosity.
freely resign the beforementioned Mortgaged Island and Balliages into the
Duke's Hands, His Present Majesty of Great Britain, the Dutch and Elector of
Brandenburgh, having Engaged their Word to satisfy the said Debt to His Royal
Highness; pursuant to which Agreement, His Britainick Majesty recommended the
said Debt at the opening of this Session of Parliament, to their Consideration,
with such Success, that the English Share of it is Assigned to be paid out of
the present Aid of two Shilling per Pound.

So, that the Duke of Holstein Gottorp owed this Obligation to his
Brother-in-Law Prince George, to see himself once more restored to his
Dominions, without the least Encumbrance, the consequence of which was, that
the said Duke ever after this last Reconciliation, lived in a perfect good
understanding with King Christitan V. notwithstanding some of his Councillors
endeavored to sow afresh the Seeds of Discord betwixt them; but in vain, he
continuing in the same Sentiment to the very last; of which good
Correspondence, one undeniable Instance was the Fortifications of Rensburgh and
Tonningen, made by the Mutual Consent of both Houses, the first by the King,
the last by the Duke, looking upon those places as the Bulwarks of the two
Dukedoms for their Mutual Defense; But this good Harmony ceasing with the said
Duke's Life, occasioned those Divisions, which for these four or five Years
past have been, and still are on Foot, betwixt the Crown of Denmark and the
young Duke of Holstein Gottorp.

CHAP. VIII. An Account of the Siege of Hamborough, undertaken by King
Christian V. in the Year 1686.
BEfore we pursue the thread of our History concerning the Differences on Foot
betwixt the two Houses of Denmark and Holstein Gottorp, we must look back as
far as the Year 1686, when King Christian V. Attack't the City of Hamborough
with great Vigor. It is very well known that the Kings of Denmark lay Claim to
that City as being Dukes of Holstein; to examine which, is beyond our present
purpose, we will only give a brief Account of the occasion which induced the
said King to take so Vigorous a Resolution, Differences betwixt the Senate and
Commonalty of Hamburgh occasion this Siege.
to back his Pretensions. It is therefore to be observed, that there being
certain Differences arisen between the Senate and the Commonalty of that City
some years before, the same were carried on by the Burghers, to such a hight,
that the Commonweal was threatened with an Imminent Ruin, by reason of their
refusing to pay any Taxes toward the support of the Government, before their
Grievances were Redressed, which tended Chiefly to make new Encroachments upon
the Authority of the Senate.

To prevent the further ill Consequence of this popular Mischief, it was
thought convenient to seek for Redress by His Imperial Majesty, who thereupon
sent the Count of Windish Graetz, as his Commissioner, to endeavor the
Composition of those Differences, which he effected accordingly, by putting a
check upon the Ringleaders of the dissatisfied Party, and confirming the
Senate in his Authority.

There was about that time in the Senate, one Mr. Nicholas Crull, a Man of a
very active Spirit, who having been formerly a great Patron of the Commonalty
in maintaining their Liberties, as long as they contained themselves within
their due Bounds, did afterward, when they transgressed their Limits, prove as
strenuous an Assertor of the Senate's Authority, of which he was a Member, and
was very instrumental in reducing some of the Leading Men of the Adverse Party
to their Duty. Those not being able to digest those hard Terms they were under
(according to their Opinion) laid hold of the first Opportunity, after the
departure of the Imperial Commissioner, to represent at one of the public
Assemblies of the Commonalty, this Senator as a Person, who had endangered the
public Liberty, and therefore not to be suffered to continue in a Station,
where he might have frequent opportunity to clip their Wings; The Bait of
Public Liberty was so greedily swallowed by the unthinking Multitude, that
they were all for removing the said Mr. Crull from his Station in the Senate,
and with great violence demanded it; so that the Senate not being able to
withstand, after many Contests, their fury, saw themselves under a necessity to
Consent, to have the said Mr. Crull, suspended, for the present, of his
Function. He seeing what constraint the Senate lay under by the violence of the
unruly Multitude, and having but little hopes of Redress on that side, made his
Appeal to the Imperial Court, who gave Sentence in his Favor, that he should
be restored to his Dignity, Offices and Profits. But the Commonalty knowing the
Emperor at that time Engaged in a heavy War with the Turks, The Emperor's
Authority slighted by the Hamburghers.
and consequently not in a Condition to force them to a Compliance, made but
little Account of the reiterate Mandats sent by the Emperor, to put his
Sentence in Execution, whilst the wiser part of the Senate (some of whom sided
with the Commons) fearing the ill consequences of it, urged them to a
Compliance with the Emperor's Mandats. Among them was one Mr. Meuring who
being a very bold Man, did stand up above all the rest for the Senate's
Authority, and paying due Obedience to the Emperor, which the Commonalty not
approving of, they played the same Game with him as they had done before with
the Senator Crull, or rather worse; for all on a sudden, without the least
fore-warning, they forced the Senate to put him under a Confinement, nor would
they suffer him to be released, till he had resing'd his Senators place, and
made a Declaration in Writing, confirmed by his Oath, that he would never
endeavor for the Future to be restored to it.

But this Precaution proved fruitless, for Mr. Meuring not thinking himself
obliged to an Oath, which was forced from him, he for his own Preservation,
left the City the next day, seeking for shelter at the Court of the Duke of
Lunenburgh Zell.

The Proceedings of the Commonalty being against all form of Law, he soon
obtained a Mandat from the Emperor for his Restoration, which being as little
regarded by the Commons of Hamborough, as the former had been, the Emperor
sent his Orders to the said Duke of Zell, as Director of the Circle of Lower
Saxony. Mr. Meuring being a Man of a considerable Estate, He engages the Duke
of Zell in the Quarrel.
soon engaged the Court of Zell in his Interest, so that they not only stopped
the Passage of all the Vessels that came down the River toward Hamborough, but
at last sent some of their Troops into their Territories, where they were to
live upon free Cost, till such time the Hamburghers should comply with the
Emperor's Mandats.

Things being come to this Pass, the Ringleaders of the adverse Party were
sorely put to a Nonplus what to resolve upon in this Exigency of their Affairs,
most of the common People beginning to murmur about the Decay of Trade, and the
heavy Taxes laid upon them, to maintain themselves against the lawful Authority
of the Emperor; so that the adverse Party not knowing what expedient to pitch
upon, they began to call in question the Emperor's Authority in relation to
the Matter in hand.

This proved a wished for Opportunity to the King of Denmark, who being
resolved to make use of this occasion to improve his Pretensions upon that
City, gave all possible Encouragement to the Commons, alleging that what was
undertaken against the City by the Emperor's Order, was done to his Prejudice:
But not satisfied with this, he unexpectedly appeared with a formidable Force
before the City Gates, demanding to be acknowledged as their Protector against
the Violency put upon them by the Emperor; and that in case of a refusal, they
must expect to be treated as Enemies.

The Senate of Hamborough not relishing those Propositions, The King of Denmark
attacks Hamburgh.
the King of Denmark, seconded his Threats with immediate Blows. There is a
Fort of five Bastions (from whence it is called the Star-fort) situate on the
Northwest-side of the City in a large Plain; This the Danes attacked the very
first Night with Sword in hand, in hopes, that, if they could make themselves
Masters of it, they would be able to bring the City to other Terms by a
Bombardment: But the Garrison in the Fort being well prepared for the Assault,
they were repulsed with great Loss. The Danes were so far from being
discouraged at this first ill Success, Are twice repulsed.
that they attacked it again the next day, with incredible Fury; but the Fort
being so conveniently situated, as to have a Communication with some other
Outworks belonging to the Fortifications of that City, and consequently being
constantly supplied with fresh Troops from thence, they miscarried likewise in
the second Attempt:

The King of Denmark and his Generals, being now made sensible that the said
Fort, both by reason of its Strength, and the Convenience of its being relieved
with fresh Supplies from the City, was not to be taken by a sudden Assault, it
was resolved to attack it in form, and to endeavor to cut off all
Communication betwixt the said Fort and the City. But in the mean while that
the Danes were advancing their Trenches, They open their Trenches.
not only the Luneburgh Forces, that were quartered in their Territories, but
also a good Body of Brandenburgh Horse were at the Request of the Senate, come
to their Relief; so that, what with those and their own Troops, they had a good
Body of regular Forces, consisting of near 12000 Men in the City; and the
Swedes in the Dukedom of Bremen, had furnished them a good Number of expert
Gunners, who not a little annoyed the Danes in their Trenches. But these
working without intermission on their Lines of Communication and some small
Forts, by which they hoped to prevent the coming of any Succors to the Relief
of the Starfort, it was resolved among those who had the Command in the City,
to endeavor to dislodge the Danes out of their Works, by making a strong and
vigorous Sally; which being put in execution accordingly, with all imaginable
Secrecy, Are routed in a Sally.
they fell upon the Danes with such Fury, that they cut near 1500 of them in
pieces in and near the Trenches, before they could be relieved by their
Cavalry, at the Approach of which the Hamburghers retreated toward their
Gates, the Danish Horse charging their Rear all the while; There happened in
this Engagement a certain Action very well worth our Observation; For, Bravery
of a Danish Officer.
a certain Danish Officer of Horse in the heat of the Engagement entered
Pall Mall with the Hamburgher Troops, through the first Gate, when being espied
by the Captain who kept the Guard there, and was going to Discharge his Fusee
at him, he Shot him through the Head, and clapping Spurs to his Horse, Fought his
way through those that opposed his Passage, and escaped safely to the Danish Camp.

After this Engagement a Treaty was set on Foot by the Mediation of the Elector
of Brandenburgh and the Duke of Lunenburgh Zell; the last coming in Person to
his Castle of Hareburgh, situate on the other side of the River Elbe, just
opposite to Hamburgh, to give the more life to the intended Composition;
Neither was the English Envoy, then residing in that City, wanting on his part,
to Contribute what lay in his Power, to bring Matters to an Accommodation, by
reason of the considerable Interest the English Company there, has in its
Preservation; so, that after some Debates; during which time the Danes made a
Trial of some few of their Bombs, which because of their too great distance,
had no Effect, an Agreement was made betwixt the King of Denmark and the City;
the main Article of which was, that things should remain in Statu quo, An
agreement made with the City.
without any prejudice to the King of Denmark's just Pretensions, till the Year
1700, and that in the interim, a good Correspondence should be Cultivated on
both Sides.

It was the wonder of all Europe at that time, to see the King of Denmark
Attack a City with fifteen or sixteen thousand Men, which by reason of the vast
extent of its Fortifications and Strength (being five or six Miles in Compass)
required rather an Army of three or four score thousand Men to besiege it in
due form. It was the general Opinion at that time, that the said Attack would
scarce have been undertaken, without a secret Correspondence within the Place,
and the dissatisfied Party of that City was charged with it, who seeing their
Affairs reduced to a desperate Condition, were supposed to have no other Refuge
than to the Protection of Denmark. But on the other hand, this has been
constantly denied by the Danes, who declare, that, that though their King saw
himself obliged in point of Policy to make use of this Juncture, when the
Differences betwixt the Senate and a strong dissatisfied Party were risen to
the highest pitch, nevertheless that Court did not keep any secret
Correspondence with them. What the Senate of Hamborough allege on their side,
seems not to agree in all Points with this; for they say, that by a Letter sent
by one of the Chief Ringleaders of the Conspiracy, which was accidentally
intercepted; they were informed of a certain Iron-Chest, hid in a Cellar in a
private House, which thereupon being found, and opened in the presence of
several Persons of unquestionable Credit and Authority in that City; many
Papers of dangerous consequence, such as Journals of their Transactions, and
several Letters relating to their Design were discovered, by which it appeared,
that they were entered into a Conspiracy to overturn the Constitution of the
Government. Thus much is beyond all Contradiction, that two of the Chief of the
dissatisfied Faction paid with their Heads for it, their Quarters being put
upon the City Gates; Some of the consp^rators punished.
one of the Senators, who was accused to have a hand in the Conspiracy, and was
kept under close Confinement upon that Account, in order to be brought to his
Trial, died very suddenly during his Confinement, and was supposed to have
poisoned himself, to avoid the Shame of an ignominious Death; several were
banished the Territories of the City, and many others, as well Gentlemen as
Citizens retired into the Danish Dominions.

CHAP. IX. Of the differences arisen betwixt King Christian V. and the young
Duke of Holstein Gottorp, after the Death of his Father, Duke Christian Albert.
AFter the Death of Christian Albert, the late Duke of Holstein, which happened
about the Year 1695, his Son Frederick began to take quite other measures, from
what his Father had done of late Years; The young Duke of Holstein takes ^ew
measures.
For, he not only entered into a more strict Alliance with Sweden, but also took
some of their Forces into his Service, and considerably augmented his own
Troops, without any previous Communication with the King of Denmark. Whereupon
the last sent to the Duke two of his Ministers, to wit: Monsieur Lilien Crown,
a Member of his Privy Council, and Monsieur Schroeder, to represent to him,
that, being, that time of the Sessions of the Provincial Court of Justice did
approach, in which, pursuant to the Tenor of the ancient Unions, the Duke was
to preside as Condominus, for this Year, His Majesty had hitherto put no stop
to the calling of the said Assembly, and had consented that the Ceremony of the
Homage should be performed, provided it were done in due Form, and pursuant to
the ancient Customs and Constitutions made for the maintaining a constant Union
and Communion between the two Houses; but the Duke having transgressed these
Bounds by taking Foreigners into his Service, and making new Levies without his
Consent, he had ordered his Ministers to desire him, first, to let him know,
what Share, by virtue of the deceased Duke Christian Albert's Testament, his
younger Brother Christian had in the two Dukedoms? Secondly, Trepositions made
to him by the King of Denmark.
That he would renew the ancient Union betwixt these two Houses; and thirdly,
That he would be pleased to send back the foreign Troops.

The two last he positively refused; as to the first, he ordered his Ministers
to give them the following Answer:

That the Duke could not but be extremely surprised at the King's Demand, His
Answer.
to Communicate to his Ministers the Contents of his Father's Testament, to
show his Legal Title to the Inheritance of the Dukedom of Sleswick, being
devolved to him by a Legal Right of Succession; and, that therefore he did not
think himself obliged to give any further Answer upon that Account; especially,
since he did not remember, that the King, after the decease of his Father King
Frederick III. had made out his Title to his Father the Duke Christian Albert;
nor did he expect now any thing like it from him. That he was of Opinion that
the King of Denmark had not the least concern in his Fathers Testament, he
being not made Executor of it; for which Reason also his Majesty had the less
reason, to desire the same to be Communicated to him.

This Letter together with the Dukes Resolution upon the two other Points, were
so ill relishing to the Danish Court, that they gave the Duke to understand
that he must not take it amiss, if they should take other Measures, such, as
would not be agreeable to him, if he persisted in the same Humor; upon which
the Duke declared, that he would Consent to renew the Union, but no otherwise
than under certain Restrictions, and not before he were satisfied concerning
certain Points, which he claimed by virtue of the last Treaty of Altena; all
which we shall have occasion to speak more at large of hereafter, when we come
to the Point of examining the Reasons alleged on both sides, for their
Justification; We will only mention it this place, that the Danish Court
looking upon those things as Evasions to avoid, or at least to delay the said
renewing of the Ancient Union, Matters seemed to tend to an open Rupture at
that time, if by the interposition of those Princes, who had been Mediators at
the Treaty of Altena, both Parties had not been prevailed upon, to endeavor to
terminate those Differences by an Amicable Composition.

The King of Denmark, whose Health began then already to be in a declining
Condition, being very unwilling to Embroil his Kingdom, was for Contributing
all what possible he could to prevent a Rupture, and therefore accepted of the
Mediation, provided it could be done without any prejudice to his Legal Right,
and ordered his Ministers, Conferences (...) Pinnenbergh.
that at the opening of the Conferences, began at Pinnenbergh in the Year 1696.
they should enter this following Protest; That the King of Denmark was very
willing to Contribute all what lay in his Power to facilitate this Negotiation,
provided it might be done without impairing his Right, pursuant to the Ancient
Unions; and that, The King of Denmark's Protest.
if the Duke in the mean while should make any Innovations to his prejudice, he
would look upon it, as an actual Breach, and that the Conferences were at an
end.

The Ministers Mediators did not only Attest, and insert into their Records the
said Protest; But also ageeed upon a Deed, Signed by them with joint Consent,
The Declaration of the Mediator, at Pinnenbergh.
that those Conferences should not in any wise be interpreted, as prejudicial
to the Constitutions of the Ancient Hereditary Unions betwixt the two Houses of
Denmark and Holstein Gottorp; and, that, in Case the Duke should pretend to
make any Innovations during the time of those Conferences, They would, by
virtue of their Authority, as Mediators, prevent the same; and especially put a
stop to all new Levies, to the receiving any more Foreigners into his Service,
and the finishing these Fortifications he had begun.

The Conferences being set on Foot upon this Basis, the Ministers of the Duke
of Holstein Gottorp, putting a quite different Interpretation upon the Second
Article of the Treaty of Altena, than would be allowed of by the Danes,
demanded not only what was granted to the Dukes of Holstein Gottorp by virtue
of the Treaties of Roshilt and Copenhagen, but also to be Confirmed and
Maintained in those things, which were introduced since that time, during the
Contests betwixt those two Houses, which they pretended, to be confirmed to
them, by the beforementioned second Article, which is as follows: The second
Article of the Treaty of A^ena


His Danish Majesty obliges himself to Restore to the Duke of Holstein Gottorp
all his Lands and Possessions, especially the Seat, called Gods Gift; his
Soveraingnty, Royal Rights and Prerogatives of gathering Taxes, making
Alliances and erecting Fortifications, to Confirm the said Duke in the
Possession of them; as likewise in all his rights and Prerogatives, in the same
manner as he was possessed of them, both before and since the Westphalian
Peace, and the Treaties of Roshilt and Copenhagen, till the Year 1675; as
likewise all what the said Duke may justly lay claim to by Virtue of the
Peacemade at Fountain Bleau; all which beforementioned Treaty's are Confirmed
by these presents, etc.

But, whilst both Parties were contesting about the Interpretation of this
Article, the Duke's Ministers pretending that thereby the Duke was Invested
with a more ample Power than he had before that time; whereas the Danish
Ministers alleged, that the Words: Hi^ Majesty restores the Duke to his
Rights, in the same manner as he has been possessed of them both before and
since the Treaties, etc. made it evident, that no new Power was thereby
intended to be granted to the Duke, but only to Restore to him, what he had
been Possessed of before, by virtue of the abovementioned Treaties; whilst, I
say, these Contests were in agitation at the Conferences of Pinnenbergh, the
Duke did perfect his Fortifications, and took more Foreign Troops into his
Service, the better to Maintain himself against those who should oppose it; so,
that the King of Denmark to hinder his further Progress, and to show to the
World that he was resolved to back his Protest, offered to the Mediators at the
opening of the Conferences, with a sufficient Force, did attack and demolished
the said Forts in the Year 1697. Which having not many Months ago been Rebuilt
with Considerable Additions, this has occasioned a new Breach between the
present King of Denmark, Successor to his late Majesty King Christian V. and
the present Duke of Holstein Gottorp, which having made so much Noise in the
World of late, it will, I suppose, not be amiss, to mention here the Chief
Heads, upon which each Party has founded their Pretensions.

The Differences lately revived betwixt the two Houses of Denmark and Holstein
Gottorp, may conveniently be reduced under those three Heads:

First, The Heads of the differanese now on foot betwixt Denmark and Holstein.
Whether the present Duke of Holstein Gottorp, pursuant to the desire of
Christian V. King of Denmark, is obliged to send back those Foreign Troops he
has taken into his Service, and to stop his own Levies, made without the
Knowledge and Approbation of His Danish Majesty?

Secondly, Whether he is obliged to renew and confirm the Ancient Hereditary
Unions? And Thirdly, Whether he ought to Communicate the Contents of the late
Duke his Fathers Testament, as far as it relates to the Succession in the two
Dukedoms, to the King of Denmark?

For the first the Danes allege the four following Reasons: Reasons alleged
by the Danes on their side.


(1) Because the Nature of the Communion in both Dukedoms require it;

(2) Because the constant Practice of both this and the former Age Confirm it.

(3) Because the Predecessors of the present Duke have frequently acknowledged
it;

And (4) Because it is altogether Conformable to the Constitution of the
Ancient Hereditary Unions betwixt those two Houses.

The first Argument they prove; Because the supreme Authority, The first
Argument upon the first Head.
and the joint Exercise of Justice plainly evince, that neither Party is
entitled to Act separately in any thing relating to the Government, without the
Consent of the other; All Proclamations, and other public Acts, such as
imposing and gathering Taxes being Authorized by the Concurrence and in the
Name of both the King and Duke. The Prelates, Nobility and Cities, not excepted
the City of Sleswick it self, the ordinary Residence of the Dukes of Holstein
Gottorp, being obliged to pay Homage, and take the Oath of Allegiance, both to
the Kings of Denmark and Dukes of Holstein Gottorp, at their first Accession to
the Regency; from whence arises the Words Condominus and Condominium, so
frequently used both by the late Duke and their Ancestors. Besides, That the
Territories allotted to each of those Houses are so intermixed by their
Situation, that it is impossible for the Troops of one of those Princes, to
March through any considerable part of the Country, without passing through the
other; by which it appears that the Ancestors of those two Houses intended to
prevent all pretenses of making separate Levies, without a mutual Consent of
both Parties; so, says they, That the Duke has no more Power to receive any
Foreign Troops in the Dukedoms, without the Approbation of HIs Majesty, than a
private Person has to permit Strangers to take Possession of a House, which he
has in co-partnership with others.

As to the Second Argument, they allege several Instances, The second Argument
upon the first Head.
by which they prove that it has been the constant Practice observed by both
those Houses, not to make any separate Levies, without the Consent of both
Parties; it being certain, that the Ancient Division and Situation of their
respective Territories being such, as not to admit of an unlimited Power in
this Point, to either side, their wise Ancestors, pursuant to the true Intent
of their joint Dominion, always looking upon it, as the Foundation-stone of
their safety, to Act in the Defense as well of their Country, as in the
Exercise of the Government, with mutual Consent; the first of which had been
introduced into those Countries several hundred Years before it fell to the
Oldenburgh Family, as is evident from the several Compacts made betwixt the
Earls of the Shauenburgh Family in the Years 1316, 1390, 1397, and 1404 from
whence it is, that the Words of Communis Terrae (Sleswicencis and Holsatiae)
defensio, is so frequently mentioned in the Transactions of the Ancient Dukes
of Sleswick and Earls of Holstein, to wit; in the Years 1226, 1250, 1260, 1264,
1328, 1358, and 1472. Upon the said Basis it was, that King Christopher III.
Built his Union, the States having represented to him, that it would be very
dangerous, both to the Prince and Subject, to divide their strength, in Case
they should be attack't by an Enemy.

This Practice has been constantly observed till the Year 1657, before which
time, no Warlike preparations were ever undertaken without Joynt-Consent, the
summoning of the Militia of the Country, as well as the Levies of regular
Troops being always undertaken, after mutual deliberations in both Sides Names,
every one bearing his Share in the Charges, the Officers as well as Soldiers
being obliged to take an Oath to the Government in general. The Marches and
Enquarterings of the Soldiery, the building of the necessary Forts, and their
Defense, the Garrisoning of Places, the Disbanding or augmenting of their
Troops, buying up of Provisions, Artillery and other Necessaries, the
Inhibitions of further Levies, permitted to Strangers, nay, even the entering
into foreign Alliances, or whatever else had any relation to the common defense
of those Countries, being constantly transacted with joint Council, and in the
Name of both Houses. There are not wanting Instances, that whenever the Dukes
did give but the least occasion of Jealousy upon this Account, the Kings of
Denmark were never wantting on their part to admonish and contradict them, and
to demand suitable Satisfaction, which the Dukes used to comply with either by
resigning those Levies to the Service of the Joint-Government, as was done in
the Year 1559. or else by giving public Assurance, that they were intended for
the common defense of the Country, and were accordingly employed in that
Service; Two remarkable Instances of which happened in the Years 1631 and 1644,
as is evident from the public Records of those Dukedoms.

As to what relates to the third Point, The third Argument (...) the first (...)
which is the acknowledgment of the Predecessors of the present young Duke,
viz. That, as they were obliged to contribute their Share to the common defense
of the Country; so they were not entitled to any separate Levies, of this the
Danes allege several Instances in their behalf.

In a Letter written the 10th of May in the Year 1554. the then Duke of
Holstein Gottorp Adolph excuses himself to the King of Denmark; That he, for
weighty Reasons, had found himself under a necessity to make Levies of some
Horse and Foot, in the King's Absence, not questioning but his Majesty would
approve his Conduct. And when in the Year 1559. Frederick II. the then King of
Denmark conceived a Jealousy at some Levies he had made, he sent some of his
Ministers to the said Duke, to be truly informed of the Matter, who excused
himself, that being then Colonel of the Circle of the Lower Sxony (which he
had not accepted of but with the King's good liking) he had made those Levies
in behalf of the Circle and the Spaniards; notwithstanding which, at an
Interview betwixt the King and the Duke at Nortorf, it was agreed, that those
Forces, as well Officers as Soldiers, should be taken into their Joint-Pay, and
swear Fealty to them accordingly.

In the Year 1611, Christian IV. King of Denmark, being engaged in a War with
Sweden, it was thought convenient, that some Troops should be raised for the
Defense of those Countries; both Houses were so far from undertaking a Matter
of such Moment, separately, that, though a pressing Necessity required it, both
the King and the then Duke of Holstein Gottorp, John Adolph, did jointly make
this Proposition to the Assembly of the Estates at Kiel, desiring that certain
Deputies might be appointed, with whom they might treat concerning these
Levies, and what depended on them.

The said Duke John Adolph, being summoned to furnish his Quota for the defense
of the Circle of the Lower-Saxony, in the Year 1613, he would not give them his
Resolution, till he had communicated the Matter to the King in his Letter,
dated the 25th of November, in these following words:

I was unwilling to give a positive Answer to the Demands of the Colonel of
the Circle of the Lower Saxony, or to engage my self in any thing of this
nature, without the Knowledge and Consent of Your Majesty, as the Joint Regent
and Lord of these Dukedoms; for which Reason, I gave them only this Answer,
that I could do nothing in the Matter, without the previous Consent of Your
Majesty.

There are frequent Instances, that Duke Frederick, the Successor of Duke John
Adolph, did acknowledge both by Words and Deed the said Condominium, both in
relation to the Civil and Military Administration of the Government; There is a
certain Proclamation, dated the 28th of March, in the Year 1620, published
under the Names of Christian IV. King of Denmark and Frederick Duke of Holstein
Gottorp, which expressly prohibits any Levies to be made in both the Dukedoms
without express Leave from both; such another Edict had been published before
in the Year 1599; both which being renewed by mutual Consent of King Christian
V. and the late Duke of Holstein Gottorp, in the Year 1671, it will not be
amiss to insert the Letters which passed betwixt them, as far as they relate to
that Subject.

An Abstract of a Letter from Christian V. King of Denmark, Norway, etc. to
Christian Albert, Duke of Holstein Gottorp. Dated Copenhagen 31 December, 1670.

IT is Notorious, that most of our Neighbors are making strong Levies both of
Horse and Foot; King Christian V's Letter to the Duke of Holstein.
and because we have all the reason in the World to fear, that they will
endeavor to list what Men they can in our Territories, and it being our
Opinion, that the same ought by all means to be prevented in time, before they
exhaust our Territories of the best of our Subjects in this dangerous Juncture.
It is for this Reason We thought sit to make this Proposition to Your Highness,
leaving it to your Consideration, whether it would not be convenient to
prohibit all foreign Levies in our Territories, under severe Penalties, by a
Public Proclamation; and to enjoin our Subjects not to enter into foreign
Service, without our Joint-Consent.

The Answer of Christian Albert, Duke of Holstein Gottorp, to Christian V. King
of Denmark, Norway, etc. Dated Gottorp 4 January, 1671.

WE received Your Majesty's Letter, The Duke's Answer.
dated the 31th of the last Month; and as We are sensible both of Your
Majesty's singular Care in preventing foreign Levies to be made in our
Territories, and that our Subjects shall not enter into any foreign Service
without our Joynt-Consent, pursuant to the Tenor of Our ancient Constitutions;
so, We will take effectual Care, that a severe Proclamation shall speedily be
published in both our Names, against those Proceedings, which We will before
hand send to Your Chancery at Gluckstadt, in order to pass the Seal.

The said Duke Christian Albert was so nice in observing every thing that had
the least relation to this Communion, (even after he had obtained the
Sovereignty by the Northern Peace) before things came to a Rupture betwixt
those two Houses, that when in the Year 1662, he had an Intention of taking a
Journey into Holland, he thought fit first to give notice of it to Frederick
III. then King of Denmark, as appears from the following Letter.

Christian Albert, the Duke of Holstein Gottorp's Letter, to Frederick III.
King of Denmark, Norway, etc. 12 Febr. 1662.

I Thought my self obliged to give Your Majesty Notice of my intended Journey
into HOlland; The Duke of Holstein's Letter to King Frederick III.
which, as I did not judge convenient to undertake without Your Majesty's
Knowledge and Consent, considering the present juncture of Affairs, and how
inseparably Your Majesty's and my own Interest are linked together in these two
Dukedoms; So, I offer by these presents, both, to Your Consideration and Care,
and take this Opportunity of taking most humbly Leave from Your Majesty.

So, when in the Year 1668. His Imperial Majesty in a Letter directed to the
said Duke, and dated the 7 of December, desired his Concurrence in granting to
him (Engaged in a War against the Turks) the Subsidy, called the Roman Months,
then in agitation at the Diet at Ratisbon, the Duke in his Letter to the King
of Denmark, dated the 2 of Jan. 1669. says expressly: That he had returned only
a general Answer to the Emperor, till such a time, that he could know the
King's Resolution, in a Matter, which concerned their joint Government.

So, there are many Instances of the said Dukes having opposed the separate jus
armorum; (the main thing in dispute now betwixt the two Houses of Denmark and
Holstein Gottorp;) The first is concerning a Fort erected by King Frederick
III. called Preisorth, The late Duke of Holstein's Letter to King Frederick III.
upon which occasion Duke Christian Albert, writ to the King of Denmark, the
following Letter, dated at Gottorp the 29 of Jan. 1663.

Being informed that Your Majesty's Intention is to re-fortifie the place,
called Preisorth, nay, that the same is actually begun, without being in the
least Communicated to Us, contrary to Ancient Custom; I found my self obliged
to represent this Matter to Your Majesty's Minister residing here, as a
Novelty, introduced contrary to the Sentiment of the Estates, now Assembled at
Kiel, and to desire that a stop might be put to it, but without any Effect
hitherto, etc.

In the Yeaer 1672. a Difference being arisen betwixt the Ministers of Denmark
and Holstein Gottorp, concerning certain Propositions, to be made to the next
Assembly of the Estates, which the Danish would have done without the
Approbation of Duke Christian Albert, he writ the following Letter to King
Christian V. dated at Gottorp, the 21 of April 1672.

We desire Your Majesty to consider according to your great Wisdom, The late
Duke of Holstein's Letter to King Christian V.
that there are no instances to be met with, when Matters relating to the
common Defense of those Countries have been undertaken, separately, without a
previous mature deliberation in the Assembies of the Estates, and without their
unanimous Consent; or have been put in Execution by Your Majesty and my Self,
as joint Lords and Dukes of those Dukedoms. Wherefore I promise my self from
your Majesty's Generosity, that you will not proceed further in this Matter,
without calling together an Assembly of the Estates, or our Approbation,
according to Custom; it being certain, that hitherto the Estates have not
Consented to any new Preparations to be made for the defense of those
Countries, nor have made any suitable Provision for it, pursuant to the
Fundamental Constitutions of those Dukedoms, and of the Ancient Hereditary
Unions, confirmed as such by the last Northern Peace. For which reason it is,
that Your Majesty in consideration of this, will be pleased not to recede from
the Ancient Custom, and not burden us with any Novelties, so, that we may be
in a Condition, to transmit the Rights we possess in those Dukedoms, of a joint
Dominion, without any blemish, to our Posterity.

When in the next following Year, King Christian V. had ordered an Encampment
of an inconsiderable Body of Troops in those Parts, he first Communicated his
Intention to the said Duke, who thereupon sent him the following Answer; An
answer from the late Duke of Holstein to King Christian V.
dated at Gottorp the 19 August 1673.

We received Your Majesty's, dated at Copenhagen the 16 of August, by the
yesterdays Post, in which you are pleased to tell us, that considering the
present dangerous juncture, you think it absolutely necessary, to take
effectual Care, that your strongholds in these Dukedoms may be secured against
any sudden Attempts; and that therefore Your Majesty has ordered two thousand
Horse and Foot to those Parts, whereof you thought fit to give Us timely
Notice; As We give our Thanks to Your Majesty upon this Account, so We don't
question but Care will be taken that an exact Discipline may be observed among
them in their March, that no Detriment may accrue from thence to our Subjects.

In the Year 1674, the present Emperor being then Engaged in a War with
France, desired leave from King Christian V. to make Levies in the two
Dukedoms, upon which the said King asked the Concurrence of Duke Christian
Albert, as appears from his Answer to the King, Dated the 21 of March, 1674, in
which he returns Thanks to His Majesty; assuring him that, though no Application
had been made to him upon that Subject from HIs Imperial Majesty, nevertheless
if His Majesty of Denmark did approve of the Proposition, he should also be
ready to comply with it.

The late Duke of Holstein Gottorp's Father and Predecessor, Frederick, has
given so many instances of this acknowledgment, as are too many to be repeated
here; some few will suffice for the present Argument:

There is a Letter from the said Duke Frederick, Duke Frederick's Letter to
King Christian IV.
to Christian IV. then King of Denmark, dated the 24 of December, 1622, in
which he proposes to His Majesty;

That he thought it absolutely Necessary, that some Levies both of Horse and
Foot should be made, the sooner the better; and that, if His Majesty approved
of his Resolution, he desired he would give his Directions to his Governor of
those Countries, accordingly.

The King's Answer to the Duke, dated the 29th of December following, was: That
he had sent Orders to his Governor, The King's Answer.
to hasten the said Levies with all possible Diligence, according to the Duke's
desire.

But, before the Duke had received this Answer, he sent another Letter,
relating to that Subject to the king, dated the 28th of December, 1622, in
which he told the King:

That though he had taken Care to Summon the Nobility and other Inhabitants, to
keep themselves ready to oppose any Invaders; Another Letter of that Duke's
upon the same subject.
and that, though HIs Majesty had sent his Orders to Berent Petersen, to hasten
the Complement of his Company, and that with all possible speed; he had already
imparted to His Majesty the Resolution he had taken of Levying a Troop of
Horse; nevertheless, considering that a good Body of Foot would be more
serviceable to them in Case of an Invasion, he was resolved to order (yet not
without His Majesty's Consent,) another Company of Foot to be Levied at the
Charge of the Country, under the Command of John Schestede; and that he had
sent the Commission for His Majesty, if he pleased to Sign it.

The King sent his answer to the said Duke, dated 13 Jan. 1623. telling him
that he had Consented to those Levies, and had Signed the Commission
accordingly.

In the Year 1634, the 4th of May, an Alliance was concluded betwixt those two
Princes, one Article of which was: That, according to Custom, no Levies should
be made without their Joint-Consent.

The same being renewed in the Year 1636, it was proposed to the Estates,
Assembled at Kiel, both in the King and Duke's Name, to raise 2000 Men.

Thus King Frederick III. and the said Duke proposed with joint-Consent to the
Estates, Assembled at Kiel, in the Year 1653, that it would be Necessary to
make some Levies, besides what they had on foot already; the same was done at
the Assembly of the Estates in the same place, in the Year 1655. And in the
Year 1656, the Estates Assembled at Rensburgh, having Consented to some new
Levies, the same were made, both in the King and Duke's Name.

Thus in the Year 1657, just before the beginning of that War between Denmark
and Sweden, which had almost proved Fatal to the first, it was proposed to the
Estates, then Assembled at Flensburgh, both in the King and Duke's Name, that
it would be very requisite to increase their Forces, and to make, (besides the
Danish Troops, that were already upon the Frontiers of the two Dukedoms) some
new Levies, which was done accordingly, both in the King and Duke's Name.

But there being one most remarkable instance of the acknowledgment of Duke
Frederick, concerning the Point in question, it ought not to be left past by in
silence here.

It is to be observed, that in the Year 1633. Charles I. King of Great Britain,
sent Mr. Robert Anstruth, as his Envoy to the said Duke of Holstein Gottorp, to
represent to him the dangerous Condition the Protestants were reduced to at
that time, and to concert Matters with him, how to reprieve them from that
Danger, that threatened their Total Destruction, unless by giving a Powerful
Assistance to them; the Papishes were forced to grant them an Honorable Peace,
Some means were also proposed, to endeavor the Restitution of the Elector
Pabatin; upon which the Duke of Holstein Gottorp ordered the following Letter
to be sent to King Charles I.

His Highness highly Approves what has been proposed in Your Majesty's behalf,
Duke Frederick's Letter to King Charles I.
to attain the desired Peace; but, the Condition of the Dukedoms and the
Provinces thereunto belonging being such, as not to permit His Highness to act
in this, as well as in other Matters of Moment, separately from His Danish
Majesty, contrary to the Tenor of the Ancient Hereditary Contracts and
perpetual Unions, made betwixt both Houses; by virtue of which every thing is
to be Transacted, Deliberated and Decreed with Joint. Counsels; It is
therefore, that His Highness will, with the first Opportunity, not only
Communicate this Proposition to the King of Denmark, but also take it into
serious deliberation; and, whatever Resolution shall be taken betwixt them upon
this Account, shall be Communicated to His Majesty of Great Britain.

Pursuant to which, His Letter to King Christian IV. upon the same subject.
the said Duke Frederick sent his Letter, dated at Gottorp, the 6th of Jan.
1634. to Christian IV. then King of Denmark and Norway, etc.

We thought our selves obliged to acquaint Your Majesty, that His Britannick
Majesty did lately send to Us his Envoy Mr. Robert Anstruth, who pursuant to
his Orders received from the King his Master, has made several Propositions to
Us both by way of Mouth and in Writing, the Contents of which, together with
our Answer, we have sent here enclosed to Your Majesty. We have all the reason
in the World to believe, that the said Envoy will in a little time urge our
Ministers, for a positive Resolution, and being sensible that the Matter is of
such a weight as concerns our mutual Interest. We thought fit, to propose it to
Your Majesty's Consideration, whether it might not be Convenient, to order our
both sides Ministers, who are to meet and to revise some Statutes relating to
our Provincial Courts of Judicature, immediately after the Fair of Kiel, to
enter into Conferences upon the said Point, and to give Us their Opinion upon
it, in order to be ratified by Us.

The Ministers of the Duke of Holstein Gottorp's Reply to this, That the Answer
sent to K. Charles I. being to be looked upon no otherwise than a Compliment,
ought not to be alleged in their prejudice; but the Letter sent to King
Christian V. upon that Account, and the ensuing Conferences seem to put it
beyond all doubt.

We will now proceed to the fourth Argument alleged by the Danes upon this
Head, viz. because it is contrary to the Ancient Unions.

The several repeated Unions betwixt those two Houses, especially those in
1533. and 1623, Fourth Argument alleged by the Danes.
are so Famous as to be past all Contradiction, by virtue of which those
Dukedoms were inseparably joined both in point of Government and Interest; The
Chief Matter objected by the Ministers of Holstein Gottorp against this, is,
The Duke of Holstein's objection against it.
that they consider those Unions no otherwise than Alliances made betwixt the
Kingdom of Denmark and those Dukedoms, but not as Family-Contracts made betwixt
the two Ducal Houses; To this the Danes Answer, that this Supposition is
directly contrary to the Intention of the said Unions, which was the joint
Defense of those Dukedoms, which could not be attained to without such a mutual
Obligation; for which reason the said Unions were never till of late Years,
considered as federa Reciproca only, but as Sanctiones praegmati^^, and the
fundamental Laws of those Dukedoms, pursuant to the express Letter of the said
Unions, the constant practice of the former Dukes of Holstein Gottorp, and
their own Confession; There is a very remarkable Letter relating to this head,
written by the beforementioned Frederick Duke of Holstein Gottorp, to Christian
IV. then King of Denmark, Norway, etc. dated at Gottorp the 22d of June 1635.

As to what relates to Us, we being sufficiently convinced by the express
Letter of the Unions; A Letter written by Duke Frederick to King Christian IV
upon this Head.
That not only the Contrahentes and Paciscentes, but likewise their Posterity
is obliged to the performance of them, we are not only resolved to adhere to
them (with the help of God) inviolably as long as we live, but likewise our
Successors are obliged to do the same. Neither do We in the least question,
but Your Majesty will make a suitable Return, in concurring with Us in the
same, as often as occasion shall require, in hopes that the due observance of
those fundamental Constitutions, made for the joint Interest and Welfare of
these Dukedoms, will for the future, as it has done heretofore, tend to our
mutual Benefit.

It is evident both out of the preceding, and several others of the
beforementioned Letters, how often the Dukes have had recourse to the words of
those Unions, when they thought themselves injured in any thing that related to
the common Defense of those Countries; and there are not wanting Instances,
when they have received actual Relief from the Kings of Denmark as Dukes of
Holstein, not only in Case of an Invasion, but also upon the Account of other
Dangers; of which there was a notable Example in the Year 1623. When the Marsh
Lands belonging to the Duke of Holstein Gottorp, being overflown with Water,
the Duke claimed Assistance from the King of Denmark as Duke of Holstein, and
that he should bear his Share in the Loss and repairing the Damages sustained,
by virtue of the Ancient Unions. And how is it possible, say the Danes, that
since, according to the Confession of the Ministers of Holstein Gottorp, these
two Dukedoms, notwithstanding the division betwixt those two Houses, remain one
inseparable Body, they should not be obliged to a mutual concurrence in their
common defense.

That those Unions are made betwixt the Kings of Denmark and the Dukes of
Holstein Gottorp, as the first are Dukes, is confirmed by the Constitution of
that Court, call d the Court of Austregen, in which, not only such Differences
as have happened betwixt the Kings of Denmark and Dukes of Holstein Gottorp, as
the first were Kings, but also, as they were Dukes, have been decided.

Thus a difference being arisen in the Year 1559, betwixt those two Houses,
concerning some Marshlands, situate betwixt Tundern and Flensburgh; and in the
Year 1565, concerning the Limits between the two Dukes, John and Adolph, the
same werre determined by this Court.

In the Year 1580, The Court for determining the difference betwixt the two
Houses.
there happened a remarkable Difference betwixt Frederick II. King of Denmark
and Adolph Duke of Holstein Gottorp, concerning the Inheritance of the deceased
Duke John; upon which, some of their Ministers were deputed with Joint-Consent,
to examine, and endeavor to adjust this Point; but being not able to agree in
the Matter, it was judged convenient, with both sides Approbation, to refer the
Whole to the decision of their respective Kinsmen, viz. to the then Elector of
Saxony, Vlrick Duke of Mecklenburgh, and William Langrave of Hesse. Pursuant to
which Agreement, the said Princes sent their Deputies to Hadersleben, who in
conjunction with the Danish and Holstein Ministers, reassumed the Conferences
on the 24th of June, 1681, and brought the same to a happy Conclusion on the
12th of August next following.

Thus, in the Year 1632, when King Christian IV. had begun to erect a Fort,
which was afterward called Christiansprice, without the Consent of Frederick,
then Duke of Holstein Gottorp, he thinking himself aggrieved in this Point,
made his Appeal to the said Court, constituted by virtue of the ancient Unions,
Duke Frederick's Letter upon that subject.
as appears by his Letter, written to the said King Christian IV. dated at
Gottorp the 20th of July, 1632.

I hope Your Majesty will not refuse to desist from the said Fortification,
till the Arguments and Rights of both sides may be examined and composed,
according to the true Meaning of the ancient, and since renewed Unions betwixt
the Crown of Denmark and our Ancestors; or by our both sides Ministers deputed
for that Purpose; or, if that should not succeed, by the definitive Sentence of
an Umpire; pursuant to the ancient Custom and Constitutions, founded upon
Equity.

It will not be beyond our purpose to insert here the Chief heads of the
Transactions which happened betwixt the King of Denmark and the late Duke of
Holstein Gottorp, Christian Albert, in a Case, concerning the division of some
Limits near List and Silt, the Rights of some Oyster-Pits, and other Matters of
no small Consequence; forasmuch as they show the manner of of Proceeding in
this Court, by the said Duke's own Confession.

They deputed an equal Number of their Ministers, The manner of proceeding in
this Court.
who being released from their Oath of Fidelity, had full Power granted them by
virtue of a Patent, dated the 5th of November, 1667, to examine, debate, and
decide the Matter in Question, and, in case of a Parity of Votes, to appoint an
Umpire for the decision of the Matter.

Pursuant to which the Conferences were opened in the Year 1668, in the City of
Tundern, by reason of the nearness of that Place, to those in question, (the
City of Coldingen being otherwise appointed by the Ancient Constitutions, for
this Court to Sit in) where the Differences being carefully examined the
referred to the determination of those Deputies, their Votes were found equal,
so, that with mutual Consent it was agreed to leave the final determination of
it to an Umpire. In reference of which the late Duke of Holstein Gottorp,
Christian Albert, writ the following Letter to Frederick III. King of Denmark,
dated at Gottorp the 31 of October, 1668.

Your Majesty has been doubtless informed how the Matter under debate of our
both sides Commissioners at Tundern, A Letter of Duke Frederick to the King of
Denmark concerning the Vmpire.
must, (by reason of the equality of their Votes,) be referred to the
Arbitration of an Umpire. It is evident from our Records, that in such Cases as
this, whenever any Princes have been Chosen for the decision of Differences
arisen between these two Houses, they used always, after they had taken a full
Information of the whole Matter in question, to depute three of their Minisers,
fitly qualified for so Great a Trust, who, after mature deliberation, were to
give their definitive Sentence, by the Majority of Votes. This has been very
wisely instituted by our Ancestors, who were the Authors of the Ancient Unions;
and did not think it reasonable that both Your Majesty's and our Rights should
depend on the Judgment only of a single Person, but that a certain number of
Delegates should be appointed by the Umpire, instructed with a sufficient
Authority, to examine the Merits of the Cause on both sides, and after a mature
deliberation, to proceed to Judgment, without any Respect to Persons. Thus in
the Year 1576, the then Elector of Saxony, being agreed upon for an Umpire, he
deputed Volekmar Van Bentish, the then Judge of the High Court of Judicature at
Leipzick; John Van Seidlitz, Governor of Thuringia, and Veit Winsheimb, a
Professor of the Law in the University of Wittenbergh, who in the same Year, by
the Majority of Votes, decided the Differences in Hand. Being therefore fully
convinced that no private Person can be a Competent Judge of those Differences
but that they ought to be submitted to the decision of such Delegates as are
empowered with a sufficient Authority by the Umpire, We have thought fit to
propose to Your Majesty on our side the Administrator of Magdeburgh, or Duke
Ernest of Weymar Gotha, leaving it to Your Majesty to propose on Your side,
whom you shall Judge most Convenient.

But because both Parties Insisted upon their proposal, the Matter did remain
undecided for that time.

There are three other Letters written by the same Duke upon the Account of
this Court of Austregen, to King Frederick III. Another Letter from that Duke
upon the same subject.
of which we will give you the Contents as far as they have any relation to
this Head.

The first is dated at Gottorp the 14th of September, 1665.

It could not but be highly acceptable to us, when we understood that Your
Majesty had resolved to put an end to those Differences, which have been
depending for a considerable time, betwixt those two Houses, and for that
purpose had appointed six Assessors on Your side, pursuant to the Constitution
of the inseparable Unions of both Houses; and, We sincerely declare to Your
Majesty, that We aim at nothing more, than that an end may be put those
differences, to our both sides Satisfaction; Our Intention being to insist upon
nothing, but what can plainly be proved to belong to Us; not doubting, but,
that Your Majesty's Intention in this, as well as in all other Actions of Your
Life, will be conformable to what Justice and Reason shall allow of. It is
therefore that We thankfully accept of Your Majesty's Offer, desiring, that you
would be pleased to send Us the Names of the said Assessors, and what Time and
Place is to be appointed for their Meeting; as likewise to propose in Your
behalf an Vmpire, in case of equality of Votes. I thought it likewise
absolutely requisite to put Your Majesty in mind, that, (...) any of those
Assessors chosen by both Parties should be under any Tie of Allegiance, either
as Ministers or Subjects to either of Us, they ought not only to be released of
the said (...), but also to be obliged by an Oath, (...) the Matter according
to Justice, and, (...) Matters cannot be brought to an Accommodation, to give
Judgment according to the best of their Knowledge. So recommending Your Majesty
to God's Protection, etc.

The second Letter dated at Gottory, His second Letter velating to this Subject.
the 16th of October, 1665. is as follows:

We have understood with a great deal of Satisfaction out of Your Majesty's
Answer to Ours, dated at Copenhagen the 10th of this Month, that you have
appointed the Arbitrators on your side, for the Accommodating, or if that
should not succeed, the determining the Differences in hand, and that they are
to meet accordingly on the 14th of the next Month of November, in Your City of
Coldingen; For which reason also, We have appointed as our Commissioners, Paul
Rantzau of Boetcamp, Detlof Ahlefelt of Heiligenstede, John Adolph Kielman of
Satrupholm, Hans Henry Kielman, Hans Rantzau of Potloes, and Dr. Cramer, who
are to meet at the appointed time and place, in order to endeavor to put an
end to the Matter in question.

The third Letter is dated at Gottorp the 10th of February, His third Letter
1666. Out of Your Majesty's Letter, dated the 6th of Febr. at Copenhagen,
which was delivered to Us yesterday, We understand, that your Intention is to
have a certainTerm prefixed for the determining the Differences about the
Divident, and some other Matters in question. We thankfully acknowledge Your
Majesty's Care, not questioning, but that though hitherto, for weighty Reasons,
no great Progress has been made in the Matter, yet that the Endeavors of our
both sides Commissioners at Coldingen, will before long come to such an issue,
as may fully restore the good Understanding that has always been betwixt our
Families: Wherefore We desire Your Majesty, that in case any grievances are
left to be decided, to communicate them to Us, that no Seeds of discords may
remain hereafter; We will take effectual Care, that, the same shall, after due
Examination, be communicated to the Commissioners at Coldingen, together with
our Instructions against the prefixed time, being the 20th of March, by which
means We hope the Differences about the Divident, as well as other Grievances
may be redressed, and the whole Matter brought to a happy Conclusion.

The Minsters of Holstein Gottorp Allege in opposition to this, that in the
Year 1672, when the late Duke Christian Albert, urged the late King of Denmark,
Christian V. to have the Differences arisen betwixt them, concerning the
investiture and some other Matters relating to the Contributions, determined by
this Court of the Austregen, His Majesty refused the same, as is manifest from
His Letter written to the said Duke upon this Subject, dated the 30th of Jan.
1679. These are his Words:

Much less can the Union be extended thus far as to decide the Investiture and
Vassalage it self; King Christian V's Letter to the Duke of Holstein, 1629.
because these are the very Foundation of all the Ancient Contracts, and
therefore destroy the Union it self; in which such differences are to be
decided, as may arise from the ^earness and intermixture of the Territories, of
both Houses. Besides, that it is a very unusual thing among Sovereigns, to
submit such Matters as Concern their Royal Prerogatives, to the decision of
others, as being inconsistent with the Nature of their Sovereignty; neither is
there any instance to be given, of such a Decision.

To this the Danes Reply, that the Chief thing then in question being the
Investiture and Vassalage of the Dukedom of Sleswick, the same did not fall
under the Cognizance of this Court of Unions, the same being expressly excepted
in the Union Contract, made in the Year 1533. In Answer to the rest, they say,
that there being at that time an open Rupture betwixt the King and the Duke,
the first did not think himself obliged to refer himself to the Ancient
Contracts and Unions; But the same being since restored and confirmed as well
by the Peace of Fountain-Bleau as that of Altena; and all what past during this
Rupture, being thereby buried in Oblivion, both sides are now obliged to remain
steadfast to the said Family-Contracts, unless they will Act contrary to the
true intent of the said Treaties.

The Partisans of the Duke of Holstein Gottorp do further Plead the Jus
armorum, Plea of the Duke's Party for the Jus armorum.
and consequently the Power of fortifying Places, and Garrisoning the same,
from the very nature of Sovereignty; Would it not, say they, imply an Absurdity
for the Duke to be invested with the Sovereignty, and all Rights and
Prerogatives thereunto belonging (which was actually done in the Treaties of
Roshilt and Capenhagen) and at the same time to have the actual exercise of one
of the Chief Acts of Sovereignty denied him? This would be no more than a
Shadow without Subtance, and a bare Title to amuse the World.

To this the Danes reply, that there being nothing more obvious, than that
several Princes of Europe, who are called, Sovereigns, and are actually such,
nevertheless have no power to exercise all and every Act of Sovereignty without
Limitation, they cannot sufficiently admire, The Dane^ Reply.
how the Ministers of Holstein Gottorp should look upon this Restriction as a
Paradox; What, say they, can a Prince not be a Sovereign, that is engaged in,
and limited by certain Contracts made with another Prince? Who can question the
Soveragnty of each particular Province of the United Netherlands? Nevertheless
by Virtue of their Union and fundamental Contracts, they are obliged to make no
Alliances, Peace or War, without Joint-Advice and Consent. It is taken for
granted, that neither the Emperor nor the French King think themselves
impaired in their Soveraignties, because by the Treaties of Munster and Reswick
(as especially appears from the 18, 20, and 25 of the last) they are limited in
their Prerogatives of Fortifying places; Besides, that there are several
Instances of Family Contracts amongst the Princes of the Empire, who think
themselves not a Jot the worse upon that account. At that rate they must call
in question the Sovereignty of the Grand Seignior himself, because in the
several Treaties, but especially in that of the year 1664, made with His
Imperial Majesty, he has for ever renounced his Right of fortifying
Zeckemheyet, and the Fort near Canisha.

Another Argument made use of by the Duke of Holstein's Party, is, that it
cannot but be looked upon as an unreasonable thing, for any Body to be debarred
of the Privilege of disposing and managing his own Inheritance as he thinks
most convenient, which in effect, the King of Denmark pretends to do.

This Argument, reply the Danes, answers it self, it being evident that the
King and Duke are Joint-Lords of those Dukedoms; and the Nature of all things
in joint-Possession being such, as not to admit of being disposed of at the
Pleasure of one of the Parties; Besides, that it is a Mistake that a Man may
act in his own Inheritance as he pleases, it being evident that he ought to
take care not to annoy his Neighbors; and the most Potent and Sovereign
Princes themselves are always very cautious in giving offense, nay even in
creating a Jealousy in their neighboring Nations.

It is beyond all Contradiction that the Treaties of Roshilt and Copenhagen,
from whence the Duke derives his Sovereignty, have not granted the same to him
without Restriction, as is evident from the Patent granted to the Duke of
Holstein Gottorp, upon the account of this Sovereignty, by King Frederick III.
in the year 1658, in which are these following Conditions.

1. That the Nobility, Estates and Cities, nay all the Subjects shall be
inviolably maintained in the possession of their Lands and Goods; Conditions
relating to the Sovereignty of the Duke of Holstein Gottorp.
as likewise in their Rights, Liberties and Privileges, as well Ecclesiastical
as Civil.

2. That neither any considerable part, or the whole Share of the Duke of
Holstein Gottorp in the Dukedom of Sleswick, shall be abalienated to the
Prejudice of the Kings of Denmark, but shall remain in the same State it is
now, as long as there are any Male Heirs living of Duke Frederick of Holstein
Gottorp.

3. That this Grant shall not in any wise be prejudicial to the former
Contracts; but especially to the ancient inseparable Union, which in all its
Points and Clauses (except what has been agreed upon concerning the remission
of the Investiture) shall remain in full force and vigor.

But the main Stress of the Argument made use of by the Duke's Ministers to
back their separate Jus Armorum, Contest about the Interpretation of the second
Article of the Treaty of Altena.
is taken from the Interpretation of the second Article of the Treaty of
Altena, made in the Year 1689; In which it being expressed, That His Majesty of
Denmark shall restore to the Duke his Sovereignty, with the Rights of raising
Money, making Leagues and Alliances, of building and possessing Fortifications,
etc. they infer from thence, that the Duke is thereby invested with an absolute
Power, in relation to those Matters therein mentioned, without any previous
Communication with the King of Denmark.

In Answer to this, it is alleged on the Danish side, That the Ministers of
Holstein Gottorp have extorted an Interpretation of the said Article, merely to
serve their own Turn; it being evident from the Words; His Majesty of Denmark
shall restore to the Duke, The Danes Answer to this.
etc. that thereby he had not the least granted him of any other Power, but
what he was possessed of before and after the Treaties of Westphalia and of the
North, till the Year 1675; as likewise by the Treaty of Fountain Bleau, as the
express Words of the said Article make it plainly appear; which Treasties are
also confirmed by the same Article. Now, say the Danes, it is certain that by
neither of those Treaties a separate Jus Armorum was granted to the Duke, as is
evident from the Contents of them, beforementioned, by the Practice observed
betwixt the two Houses since that time, before things came to a Rupture; and by
the repeated Confessions and Acknowledgment of both sides, some of which have
been inserted before: For which Reason also, effectual Care has been taken in
all the beforementioned Treaties, to insert a Clause for the Confirmation of
the Family-Compacts and Ancient Unions, made betwixt the two Houses of Denmark
and Holstein Gottorp, as may be seen, especially in the Treaty of Altena, the
fifth Article of which, is as follows:

As to what relates to Unions, Family-Contracts, and other Agreements made to
the Year 1675; The fifth Article of the Treaty of Altena.
as also the Communion and other Customs used to that Day, shall remain in
force, no less, than what had been expressly and literally determined, in
relation to this Matter by the Treaties of Westphalia, of the North, and of
Fountain-Bleau, etc.

These words give us, say the Danes, so plain an Interpretation of what has
been mentioned in the second Article of the same Treaty, concerning the Duke's
Sovereignty, that it needs no further Answer; the Unions, Communion and
Family-Contracts, being expressly preserved in their fill vigor by this as well
as the preceding Treaties, of Westphalia, of the North, and Fountain-Bleau,
therein mentioned.

The infraction made by the present Duke of Holstein Gottorp upon the Rights of
the late King of Denmark, Christian V. by receiving Foreigners into those
Dukedoms, at a time, when the State of the King's Health was in an almost
desperate Condition, seems to be taken notice of in favor of the Danes by the
Ministers Mediators of Pinnenbergh, The Letters of the Ministers Mediators to
the Duke of Holstein.
who upon that account writ a Letter to the said Duke of Holstein Gottorp,
dated the 5th of August, old Style, 1699, in the following terms:

We the Ministers Mediators, have beyond all hopes, and to our great
Dissatisfaction understood, that Your Highness has not only received into those
Dukedoms a certain Number of Swedish Troops from Wismar and the Duchy of
Bremen; but also makes further Preparations to erect some Forts, and that in
such Places, where never were any before; Hitherto it is only by Fame and some
private Letters, that We are informed of those things; For Mr. Wedderkop, Your
Highnesses Privy Counselor, did not think it worth his while, to send an
Answer to a Letter, which I (the Court of Eck) with to him upon this Subject,
about a Week ago, or to give Us the least notice of it otherwise, besides what
he declared to the Ministers Mediators in general, pursuant to the Intructions
he received (as he told us) from Your Highness; though at the same time this
might very conveniently have been done, in Honor and Respect to the Mediators:
We don't at this time pretend to call in question Your Highnesses Jus Armorum,
and whatever other Rights may belong to you; nevertheless We cannot but put you
in mind, that the respective Princes Mediators, our Principals have declared
several times, both at the opening of the Conferences, and since that time,
that Your Highness should not suffer any Prejudice in his legal Rights, by
Suspending the Exercise thereof for the present; which also you did accept of,
as is evident from the Resolute taken by You at the Intercession made in that
behalf, to stop the same for the Love of Peace, and to facilitate the
Conclusion of the Treaty. We are well satisfied, that the Princes Mediators,
who have empowered Us, will be very well pleased to see Your Highness persist
in the same Sentiment, which will free them from the apprehension, which
otherwise they may take at this Enterprise. It is for this Reason, that We the
Ministers Mediators, think our selves obliged both in point of Conscience, and
of the Trust reposed in Us, and to convince the World, that we have done
hitherto, and continue to act with all possible Application for the
Preservation of the public Tranquillity and that We will not be answerable for
the ill Consequences, which may attend it; and therefore request Your Highness
with all due Respect, that you would be pleased, to send back those Swedish
Forces, which you have received into those Dukedoms, contrary, not only to the
Constitutions of the Empire, by causing them to march through the Territories
of some of the Princes and States of the Empire, without their knowledge; but
also to the no small Prejudice of His Majesty of Denmark, who thereupon has
made his Complaints to Us, because these Troops did pass through several
Balliages, which are under your Joint-Dominion; and that for the rest, Your
Highness will likewise be pleased to leave things in Suspense, till such time,
that we have received the Answers we expect from our Principals, etc.

But it is time to proceed to the Second proposition made by King Christian V.
to the present Duke of Holstein Gottorp, The second Proposition concerning the
Renewing of the Unions.
which concerned the renewing of the Ancient Unions; This was at first
positively denied by the Dukes, but upon further Consideration complied with,
but under this Restriction, that it should be done as soon as the Duke had
received Satisfaction concerning certain Points, which he said, were not
executed according to the Tenor of the Treaty of Altena. The pretensions made
upon this Account consists Chiefly in this, that the Duke of Holstein demands
Restitution to be made to several of his Ministers of what had been taken from
them before, and the Restitution of the Lordship of Gods-Gift (Gods Gabe)
according to the express words of the said Treaty.

Unto this the Danes Answer, The Danish Argument upon this Head.
that they have Contributed all what could be expected from them, toward the
Execution of the Treaty of Altena; That in relation to the Satisfaction due to
the Ministers of Holstein Gottorp, they had assigned to them several real
Debts, due from the Duke their Master to the King of Denmark, which they having
accepted of at that time, it was their own Fault, if this Satisfaction did not
prove to their Content.

As to the Second; which Concerns the Seat, called, Gods Gabe, they don't in
the least deny, but, that the same has been expressly stipulated to be restored
to His Highness, which would have been put in Execution acordingly, if there
were not a certain Clause inserted in the (...) Article of the said Treatise,
by virtue of which, the Duke of Holstein Gottorp, obliges himself to withdraw
his Action which he had la^d against the House of Holstein Ploen in the
Imperial Court. This Action concerned Chiefly the annulling of certain
Contracts, made some time before with the House of Holstein Plo^n, by which the
last was entitled to the Possession of the beforementioned Seat of Gods Gabe.
And the same being since that time Surrendered by the House of Ploen to Duke
August of Norburgh, the King of Denmark could not but look upon it, as a very
odd pretense, to desire that the said Duke of Norburgh should be put out of
Possession, in order to have it restored again by the Duke of Holstein Gottorp.

This it was that induced the late Duke of that Name, not to insist upon the
Restitution of the said Lordship, but, when after the Conclusion of the Treaty
of Altena, Commissioners were appointed on both sides, to terminate by an
Amicable Composition, some inconsiderable Differences yet remaining betwixt
Denmark and Holstein Gottorp; the Duke would not as much as have it mentioned
among the rest, only desiring His Majesty, to prevail by His Authority with the
Duke of Norburgh, thus far, as to come in Person to His Court at Gotorp, and to
pay him some Acknowledgment upon that Sco^e, which was done accordingly by the
said Duke of Norburgh.

Accordingly this Point having never been called in question since, as long as
the late Duke Christian Albert lived, neither could it be done under any legal
Pretense, for the Reasons beforementioned, the King of Denmark looked upon this
Matter to be past all further Contest.

Notwithstanding which, The King of Denmark's Declaration upon this Head.
this Point being closely insisted upon by the Ministers of the present Duke,
the King of Denmark, to remove any Obstacle that might retard the renewing of
the said Unions, sent these following orders to his Ministers.

We have received Yours, out of which we see, what is passed betwixt You and
the Ministers of the Duke of Holstein Gottorp, on the Account of the present
Differences; and, that the Duke has at last consented to the renewing of the
Unions, provided we on our side will give him Satisfaction concerning certain
Points, which, they pretend, are to be terminated as yet, pursuant to the
Treaty of Altena, etc.

As to what relates to the renewing of the Unions, the Duke ought to have
explained himself more at large upon that Account, pursuant to the Tenor of
that perpetual Union, made in the Year 1623. But, if he remains resolved to
insist upon that Point, it would be convenient for you to Demand an Exact
Account of those Matters, which they pretend to upon that score; forasmuch as
the Points in question, of which they make so much noise, concern only the
indemnifying the Ministers of Gottorp, for what they have suffered by the
preceding Confiscations, and the Lordship of Gods Gift; truly things of very
little Consequence: But whatever it be, to show to all distinterested Persons,
how far we are inclined to Consent to any thing the Duke in reason can ask, and
how desirous we are to maintain the Ancient Ties and good Correspondence
established and confirmed betwixt our two Houses, We order you, to declare to
the Ministers of the Duke of Holstein Gottorp, That, if their Master will
Engage himself to renew the Union made in the Year 1623, according to the
express Words of that Treaty, and the preceding Unions, that then We will
immediately give full Satisfaction as to those Points, which are not as yet put
in Execution by virtue of the Treaty of Altena; and, if any further
Difficulties should arise, we will leave them to the determination of such
Commissioners as shall be appointed by Us on both sides, for the composing of
them, according to the Meaning and Rules prescribed in the Ancient Unions, etc.

From which Concession the Danes evince, That the Duke of Holstein had no
further reason to insist upon that Exception, unless it were either quite to
avoid, or at least to delay the renewing of the said Unions.

But it is time for us to touch a little also upon the third Demand, The third
(...) qu^^ti^n.
which was the Communication of the late Duke Christian Albert's Testament.

This was interpreted by the Duke of Holstein Gottorp, as an infringment upon
his Sovereign Prerogatives, as may be seen from his Letter, of which we have
given you the Copy before; Whereas the Danish Ministers allege, That the King
of Denmark had no other design in it, than to know (as he ought to do) whether
the present Duke Frederick was constituted sole Heir in the Ducal Share of
Sleswick; or whether his Brother Christian had some joint or separate Interest
in the same? The Danish Argument upon this Head.
The more because the Jus Primogeniturae being not introduced in the Dukedom of
Sleswick, and there being no Alteration made as to this Point, by virtue of the
Patent concerning the remission of the Vassalage of that Dukedom; The King, say
the Danes, had all the reason in the world to demand to be satisfied in this
Point, it being absolutely requisite, that in so nice a Juncture as this, (when
they were in Treaty concerning the Ceremonies and other Matters relating to the
Homage) the King should know, who it was that was to have the
Joint-Administration with him in the Government of those Dukedoms; it was
absolutely necessary, say they, to enquire into this Point, in order to be
fully satisfied, whether the said Duke Frederick alone, or his Brother
Christian was to come in as a third Person in the Communion established betwixt
those Houses; especially, since there are not wanting Instances, that such a
Division has been made in the said Dukedom.

I am apt to believe, I have by this time almost tired the Reader's Patience
with the rehearsal of those Disputes, which from a small beginning, have by
degrees, been carried on to that height, that in all appearance the decision of
them will be made by the Sword, rather than by force of Argument: The flame of
the War having already begun to spread it self through several Parts of the
North, by the Irruption made by the King of Poland into Livonia, and the
attacks upon the Forts ^^ected by the Duke of Holstein Gottorp, by the Danes;
so that I will conclude this Chapter with giving you a true Copy of the Demands
made by the Duke of Holstein Gottorp at the Treaty of Altena, together with ^t
authentic Translation of the Articles of the said Treaty, as they were laid
before the Honorable House of Commons, this last Sessions of Parliament.

The DEMANDS made by His Highness CHRISTIAN ALBERT, Duke of Holstein Gottorp,
presented to the Ministers Mediators, Assembled at Altena, for the Composing
the Differences, arisen betwixt His Majesty of Denmark and the said Duke.
I. THAT the Dukedom of Sleswick, with the Country, called Gods-Gift, and its
Dependencies, shall be restored in the same Condition, wherein they were in the
Year 1674, and when they were taken. II. THAT the Island of Fehmeren shall be
surrendered, and the Balliages of Trittaw, Tremsbuttel and Steenhurst, shall be
surrendered without Money, or any Pretension. III. THAT The Peace between the
two Northern Crowns, shall remain entire; that His Highness of Holstein shall
enjoy all Rights and Privileges of Sovereignty, and particularly, that of
Collectandi and Foederum. IV. THAT though His Highness may lay a Claim to the
Contributions levied, which amount to above 100 Tuns of Gold, he will be
satisfied with a General Collection, which shall be made in the two
Principalities, for building a Fort in the most necessary and convenient
Situation, and for the Payment of 500000 Rixdollars at three Payments. V. His
Highness claims, that the Ammunition and the hundred Pieces of Cannon that were
in the Castle of Tonningen, when it was demolished, shall be restored him. VI.
THAT the Popular Government be abolished. VII. THAT not only the Emperor and
the Electors of Saxony and Brandenburgh, shall be Guarantees of the Treaty in
the Quality of Mediators, but the rest of the Members of the Empire, and in
particular, the Circles of the Lower-Saxony, the House of Lunenburgh, and the
King of Sweden. VIII. THAT all other Demands shall be justly Examined; and that
if the Conditions are not accepted within a Month, His Highness will be no
longer bound to them. Upon which, on the 20th of the next ensuing June, the
following Articles were agreed upon.
An Authentic Translation of the Articles of the Treaty of Altena, made in the
Year 1689, as it was laid before the Honorable House of Commons, this last
Sessions of Parliament, by His Majesty's special Command.
BE it known to all, by what means the great Controversies, which have been a
long time between His Royal Majesty of Denmark and Norway, and His Highness the
Duke of Holstein Sleswick, by the Earnest Mediation of His Imperial Majesty,
and Their Electoral Highnesses of Saxony and Brandenburgh, have been Composed
and for ever Abolished upon the following Conditions.

I.

THAT there shall be a general Amnesty, and a perpetual Oblivion of all that
has been hitherto undertaken on both Sides, done or acted by each or other
Party, their Minsters, Subjects or Adherents; None of either Side shall be
called to an Account, nor shall any body be brought into Danger or Charge for
it; but an Eternal and Indissolvable Friendship and Union shall hereby be
restored and established betwixt His Royal Majesty of Denmark and Norway, His
Heirs and Successors in His Kingdoms, and His Highness the Duke of Holstein
Sleswick and His Successors.

II.

His Royal Majesty of Denmark and Norway, shall Restore to His Ducal Highness
all His said Highnesses Dominions, Lands, Islands and Goods, but specially the
Lordship of Gods Gabe, together with the Sovereignty of the same Royalties,
Rights of raising Moneys, making Leagues and Alliances of Building and
Possessing Fortifications: In Fine, all those Rights and Prerogatives
whatsoever, that His Highness did Hold and Enjoy before and after the Treaties
of Westphalia, and of the North, to the Year 1675. As likewise whatever His
Highness may Claim by the Pacifications of Fountain-Bleau, the Conditions and
Contents of which Treaties are confirmed hereby, and also his Royal Majesty
will Restore to His Highnesses Officers and Subjects, all their Goods and Debts.

III.

Whereas His Highness amongst other Demands, has requied that His Royal
Majesty would free the Island of Fehmeren, together with the Governments of
Steenhurst, Tremsbuttel and Trittaw from a Mortgage, pay that Sum of Money
they are Engaged for, and restore them without any Charge to His Highness; His
Royal Majesty, to give the greater Mark of His Favor to His Highness, as being
nearly related to him in Blood and Affinity, does give up the Mortgage, and
remit the Action he has against the Government of Trittaw, and Restores it
with all its Dependencies; but as to what concerns the Island of Fehmeren, and
the Governments of Tremsbuttel and Steenhurst, these being not in the Hands of
His Majesty, but of His Royal Highness Prince George of Denmark; His Imperial
Majesty and Their Electoral Highnesses of Saxony and Brandenburgh, in Quality
of Mediators for composing these Differences, to the End, that Peace and
Tranquillity may the better be established and settled in the Northern Kingdoms,
and the Circle of Lower Saxony, it being of great Importance to the Public
Good, that it should subsist inviolably, they have undertaken to find out such
Means to make Satisfaction to His Royal Highness for that Sum of Money, for
which he holds those Places, without any Charge or Prejudice to His Royal
Majesty; as likewise to obtain the Consent of His said Royal Highness: That the
said Island and Governments be restored again to His Highness the Duke of
Holstein, exempt and free from the Debt and Mortgage they formerly lay under.

IV.

On the other side, His Highness does renounce all Actions and Pretensions he
might have, not only against His Royal Majesty, for having detained His
Dominions for some time, and enjoyed the Revenues thereof; but also does
release and wholly desist from those Proceedings he had obtained from the
Imperial Chamber, against the House of Dukes of Holstein Ploen.

V.

As to what belongs to Unions, Family-Agreements, and other Conventions, made
to the Year 1675; as also the Communion, the Custom used to that day shall
remain in Force, no less than what has been expressy and literally determined,
in Relation to this Matter by the Treaties of Westphalia, of the North, and of
Fountain-Bleau; and whatsoever remains and is unreceived of the Revenues of the
Chamber or Contributions in His Highnesses Dominions, shall by no means be
Demanded from His Royal Majesty.

VI.

They do remit other Grievances to be made up by a friendly Transaction, and if
that does not Succeed, they leave it to the Law, and neither Party shall
undertake any thing by way of Force aganst what is above settled.

VII.

The Ratifications of this Agreement shall be Exchanged here at Altena,
fourteen days after the Subscribing of it, and the Agreements shall
immediately, or at furthest within eight Days after the Exchange, be strictly
put in Execution, Bona Fide, and without Delay.

In Witness whereof two Copies of the same Tenor, Subscribed and Sealed, have
been delivered to each Party. Done at Altena, the 20th day of June, in the Year
1689.

CHAP. X. The Character of King Christian V. his Court; with some other Matters
relating to his Person, and the Royal Family.
THE good Qualities of this Prince were such as deserve to be ranked amongst
the best our Age has produced; As the preceding Sheets do sufficiently convince
us, that his whole Genius was bent upon Action, so even his Enemies cannot
deny, but that in the execution of his Designs, His Courage.
he showed as much Personal Courage as could have been expected from a private
Man. Of this he gave frequent demonstrations in his Wars with Sweden, when he
always appeared at the Head of his Army's, and by his own Example animated them
to doing well: In the Attack made upon the City Hamborough, he exposed his
Person so near to the Enemies Shot, that several Persons of Note, who attended
him, were slain by his side. There are few, I believe, who can deny, that his
Conduct in that War, was answerable to his Courage, His Conduct.
the whole design against a too Potent neighboring Enemy, being founded upon
the deepest Reasons of State, the fruits of which Denmark might have reaped to
its great Advantage, if the Dutch by clapping up a separate Peace with France
at Nimeguen, had not frustrated the Designs of their King.

He was a Prince of singular Assability and good Nature, His Assability.
Mild and Gracious, without the least appearance of Pride, being both Beloved
and Reverenced by his People, who, unanimously agree in this, that during the
whole Course of his Reign, he never abused his Absolute Power; and such was his
Affability, that even when he dined in Public, he would sit down not only with
his Queen, Children and Relations, but also with his Ministers and General
Officers.

The most refined Politicians in these Parts, give him this Character, Religion.
That he had as much Religion as was becoming a Prince, being Religious without
being bigoted to his Clergy, whom, though he allowed to speak with all due
Freedom in the Pulpits, and to correct the Vices of Persons, even of the first
Quality, yet never admitted them into the Secrets of the Government. Of his
Moderation in Point of Religion he has given several Instances, in permitting
the French Protestants to build a Church at Copenhagen, and the Roman
Catholics to erect a Chapel at Gluckstadt, things never known in Denmark
since the Reformation; the Lutherans in the Northern Parts not allowing the
Public Exercise of any, but their own Religion.

He was Master of four Languages, to wit: The High and Low Dutch, and the
French, besides his own; and though neither by his Genius he was inclining, nor
by his Education had ever been improved in any particular Sort of Learning, yet
as his Warlike Temper made him love Fortifications, so he was as great Admirer
of Geographical Delineations, and would with a great deal of Delight examine
the Design of any Forts, to be erected in convenient Places.

He was not in the least Luxurious in his Meat and Drink; His Moderation.
and if in his younger days he would now and then commit an Excess in the last,
this was recompensed by his Moderation of late Years.

The same might be observed in all his Diversions, which were either certain
Progresses, which he used frequently to make into Sleswick, Holstein, or some
of the adjucent Islands, or else Divertisements at his Country Seats: Every
Summer he used to spend five or six Weeks at his Hunting-House of Jagersburgh,
His Diversion.
situate near the Seaside, not far from Copenhagen; Two Months more of the
Summer, he commonly kept his Residence at Fredericksburgh, a most Magnificent
Pailace, about twenty English Miles from Copenhagen; where the Court spent most
of its time in Stag-hunting, and the King always allowed a great deal of
Freedom to his Domestics.

At a certain Season, when the young Swans are grown up almost to the bigness
of the old ones, Swan-hunting used to be his Pastime, which was performed by a
good number of Gondola's or Small Boats, filled with Gentlemen and Ladies, who
surrounding the Island in which the Swans abide, they used sometimes to kill
several thousands of them with their Guns.

Some Intrigues he has been engaged in, but those were not very many, he having
been a constant admirer of the Countess of Lamsoe, his Darling Mistress. His
Amors.
Her Name was Mrs. La Mothe, the Daughter of a Physician at Copenhagen; The
King having espied her accidentally one day, as he passed by the House, he
became so enamoured of her, that he could not rest satisfied till he got into
the Possession of this Beautiful Creature, which he at last effected, by the
Intercession of the young Lady's Mother, who considering that her deceased
Husband had left her Children no considerable Fortune, prevailed with her
Daughter, to overcome a Scruple, which now a days, by Custom, seems to become
warrantable, for the Preferment of her Family.

The King had two Natural Sons by her, both very handsome Gentlemen; His
Natural Children.
the Eldest had the Revenue of the Post Office settled upon him, and commanded a
Regiment of Horse in France; The second being designed for the Sea, has made
several Voyages under the Tuition of certain Persons, in whom the King confided
much. Their Mother he created Countess of Lamsoe, which Title, she received
from an Island of that Name he bestowed upon her; besides which, he allotted
her a Pension of a thousand Pounds per Month.

His Ministers, who had the Chief Management of all Affairs of Moment, were
(after the Disgrace of Greiffenfelt;) Count Gulden Lewe, Natural Brother to the
King, His Ministers of State.
and Viceroy of Norway, who has the Reputation of one of the finest Gentlemen
in Denmark; having formerly been Ambassador from that Crown to King Charles
II. who was so Charmed with his Conversation, that during the time of his
Residence in England, he made him the constant Partner of his Pleasures.

The second; Count Ravenclaw, his Great Hunts-Master, he is a Native of
Holstein, who bore both the Title and Toils of the Chief Ministry with a great
deal of Applause, being a Person very Affable, and of easy access.

Thirdly, The Baron Juel, Brother to the Danish Admiral of the same Name, being
descended from an ancient Noble Family in Denmark.

The fourth, Mounsieur Ehrcashilt a German by Birth, who having been Taught the
first rudiments of Policy, by that Famous Monsieur Terlon, whom we have
mentioned before to have been Ambassador to both the Northern Crowns, has
since been employed in the Management of Matters of the greatest Moment, by the
late King of Denmark, his constant Residence having been of late Years in the
City of Hamborough; which being a Place situate the most Conveniently in Europe
for Correspondence, and to keep a watchful Eye over the Transactions of the
neighboring German Princes, he was entrusted with that Province.

The Management of the Treasury was formerly committed to oen Mr. Branet, but
his Shoulders being not strong enough for the burden of so weighty an Affair,
he was dismissed from that Employment, and one Monsieur Plessen substituted in
his Place; He is a Native of the Country of Meclenburgh in Germany, and has
deservedly acquired the Character of the ablest Manager of the Finances in
Denmark; it being certain, that whereas the Kings Treasury was several Millions
of Crowns in Debt, he has effectually Redressed the embroiled State of the
Finances, to such a degree, as that the King's Credit is fully recovered both
at Home and Abroad; besides that, he is Master of four or five Languages, and
among them of the English, having lived several Years in this Kingdom, in the
Service of Prince George of Denmark.

But his Principal Favorite was one Mr. Knute a Mecklenburgher by Birth, His
Favorite.
who, as he was Bred up with the King, and had been the constant Consident and
Companion of his Pleasures, so he kept the first Rank in his Favor to his
dying day, and employed most of his Time, rather in managing the King's Person,
than in public Assairs.

His Chief General Officers were the Duke of Holstein Ploen, His General
Officers.
and Count Wedel, Field Marshals; Lieutenant G^^^^als, Count Guldenlewe,
Viceroy of Norway; The Duke of Wirtenbergh; Monsieur Shacht Plessen, and
Dumeny.

But before we conclude this Chapter, we must also speak something concerning
the Royal Family.

We have told you before, The Character of the Queen.
that he Married the Lady Charlotta Amalia, Sister to the present Landgrave of
Hesse Cassel; She is a most Excellent Person, in Respect of Her Great
Qualifications, both of body and Mind; She is Admirably Fair, and Extraordinary
well Shaped, Her Complexion being a perfect mixture of Phlegmatic and Sanguin;
But the Excellencies of Her Mind far surpass those of Her Body, being Engaging,
Assable, and free to the Highest Degree; She has given a thousand Instances of
Her Prudent Conduct; especially in protecting the French Protestants; and
others who had thrown themselves under Her Protection; She being always looked
upon by the whole Kingdom, as the common Refuge of People in Distress.

The King had five Children by Her; to wit: Four Princes and one Princess; The
Eldest was Frederick, who some Months ago has succeeded him in the Throne,
being now about seven or eight and twenty Years of Age.

The Second was Prince Christian, His Children.
of a very robust Constitution, and much addicted to Hunting and Warlike
Exercises; he died some years ago in his Travels, at Augsburgh in Germany.

The Third was called Charles, being now about sixteen; and the Fourth,
William, about thirteen years of Age.

The Princess his only Daughter is looked upon as the greatest Beauty of the
North; she was Contracted to the Electoral Prince of Saxony, but the Match was
broke off.

From what has been said, it is evident, that the late King Christian V. was a
Prince endowed with all the Qualifications belonging to a Person of so Eminent
a Rank; For whereas he found the Kingdom in a very declining Condition, by
reason of the late unfortunate War with Sweden; He restored, in some measure,
its decayed Estate, by providing for the Security of its Frontiers: The Citadel
in the Isle of Bornholm, commanding the Road of Roena, toward the Swedish
Dominions, The late Kings Core for the security of the Kingdom.
was brought to Perfection by his Care, in the Year 1689, being fortified after
the Modern Manner with considerable Outworks.

Cronenburgh, Famous for its Situation on the Passage of the Sound, ows its
perfection also to this King, its Fortifications being now all faced with Brick:

So the City of Rensburgh stands indebted to this King for the enlargement of
its Fortifications; This place being situate upon the Borders betwixt Sleswick
and Holstein, on the River Eyder, was by his Orders made a Royal Fortification,
the Bulwarks and Outworks being all faced with Brick, which could not be done
without a prodigious Charge,

It is acknowledged on all hands, that whereas at the time of his Accession to
the Throne, the Forces of that Kingdom were neither numerous nor well
disciplined; His Army.
he introduced such a Reformation among them, that he left near 40000 Men, as
good Troops as any are in Europe, who have signalized themselves in several
Parts against the French and Ottomans. His Maritim Affairs left in so good a
Condition, that it is believed the present young King will bring a Fleet of 40
Men of War in the Baltic next Summer; and as to what concerns his Revenues,
His Revenue.
we have told before, that what with the good Management of the Treasury, and
the vast Improvement of Trade in that Kingdom, whilst we were engaged in a War
with France, they have been improved beyond what could have been rationally
expected, considering the vast Charges he was forced to be at in maintaining so
Considerable an Army.

To conclude this Account, we will add, that as he was naturally of a very
robust Constitution, so he was always forward in undergoing all manner of
Fatigue, which at last occasioned some Fits of the Gout, and these increasing
by degrees, threw him into a Languishment, of which he died on the 22th of
August, in the Year 1699, leaving the Throne to his Eldest Son, now King
Frederick IV.

THE CONCLUSION.
JUst as I was upon Concluding this Treatise, the following Propositions, made
by the two contending Parties, to the Ministers Mediators, Assembled at
Pinnenbergh, came to my Hands, which, as they may serve toward the Clucidation
of what has been said upon the several Heads now in Contest betwixt them, so, I
thought it absolutely Requisite to afford them a Place here.

His Majesty's of Denmark and Norway, etc. Propositions made to the Ministers
Mediators, on the 24th of August, O. S. 1696, at Pinnenbergh.

(1) That the Unions and Hereditary Contracts, as likewise the Communion
founded upon the former, may be explained, and put into a due Light, Pursuant
to their true Intent and Meaning.

(2) That, what concerns the dispute about the Jus Armorum, such as Creating of
Fortifications, and making of Levies, with all other Matters relating to the
Common Defense of these Dukedoms; it may continue in the same manner as has
been practiced before, according to Ancient Custom; and what ever has been done
in this point on the Duke's side, contrary to the Unions, Family-Contracts, and
the Communion, shall for the future, be redressed and and quite Abolished.

(3) That the Joint-Defence of those Dukedoms shall be resettled upon the
ancient Foot, and to prevent all further Jealousy upon that Account for the
future, the Taxes Levied as well upon the Prelates and Nobility as the Cities,
and all the Subjects in General to be brought into one Joint-Treasury, as it
was before the Agreement made in the Year 1663, betwixt both Houses, which
(being done with mutual Consent, and only for a certain time, ought to be quite
annulled for the future.

(4) His Majesty of Denmark desires, that the last Will and Testament of the
late Duke Christian Albert may be Communicated to him.

(5) All remaining Grievances to be composed within a limited time, by an
Amicable Transaction, and in Case some Differences remain, the same to be
decided according to the true intent of the Compacts of Union.

The Propositions made by order from His Highness the Duke of Holstein Gottorp,
upon the Propositions delivered by the Danish Ministers, the 24th of August
1696, to the Ministers Mediators, at Pinnenbergh, the 14th of September O. S.
1606.

(1) His Highness is willing to renew the so much desired Union, but upon no
other Condition than was stipulated in the Trcaties of Gluckstadt and Altena;
provided also, that his other Grievances may be Redressed, and the King renew
the same on his side. What concerns the joint Dominion over the Nobility and
Prelates (for the same ought not to be extended over the rest) mentioned and
introduced in the Her editary Divisions and Family-Contracts, the some ought to
be looked upon no otherwise than Family-Agreements, but not as fundamental and
unalterable Laws, never to be dissolved or annulled; The contrary of which
appears from what has been declared in the Northern Treaties, that of
Gluckstadt; and by His Majesty's own Concession, wherewith His Highness is
willing to rest satisfied.

(2.) In case there should be an imminent Occasion of an extraordinary
Provision to be made for the defense of these Dukedoms; His Majesty and His
Highness as Joint Lords thereof, will, according to ancient Custom, enter upon
Consultations and agree upon this Point; But as to what concerns the Rights or
entering into Alliances, to erect Fortifications and making Levies, this is put
beyond all dispute by the Treaty of Altena, which grants to His Highness, among
other Regal Rights, those beforementioned without any Restriction, Limitation,
or previous Communication; in which sense it was not only taken and signed by
the Mediators, but also by the Princes, who were Guarantees of the said
Treatyl; His Highness is not in the least sensible, that on his part there has
been done any thing against that Union, which is so earnestly desired to be
renewed, no more than against the Hereditary Division and Communion; His
Highness being willing to be only secured in the quiet possession of them.

(3.) His Highness has made it his utmost Care to provide for the defense of
the Country, for which purpose he has taken some foreign Troops into his
Service, and has made considerable Levies, and put his Fortifications in a
posture of defense, having expended upon this Account not only what Taxes have
been levied, but also considerable Sums arising from his own Demeasnes; But
what is alleged concerning the abolishing of a Treaty made in the Year 1663,
and that it would tend to the removing of all farther Jealousies and
Misunderstandings, if the Taxes raised, as well from the Balliages, Lands and
Cities, as the Nobility and Prelates were brought into one common Treasury; His
Highness is of quite another Sentiment; He looks upon it as a thing depending
merely on the pleasure of Sovereigns, which way Taxes are to be raised, to wit:
from their own Subjects, so that neither party receives any prejudice by it.
The due observance of the Treaties of the North and Gluckstadt, and of what
since has been declared by His Majesty, would prove a more effectual means to
prevent all farther Jealousy and differences.

(4.) What concerns the Communication of the Last Will and Testament of His
Highnesses Father the late Duke Christian Albert, His Highness persuades
himself, that the Reasons alleged to His Majesty, and since published, will be
so prevailing, as to induce him not to insist any farther upon this point.

(5.) After His Highness has been redressed concerning the beforementioned
Grievances and Propositions, by the Intercession of the Princes Mediators, he
is willing that the remaining Differences may be referred to an amicable
Composition; and in case that should take no effect by a legal Procedure,
pursuant to the Intent of the Treaty of Altena, which does not mention the
least of the Decision of such Differences as may arise betwixt both Houses, as
they are Dukes of those Dukedoms, to be done by the Judgment of the Court of
Unions.

Many more Observations might be made upon those Propositions, but as most of
them have a near relation to what has been said before; so we will only allege
here in a few words, what the Danes reply to the Allegation of the Treaty of
Gluckstadt, so often mentioned in the Duke's Propositions:

They say that this Treaty (containing the Preliminaries of the
Marriage-Contract betwixt the Daughter of King Frederick III. and the late
Duke) several Transgressions made on that Duke's side, were thereby buried in
eternal Oblivion, without insisting upon every particular, which ought not to
be drawn into Consequence to the Prejudice of His Danish Majesty; it being
especially provided for in the said Treaty, that all the Ancient Unions should
remain in their full force and vigor.

FINIS.

