A PARISH LOOKING-GLASS FOR Persecutors of Ministers.

Wherein Such persecuting People may behold their ugly-faced sinful Condition,
and the Judgments of God falling on their heads. OR, The Persecuted Ministers
Apology.

Published by Richard Culmer for the Common Good.

Especially, That the Christian Magistrate may take more notice of, and be more
zealous against Persecutors and Oppressors of faithful Ministers: which
Persecutors endeavor, first, to ruin Ministers which are weaker in power than
Magistrates; intending afterward more easily to ruin Magistrates also, and
level all.

AND That people (Sectaries and others) which despise, mock, revile, slander,
defraud, oppress faithful Ministers, sent by the care and wisdom of the
Christian Magistrate, may be warned by the Judgments full of horror, upon
such Persecutors, herein recorded, which God has set forth for example to
others.

And published by him more especially, In Defense of his Father Richard Culmer,
Minister of Mynster, in the County of Kent, in the Isle of Thanet, near
Canterbury.

To prevent his said Fathers causless ruin, which is now endeavored by those,
who (as the ensuing History shows, after many public, shameless, savage
Persecutions of him, by word and deed, to the shedding of his blood, only for
his actings for God and the present State) now go about by secret false
suggestions, to have him cast out of his Living; and of their Confidence to
prevail against him it is boasted in Canterbury, and elsewhere publicly, which
has caused this public Apology.

Psalm. 7. 13. God ordains his Arrows against the Persecutors. Matthew. 23. 37.
O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that
are sent unto thee, etc. 1 Cor. 15. 32. I have fought with beasts at Ephesus,
after the manner of men. 2 Cor. 6. 9. Persecuted, yet not forsaken. London,
Printed by Abraham Miller, 1657.

TO THE HONORABLE Colonel ROBERT GIBBON, Governor of the Isle of Jersey, etc.
Right Honorable,
YOur native Country (the County of Kent) has many obligations of much due
respect unto you, for your prudent and valiant actings formerly, and at
present, for the welfare and safety thereof. And your courteous respests to
all, and to my Father in special (heretofore and lately, in that you were
pleased to honor him, by calling on him to accompany you, when you surveyed
the places of danger for landing a foreign enemy along the Seacoasts in the
Isle of Tanet, which lies overagainst the Coasts of Flanders.) And your
undeserved favors to my self, have encouraged me to presume of, and crave your
worthy Patronage of the ensuing Apology, which the law of filial love and duty
has compelled me to write, in the speedy and necessary defense of my aged
Father, whose Ministerial imploiments will not give him leisure to do it with
his own pen: I do unfeignedly profess it rather a grief, than any delight to
me, that (upon this occasion) I am necessitated to publish that any such
savages, as are here described should be found in Old-England, in Kent or
Christendom, after so long continued gracious means of extraordinary civility
and Christianity: But hereby may be seen in what ignorant, barbarous, profane
condition, Prelates, and Dean and Chapter, Non-resident Doctors (a non docendo)
and their ignorant, drnnken, lewd Curates, have left people, which is the
miserable sad case of many Parishes, as hundreds of faithful Ministers have
found by woeful experience. But it is apparent, that the All-seeing righteous
God will not have the Persecutions and Oppressions herein recited to be buried
in the grave of silence and oblivion, seeing a public discovery thereof is
called for exraordinarily, and necessited and extorted, not only by open
slanders, by written and printed Libels, but by public revealings, and loud
boastings of secret actings of enemies, by enemies themselves; all which could
not but be made use of, without dishonor to God, and injury to Justice it
self. For those that have made lies their refuge, and calumnies the weapons of
their rage against my Father, and have by a confederacy withheld all their
Tithes wholly from him, for above three years last past, do grow now more than
ever publicly clamorous against him. And their malice is grown to that
monstrous height of rage, that it has so blinded the little common reason that
was left in them, that they have presumed impudently (distrusting the merits of
their cause) to pass by his Highnesses worthy Commissioners for ejecting of
ignorant and scandalous Ministers, and to wave the common Law, and have
petitioned against him to his Highness himself; upon what grounds, fancies or
vain hopes, they only know; But this is certainly known, that in their
boastings (before they have put on their armor) they vaunt much of their
potent military friends: But I am consident none of those worthies will engage
against my Father, but cashier them out of their good affections, when they are
informed of the truth, by the ensuing defensive Narrative, which is my Fathers
defensive weapon, which their extraordinary Alarm have forced him to arm
himself withal, and to stand upon his guard and defense, to prevent the ruin
of his good Name and Family, which nearly concerns me in particular, who am a
soldier also at this present in commission for the present State. And this
cause is of greater concernment, than is at first conceived, not only to him,
but to the public; And Gods glory is much concerned in it: For if his
adversaries could by subtilty prevail to have him sacrificed to their malice
and covetousnes, by the hands of abused Justice and Authority: It would not
only prove his undeserved ruin, but much encourage the mutinous enemies of
Reformation to endless oppositions, and persecutions of faithful Ministers, and
would discourage Ministers to be faithful, for fear of ruin, for want of just
defense from the Higher Powers, to which they adhere in the cause of God: which
is not written out of fear of any such thing, which his adversaries are so
confident of, to take effect against him; as of old against absent
Mephibosheth; And although means of defense and preservation are to be used,
and to this end the ensuing Apologetical History, or Historical Apology is
written, concerning things that have not been acted in a corner, but publicly
and lately, and are notorious, and will not be denied: Yet (as Nicodemus says)
Our Law judges no man before it hear him, and know what he does. No Ziba nor
Haman, though he may boast of his friends at Court, can now procure such hasty
Decrees, blessed be God, By whom Kings reign, and Princes decree justice, and
who pulls down mighty ones without number, and sets up others in their rooms: He
is the Lord of Hosts, who has taught your hands to war, and your fingers to
fight: I beseech him to be your shield, and your great reward: So craving
pardon for my boldness, I humbly take leave, and remain,

Sir, Your obliged, assured Servant and Soldier to be commanded RICHARD CULMER.

A PARISH LOOKING-GLASS FOR Persecutors of Ministers.
THe Persecutors of faithful Ministers in these times, may behold as in a
glass, the vileness of their sin, and the great displeasure of God against
them for it: If they look into the Scripture, or later Histories, and daily
experience. We read (2 Chronicles 36. 14, 15.) And the Lord God of their Fathers
sent unto them by his Messengers, rising up betimes, and sending them: because
he had compassion on his house, and on his dwelling place: But they mocked the
Messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his Prophets, until the
wrath of God arose against his people, till there was no remedy: Therefore he
brought upon them the King of the Chaldees, who slow their young men with the
sword, in the house of their Sanctuary, etc. And Ahab and Jezabel persecuted
the Prophets of God, but dogs licked up the blood of Ahab, after he was slain,
and dogs did eat persecuting Jezabel. The children which did mock, and miscall
Elisha the Prophet and Minister of God, were two and forty of them torn in
pieces by wild Bears (2 Kings 2.) They were the children of Persecutors of
Gods Ministers, and spoke their parents language. The Persecutors of the
Prophet Jeremiah, said, Come let us devise devices against Jeremiah, let us
smite him with the tongue (Jer. 18. 18.) Therefore God delivered up their
children to the famine, and their blood was poured out by force of the sword.
Those that persecuted our Savior the great Shepherd, and did persuade people
not to hear him preach, saying, He is mad, and has a Devil, why hear ye him?
(Joh. 10. 20.) and would stone him, though he spoke as never man spoke, and did
works which never man did: yet they having begun to persecute him, did sin
against the light of their own conscience, and against the holy Ghost, to make
good their begun acts, and hold up their reputation, and did persecute him to
the death: What became of those persecutors? Is not their judgment eternal in
hell for their unpardonable sin? Alexender the Coppersmith, and other
Persecutors of the Apostles have their woeful reward, though they clamoured and
articled against St Paul, as a pestilent fellow, a mover of sedition, etc.
These things are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world
are come, and teach Ministers now for their comfort what Christ spoke, Blessed
are ye when men shall revile you, and persecute you; for so persecuted they the
Prophets that were before you; And if they have persecuted me they will also
persecute you.

But some men will not be warned by other men's harms, and examples; therefore
they are made examples to others. Our late Bishops and their Adherents are a
rare and remarkable president of Gods Judgments on Persecutors of faithful
Ministers, which sin made them ripe for their deserved downfall: But their
Persecutions ended at the beginning of the long Parliament: Then the iron teeth
of those beasts were knocked out, and the iron yoaks, which they had put on
Ministers necks were all pulled off: But when the Ecclesiastical Courts were
taken away, the people took lawless liberty to themselves, to put (as it were)
a hogs yoke on Ministers necks, and did persecute faithful Ministers sent unto
them, as sheep among wolves: Oh what woorying and wearying out most precious
Ministers by word and deed, by tearing and tugging, lyings and slanderings,
revilings and defraudings, and withholding their maintenance by confederacy!
And these Persecutions (especially in point of maintenance) continue very great
at this day all the Nation over; people being encouraged hereunto, for want of
better Laws for Tything, and of more speedy execution of justice, according to
the Laws that are in force. Many hundreds of faithful Ministers in England may
justly write such books against their Persecutors, to awaken the Christian
Magistrate, and warn Persecutors, against whom their cries are gone up to
Heaven, and have brought down vengeance upon very many: And their complaints
and moans by words are daily heard, and may be read, some in print, and in
their Bills against thousands in the Court of Exchequer, where relief is
certain, but so long waited for, that in the mean time the poor Ministers and
their families perish; And oft-times the parties, or witnesses, or both die, or
the Tyth-robber breaks, and runs the Country, which is usual, before the
Cause come to hearing. I could show Persecutors many very fresh examples of
their sin, and of punishments on people, that have lately persecuted
faithful Ministers in several Parishes, as that of Mr E. K. of Dover in 1644.
who came out of his seat, and joined in the hurliburly made in St James Church
against Mr Vincent a godly able Minister, who was sent thither by the
Parliament, and persecuted him otherwise: But the Persecutor persecuted himself
a little after by laying violent hands on himself, and was a self-executioner
by hanging himself. This and many such bleeding examples may be produced
touching the hand of God against such Persecutors, enough to fill volumes. But
I shall now only instance in the Persecutors of Mr Richard Culmer (heretofore
of Magdalen College in Cambridge, Master of Arts, and) now Minister of Mynster
in the Isle of Thanet in the County of Kent, whose Persecutors are now very few
living in that Parish; but mighty and numerous elsewhere; even those of the
Popish, Prelatical and Cavalier Party that never saw him, because of his
activenesse against their Cause. They have printed two libellous Books against
him, and often articled against him, and raised Persecution against him to the
shedding of his blood, etc. as the ensuing History shows; And to have their
wills against him (if it be possible, to ruin him) they have lately petitioned
against him to his Highness himself, and since publicly boasted against him
in their confidence now to prevail against him; which has caused this Apology
to be published in his just defense, and for vindication of the truth. This man
after he left the free Grammer-school at Canterbury (being senior of all that
School, then consisting of above two hundred Scholars, in the time of Mr Roger
Raven, the King of Schoolmasters, as he was deservedly styled at his Funeral,
an eminent, godly, learned, yet persecuted and silenced Minister) lived about
eight years a Student in Magdalen-Colledge in Cambridge. And being afterward
Minister of Goodnestone in EastKent, was persecuted from thence by Archbishop
Laud, only for refusing to publish the Kings Book for Sabbath-recreations: (See
the History of that Archbishops Trial in the Index letter C. Culmer.) And he
continued three years and seven months silenced before the first Parliament
was called; In all which time he got not one farthing by his Ministry, having
seven children so little, that he could, and did carry them all at once on his
back: And (to add to his Persecutions by the Prelate) he was persecuted by the
Patroness Mrs P. (whose Posterity has felt some reward of Persecution) who
immediately upon his silencing gave his Living away to Mr A. H. who for lucre
of that Benefice, did join in the Persecution, and did publish that profane
Book in that Parish Church on the Sabbath Day, in the presence of Mr Culmer;
and of the people there: But a year after he lost his goods by fire, and the
next year he himself was drowned in the water. And Mr D. (yet living) then
Curate to the Bishop of Rochester at Barham, did that Sabbath also publish in
the Church at Goodnestone the unjust Decree of Suspension made against Mr
Culmer in the Archbishops Ecclesiastical Court, by the Arch bishops special
Order and Command to Sr N. B. But a little after this, the people of Barham
fell to dancing on the Sabbath, and a quarrel arose about a wager between two
dancers, and he that won the wager had his brains knocked out that Sabbath.

But at the first coming in of the Scots into England, the persecuting
Archbishop (who a little after was beheaded at Tower Hill for Treason, etc.)
presently absolved Mr Culmer, who might justly say, Garamercy good Scot for his
Absolution. And he being at liberty to preach, was presently called by Dr
Robert Aus^in (now living) to be his Assistant at Harbledown near Canterbury,
where he preached diverse years, and had very many Auditors from that famous
City. But there also he was persecuted for his actings against drunkenness,
and against profaning the Sabbath by Crickit playing before his door, to spite
him, which when he had reproved privately and publicly, they removed that
sport to a field near the Woods, where they threw stones at his Sons, whom he
sent to see if they played there; and upon public reproof, the Churchwarden
(whose wise was for just cause denied the Sacrament) bought boards to keep the
people of Canterbury out of the Church Seats. And the grandee Persecutor J. W.
used to go with his crew of brawlers and railers, his wife especially, upon the
Sabbath to the Parsonage-house, and there did clamor and bawl to the Doctor to
move him, that Mr Culmer might preach no more there; and one of them S. S.
cried out, saying, It is a shame to speak what he has done; and being asked by
the Doctor, what Mr Culmer had done, the only answer of the accuser was, Why
was he turned out of Goodnestone? And being urged to speak what he could say
more, he could not allege any thing else: By this the Magistrate may see, that
some people are like a kennel of Hounds, that will bark for company; if one or
two bark against a Minister, then presently one and all, right or wrong: as of
old they all cried, Not him, they all cried, Crucify him, etc. The upholding
of the noise and cry was, Oh our souls, our souls, will you damn our souls! we
cannot edify by one we love not: But when their clamours prevailed not, they
writ Articles against Mr Culmer, as follows, That he refuses to administer
the Sacrament according to the Church of England: That he raised scandals of
the Parish in the Pulpit: That he made differences between Neighbors: That
some refuse to hear him, and others declare they cannot edify by him. These,
and only these Articles they exhibited to the Doctor, who having heard all
things objected against Mr Culmer, gave them an answer, that what they objected
he found either frivolous, or false; And he reproved a rich widow Mrs R, who
being asked, Why she clamoured? her only Answer was, that Mr Culmer had said to
the Overseers of the poor, that he wondered that she refused to pay her
assessement of 2s. 6d. to the poor. But the Doctor being elsewhere provided of
a Benefice, wholly left that place to the Patron, who placed a Minister there;
And when they were told a little after, that they had made a sorry exchange in
the room of M Culmer; It was answered, We care not whom we have, n^w we are rid
of M. Culmer: But what is become of those Persecutors of M. Culmer is famously
known: One of them E. Br. (because M Culmer would not give him the Sacrament
immediately after he had been drunk, and did pursue his wife with a drawn
sword, did thereupon write a Petition against M. Culmer, and went about the
Parish to get Subscriptions to it) was a little after found guilty of Felony,
and was burnt in the hand at the Sessions at Canterbury: And you may now find
the Grandee Persecutor J. W. in the Goal at Canterbury (his son used to
thresh Corn on the Sabbath mornings for fodder:) And now after the death of two
Ministers, the third (having little encouragement amongst them) left them
destitute. And after M. Culmer lest preaching at Harbledown, he preached in
Canterbury; and there he and other Ministers were appointed by Authority or
Parliament, to detect, and cause to be demolished the superstitious
Inscriptions, and Idolatrous Monuments, in the Cathedral in Canterbury; And
when they came to the great high prized most idolatrous Window, in the Chapel
of Thomas Becket, in that Cathedral (the Laborers, not acting as was desired)
M. Culmer laid, If we neglect this opportunity, we may repent it; and thereupon
threw off his Cloak, and took a whole Pike in his hand, and went up a Ladder
fifty six steps high, and did full execution upon the Idolatrous Monuments
there: whereupon some stirs began, a Prebends wife cried out, Save the
child, meaning Christ lying in the Manger pictured there; and M. Culmers blood
was then threatened by some that stood without the iron grates, in the body of
the Church: But M. John Lade then Mayor of Canterbury, sent a file of
Musketeers, who conveyed Mr. Culmer safe home to his own house. And a little
after M. Culmer published a Book entitled, Cathedral News from Canterbury,
which is a true History of the sins and plagues of that Cathedral Babel; The
Title page of that Book is, Cathedral News from Canterbury, showing the
Canterburian Cathedral to be in an. Abbey like corrupt and rotten condition,
which calls for a speedy Reformation or Dissolution, which Dissolution is
already foreshewn, and begun there by many remarkable Passages upon that place,
and the Prelates there: Recorded and published by Richard Culmer Minister of
Gods Word, dwelling in Canterbury, heretofore of Magdalen College in
Cambridge, Master of Arts: If I should hold my peace the stones would
immediately cry out, Luke 19. 40. Imprimatur John White. I have perused this
Relation of Cathedral News, and therein observe, that the hand of Providence
has indeed wrought a new thing in our Israel, Worthy to be looked upon by all,
with a due mixture of wonder and thankefulness: And therefore conceive it
necessary to be published to the view of all: Jo. Caryl. Printed for Fulk
Cliston, etc.

But this Book being the finger in the Bile, and swelling Ulcer of Prelacy and
Cathedrals; Immediately upon the first publishing of it, the nest of Cathedral
Hornets at Canterbury, and their waspish Malignant Adherents, flew about M.
Culmers ears, bombalizing and toating so loud, that City and Country rang of
their railing and libellings. They presently published in print two lying
Libels against him; One called, The Razing of the Record, or, An Order to
forbid any Thank^sgiving for the Canterbury News, published by Richard Culmer,
Printed at Oxford, in the year, 1644. The other entitled, Antidetum
Culmerianum, or, Animadversions upon a late Pamphlet, entitled, Cathedral News
from Canterbury; Oxford, Printed by H. Hall, 1644.

These Libels of private concernment M. Culmer thought fit to answer only with
scorn and contempt amidst so many public differences; being confident that no
wise man would believe that, which no man does avow, or set his name to. They
publish in the Libels, That he was famous in Cambridge for football playing
and swimming; but never thought to be cut out for a Mercury: But he gave some
specimen to the contrary in many public Acts, in the University; I name only
that in print, in the Book, called Lacryma Cantabrigienses, upon the death of
Queen Anne, viz.

Cyxthia Lucisluo conjungitur aurea Phoebo:
Phoebeo in terris conjux fuit Anna Jacobo:
Ecclipsin patitur Phoebe; Sic deficit Anna:
Phoebus in Orb micat: Sic (...)lendet in Vrbe Jacobus:
Luna praeest undis: Lachrymas tulit Anna Britannis:
Sol radiis undas siccat: Splendore Jacobus.
Richard Culmer Col. Mag.

And that report in the Libel, touching his pulling out the spigots in the
Colledge-cellar, at Cambridge, and his escape, and running away, and expulsion
from the University, is a mere forgery, as many now living, that were of that
College, can testify: That also is a mere slander touching Richard Pising of
Canterbury, who is yet living there, and can witness the contrary to that
which the Libellers publishes against M. Culmer: And as touching that which
they record touching M. Culmers being cast into the Fleet; It was a crying
persecution and injury done to him by the Arch^bishop, which the other Lords
knew well, and therefore released him, upon their next sitting, within five
days: But M. B. may thank Sir J. F. for his head; And may thank his own
prating tongue (first and last) for all his trouble then.

Many other silly fictions they invented and published in those railing Libels;
as that M. Culmer tied a rope about his fathers Cows horns to let himself down
the Cliff in Thanet to reach Daws.

By such feigned Stories the Cathedrallists endeavored to confute that true,
real History, written by M. Culmer, which caused them to gnaw their tongues for
pain, and to put so much Gall in their Ink, in their pretended Confutation of
his Book, by those forgeries, which are falsely called, Culmerianum Antidotum:
Being deadly poison to take away the life of his good Name and Reputation: But
I am confident, that these ensuing Testimonials, which are not forged, but
real, under so many Names of worth, will be a general Antidote, and (...)
against all infection and prejudice to M. Culmers good Name and Reputation from
those pestilent Libels, whose Authors are De terra incognita, of the unknown
Land, and (...) namelesse: But these Testimonials are not namelesse.

Civit. Cant. ss.
WE the Mayor and Aldermen of the City of Canterbury, and other Inhabitants
there (at the request of Richard Culmer of the said City Clerk, who has lived
in, or near the said City for many years last past) do hereby certify, That
the said Richard Culmer is a man of exemplary Life and Conversation, and an
able and diligent Preacher of Gods Word: In Testimony whereof we have hereunto
subscribed our Names, this tenth day of August, Anno Dom. 1642.

Cleve Carter Mayor, Avery Sabin. James Master, will. wbiting, John Stanly, John
Lade, William Bridge, Danicl Masterson, John Terry, John Watson, George Knot,
John Pollen. Paul Pettit, Vispasian Harris, Peter Pyard, Richard Juxon, Themas
Player, George Young, Roger Sympson, William Cullen, Francis Maplesden, George
Milles, Edward Norden, Thomas Kingsford, Thomas Trusser, John Sympson, Walter
Mond, John Routh, Edward Master, John Nutt, William Man, Edward Berry, John
James, Henry James, Giles Master, Nicholas knight, Henry White, Allen Epps,
John Bix, William Russel William Jones, William Master, Robert Beak, George
Nichels, William Cullen Sen. William Glover, Matthew Spencer, John Woodware,
Richard Hardris, Christopher Harslet, Edmond Crisp, Thomas Den, Robert Lade,
Edward Engeham, Edmona Randolph, Edward Aldy Rector of St Andrews in
Canterbury, James Nicholson, Philip Delme, Thomas Ventris Rector Sanctae
Margaretae, John Player, Thomas Courthop, John Lee, Michael Page, William
Taylour, Thomas Ventris.

This is a true Copy of the Original remaining in the Assembly.

Henry Roborough Scriba, Adoniram Bifield Scriba, John Wallis.


To the Honorable Committee of Parliament for Plundered Ministers.
Honorable Sirs,
WE are bold to move you in the behalf of Mr Richard Culmer, a Minister, who
lives in Canterbury; The Burgesses, Mayor, and Principal Inhabitants whereof,
do give a very good Testimony of him under their hands in writing, whom we also
know to be as they testify of him; And we further testify, That he has been
a very forward advancer of the Common Cause, by his Ministry, and otherwise,
from the beginning of these distractions; And was long suspended for not
publishing the Book for Sabbath sports: But now is altogether unprovided of a
settled Ministry. Our earnest request is, That he may be taken into your
consideration, and provided for somewhere in these parts: We are very unwilling
such men should be discouraged, or that the ill-affected should point at them,
as unregarded* So we humbly take leave, and remain,

October 9. 1643. Your Loving Friends to be commanded, John Lade Mayor, James
Oxinden, John Boys, William Man, Michael Lewsie, Ri. Hardres, Edward Scot,
Thomas Westrow, Mark Dixwell, Edward Boys, John Boys.
This is a true Copy of the Original remaining in the Assembly,

Henry Roborough Scriba, Adoniram Bifield Scriba, John Wallis.




To the Honorable the Committee appointed by the Parliament for Plundered
Ministers.
Gentlemen,
I Do herewith present unto you M. Richard Culmer, a Minister of Canterbury,
who though I cannot properly say he has been plundered, yet has lost much for
not publishing the Book for Sabbath sports: And I have had personal experience
from the first of these distractions of his fidelity, and great activenesse in
the Common Cause. And now seeing a Testimonial under the hands of the Burgesses
for Canterbury, and of the Mayor, and many well-affected chief Inhabitants
there; That he is a man of exemplary life, and an able, and diligent Preacher:
And seeing also Letters directed to you in his behalf, from many of the
Deputy Lieutenants of Kent: And for as much as I am certified that the
Archdeacon of Canterbury has deserted his Cure at Ickham near Sandwich in
Kent: My earnest request to you is, That Mr Culmer may by your Order officiate
that Cure, and be settled in it, if the Archdeacon shall be removed out of it:
And I am the rather willing to move you on Mr Culmers behalf, for that I know
the House of Lords (taking him into special consideration) did Order that he
should succeed the Dean of Canterbury in the Parsonage of Chartham; but at my
motion he sat down, and gave way that my Lord Generals Chaplain should have
that Benifice: And so with my affectionate respects commended to you, I rest,

Warwick-house, Feb. 2. 1643. Your very assured Friend. WARWICK.


And to proceed, after those Libels were spread abroad in Print: A Libel was
written against him at Canterbury, and in the night thrown under the door of
the then Mayor of Canterbury, who sent it up to the Committee for Plundered
Ministers: And (to cause the people to destroy him) they raised a false report
against him, that he had broken the earthen pots or pipes, which conveyed water
to the City, and that he was seen to break them; And that he had said, that all
that neither could or would give any thing to the Parliaments proceedings,
should be put into a house, and the house fired on them; and that the King
would be at Canterbury at such a day, and then Mr Culmer should be hanged, But
threatened folks live long. And Mr Culmer being so recommended to the Committee
for Plundered Ministers, as aforesaid; they thereupon resolved to place him in
the Sequestered Vicarage of Mynster in Kent; But the Malignants and
Cathedrallists from Canterbury, and some from Harbledown presently endeavored
to make the minds of the people of Mynster ill affected against him; and it was
said often openly in the streets at Canterbury, Blue Dick should be set out of
Mynster; And diverse Ministers that seemed to be his friends, did him ill
offices there, for their own ends: One that aimed at that Living himself, told
them, that although the Committee had voted Mr Culmer the Place, yet if they
would stir and show great opposition against him, they might remove him: An
other (when he saw he could not get it for himself) advised them maliciously,
saying, Clog it with a Lecture, clog it with a Lecture; But after the people
had heard Mr Culmer preach there, nineteen of the Parish subscribed, that they
were willing to receive him as their Pastor: And one of the chiefest did then
give him loving entertainment, but desired him to entertain his brother-in-law
Mr P. then Curate to be his Assistant, and to give him 40lb by the year, which
Mr Culmer desired to be excused in, saying, He was able to officiate alone, and
that if 40lb per annum Fifts, and as much in Taxes, and 40lb to his Assistant,
Were paid out of 200lb, he should have little himself: But the truth is, That
Curate was very scandalous, called The Father of Drunkards, because diverse
Toffe-pots in the Parish called him Father, and he called them Sons: But one
day in a Cellar they complained to him, that he called them Sons, but gave
them no portions: Then he gave them portions; To one Knaves-acre, to another
Duns-acre, to another Cuckolds-corner, to another a Patent to hug and buss, to
another Meretrix-Hall: He would tipple with them in the Tap-house near the
Church every day in the week, and on Holy Days, out of the Alehouse to the
Church, and from the Church to the Alehouse, and come out hollowing at
midnight, and was so drunk that he could not stand: He would bowl with them on
the Sabbath, and forced the people by threats openly in the Church to come up
and kneel at the Alter rails; And said, Prince Rupert came over to right his
Uncles Wrongs. And when Mr Culmer came to the Vicarage-house, there was a large
Picture of a man in the window, and underneath it was written, Salvator mundi,
the Savior of the world. But Mr Culmer said before many present, This is not
the Savior of the world, for it cannot save it self, and thereupon dashed it
in pieces; But the Curate reviled him, and said, It was there in many Doctors
times, and in M. Bromwels time; He had served above twenty years as Curate
there, and was well beloved. And his Predecessor Curate would go to Sandwich
and fetch Bottles, hanging round under his Priests coat; He was wont to huddle
up forenoon and afternoon Service altogether, and tell the people he did it,
because there was a merry meeting in the afternoon; And the Priest (as they
called him) was sure to be present, and it was their glory to have him amongst
them, in their drunken courses, and to laugh at the drunken Priest.

Another thing was then propounded to Mr Culmer at his first coming, viz. That
he would give under his hand in writing, to take the Tithes as the Sequestered
Doctor had them: But he refused to make any composition, whereupon differences
arose: And the brother-inlaw to the Curate said, He would spend 500lb to keep
out Mr. Culmer, and procured diverse others to join with him to keep out Mr
Culmer, and to bring in some other Minister. But when they saw they could not
prevail to bring in whom they would; They went up to the Reverend Assembly of
Divines, sitting at Westminster, to get any, they cared not whom, to supplant
Mr Culmer; being confident that any Member of that Assembly would carry it from
him: There they first met with Dr Smith, who hearkened to them at the first: But
having discoursed with Mr Culmer, and seen his Testimonials, and enquired of Mr
Herbert Palmer, and others touching him; He came to Mr Culmer and told him,
That if his Living were worth 500lb per annum, he would not have it from him,
but would assist him against his adversaries: But afterward they surprised one
of that Assembly, who accepted of that place; but when it was moved in the
Assembly for his approbation from them to the Committee for Plundered
Ministers; Mr Herbert Palmer, who had known Mr Culmer for many years, made a
Speech in his behalf of at least half an hour long, as if it had been penned,
and (amongst the rest) he said, If Mr Culmer be supplanted of this Living, I am
confident the Malignants in Canterbury will make bonfires for joy: Then Dr
Gouge, Mr Wilson, Dr Corpet, and others there, which knew Mr Culmer, spoke also
in his behalf: whereupon the Vote of the Assembly was, That their Brother
should be entreated to sit down, and give way to Mr Culmer for that Place: And
thereupon after that Assembly had certified to the Committee for Plundered
Ministers, touching Mr Culmers fitness to officiate at Mynster, that Committee
granted him their Order of Sequestration.

But when news of this came to Mynster, some began to rage at it, saying, Such
a devilish Round-headed Priest, that brake the Windows at Canterbury, and
refused to give the Sacrament to all at Harbledown, and would not use the
Service Book, should not come there: And it was given out, that a band of women
should meet him at Sarwall, and throw him into a ditch: But one Mrs O, that had
heard well of Mr Culmer, said to the Gossips in the Church Porch, What band?
Who shall be Captain? One named, such a woman; The other replied, Oh she, she
was brought a bed a month after she was married, we are like to have a good
band I hear, either whores, or with child before marriage. And upon this
occasion I cannot but recount what fell out lately in a Vestry there at a
Debate about putting out Apprentices, it was voted by Mr Culmers adversaries,
and set down in the Seffe-book, That such a Girl (a Bastard) should be Mr
Culmers Apprentice: But he afterward addressed himself to the Justices, and
desired them, that such an affront might not be put on him, and said further,
There were yet but eight bastards since his coming thither, and desired he
might be excused until the tenth fell: The Justices smiled, and ordered him
another Apprentice. I rehearse this, because I hear the accusation against Mr
Culmer is his rehearsing of a same of words of the feminine gender. But the
band of women never advanced nor charged, but with their sharp tongues.

But the 500lb man, with others, went presently (before Mr Culmer came down
with his Order) with a Petition to diverse Peers of the Realm, which were then
in the Isle, upon pleasure of Hawking and Hunting, and lay there: But when the
Earl of Warwick had read their Petition against Mr Culmer, he said, I know Mr
Culmer well, he is an honest man, I pray receive him according to Order; If
need be, I have a better Living for Mr Culmer; But we must not oppose
Authority, etc. A little after a chief Parishioner of another Parish
(brotherin-law also to the said Curate, since a sequestered Cavalier) went with
two of Mynster to Canterbury to a Committee of Deputy Lieutenants, and there
they clamoured against Mr Culmer, who was thereupon sent for to the
Chequer-Inne: But after they had heard him speak, Sir James Oxinden said, Now
we have heard Mr. Culmer speak, all that you have said against him, falls from
him as water from a tiled house: And Mr. Boys of Bettishanger (then Knight of
the shire for Kent) said, their allegations were of no weight, and would not
prevail: and he said, I pray oppose him not; I am confident you will never
prevail against him to remove him, he has been so eminently active for the
common Cause, and you have nothing to allege against him, I pray receive him,
he is sent unto you by Authority, I dare engage for him he will be an honest
quiet man amongst you if you will be quiet. But he that was of another Parish
said, They had Scouts out against. Mr. Culmer, and would find enough against
him, He were better leave them quietly. And indeed they sent out to all places
where Mr. Culmer had lived, or had any dealing, to find matter against him: The
chief thing which they then alleged against him was; that he was a contentious
man at Harbledowne: whereupon the Committee sent to Dr Austin, who is an
eminent godly Minister, to know the truth of matters concerning Mr Culmer at
Harbledowne: The Doctor returned them an answer in writing as follows: October.
11. 1644. Whereas I am desired to testify what I know concerning Mr Culmers
carriage and behavior at Harbledowne, especially for matters of contention
between him and some there; I do hereby truly testify, that having heard all
that has any ways been objected against him, I judged it rather to proceed
out of malice, than from any ground of truth: and the contention spoken of, to
have been rather out of his zeal to the cause of God, than any private cause of
his own: And though they did alledg matters against him, yet I judged them but
frivolous; And I have been thanked for his ministry there; which many of the
City of Canterbury also thought so well of, as they took the pains to travel
thither to enjoy it, and that for many years: And I also testify, That I have
had much dealing with Mr Culmer for at least twelve years, yet if he were now
mine enemy, I must say, I have never found him but an honest man, both in word
and deed: In testimony whereof I have hereunto set my Name, Robert Austin.
About that time the Committee of Deputy Lieutenants for Kent, made the Order
following, (viz.)

Whereas we are informed, that there is a weekly Lecture at St John's in the
Isle of Thanet, in the County of Kent; we think fit that Mr Culmer, being a
very well-affected man, and put in by the Parliament into a Cure in the said
Isle, shall take his turn in preaching the said Lecture. Alsford 12 June 1645.
Richard Hardress, Anthony Welden, Robert Scot, William Miller, John Boys,
William Kenrick* But after this Order, and Mr Culmers preaching there, that
Lecture soon ceased, because (it seems) Mr Culmers preaching was not pleasing
to the Cavaller party: The Minister there was afterward sequestered for
malignancy, and not one of the seven Ministers of that Isle but was neuter or
two pockets at the best, or rather the worst at that time; and could make his
Mill go with any wind. But the ceasing of the Lecture did not satisfy them;
but their chief project was to remove Mr Culmer out of that Isle: They (as the
event proved) having a design to raise a new War, they knew that Isle to be
a fit place for landing an Enemy: There is Ramsgate alias Roman-gate, where the
Romans landed when they conquered this Nation: And not far from thence, there
is at this day found (after a great rain) Roman Coin, with the Title and
Effigies of Roman Emperors: And they considered Mr Culmers disposition,
activeness, and resolution against them and their Cause: Thereupon they
procured diverse to go to Sandnich to a Committee of Deputy Lieutenants, where
Sir Edward Boys (a Parliament man and Governor of Dover Castle) was Chairman;
there at least forty in their best clothes, and with their best friends and
Sollicitors, did earnestly petition, and clamor as for life, that Mr Culmer
might be removed from Mynster. But Sir Edward Boys asked them, What they
(...)ad to object against Mr Culmer? It was answered, They had nothing for the
present, but they might have in time: (Non ame to Volusi. nec possum dicere
quare.
Hoc tantum possum dicere, non ame tc.)
They clamoured that they could not edify by him, and desired the Committee to
pity their souls, etc. But Sir Edward Boys answered them saying, I have known
Mr Culmer many years to be an honest man, and zealous for God in the worst
times, and a good Preacher; you do ill to oppose a man sent unto you by
Authority without showing cause: if he should be removed upon such opposition,
it would open a flood-gate to ruin all good Ministers, and encourage opposition
against them: I am a plainman, and love to deal plainly, I like not these
courses, and until you have matter against him, I shall engage for him, and
engage all the friends I have in England for him against you; therefore pray
honest men be quiet, until you have just and sufficient cause to complain of
him. At another time they came to a Committee at Eastry, and the 500lb man
spoke against Mr Culmer a long time; Then Sir Edward replied saying, He had
heard him patiently, and all was in their own commendations, but nothing
alleged against Mr Culmer; but (said he,) when you have said all, Mr Culmer
has lent more voluntarily to the State than all your Parish, besides his
personal actings: pray trouble us no more with your clamours till you have
cause. And afterward Sir Edward Boys (hearing of some potent agents, which
they had procured against Mr Culmer at Westminster) wrote a Letter as follows.

To the Honorable Committee of the House of Commons assembled in Parliament,
for plundered Ministers, present these.

Honored Sirs, I and many of the Deputy Lieutenants of Kent, have heretofore
written earnestly unto you, in Mr Richard Culmers behalf, whom you have since
settled in the Vicarage of Mynster in the Isle of Thanet in Kent, for which I,
amongst others, heartily thank you: Some of which Parish (being men of note for
Religion, and activeness in the common Cause) have this day been with me,
earnestly moving me to be a means, that he may be upheld and continued there
against a few violent opposers, who, having begun to oppose him, endeavonr to
make good their own wills and acts, and leave no stone unremoved to that
purpose, although I have once and again showed my dislike upon good grounds; I
doubt not but when you understand the truth of things, you will be sensible of
this cause, which is of great concernment, and will be such a president if his
enemies prevail, as will be of very ill consequence; and I am certified, that
there is no such cordial opposition in the most of the Parish as is pretended;
but if two or three would surcease, all were at an end; his life and Doctrine
being such, that it has prevailed already with diverse. I shall not trouble you
further, only I entreat this honorable Assembly, to continue him there until
be shall give just cause to be removed, or outed in a Legal way; which I
presume to crave at your hands, for him* that in the worst times suffered under
the tyranny of the Archbishop; and for a man which (to my knowledge) has been
most famously active for the Parliament many ways, from the first of these
distractions, and for a man so well attested as he is by so many godly
Ministers and others. So I rest. Your humble servant Edward Boys. Dover Castle
this 27th of January 1644.

A little after this, when Mr Culmer had ended his morning Sermon at Mynster,
on the Sabbath day, one R. H. came crouding up to his desk door, and clamoured
saying; Neighbors, You that have set your hands against Mr Culmer, for a more
abler man, pray stand to it against him; we have had no Communion this blessed
Nativity, nor Prayers all this Christmas Holidays: Whereupon one or two
clamoured, but Mr Culmer went out presently: and the afternoon Sermon being
ended, the clamourer came, and cried out as in the morning; then a chief man of
the Parish cried all, all: and the clamourer said aloud in the Church to the
forenamed Scout, who was of another Parish and then present; Captain I hope you
will join with us: The Scout answered aloud in the Church saying, I will both
ride and write: but Mr Culmer soon left them clamouring and talking. Not long
after that they raised a slander against him, that he said they were
Malignauts: which I have often heard him say, they merely forged against him,
and that he only said, he knew it was a plot of Malignants to incense them
against him: Upon this the 500lb man and some others went to the Committee of
the County at Alesford, and there accused him of that saying, which they indeed
had forged for their own ends, to strengthen themselves to get a Certificate
from that Committee, That some of them being of the Trained bands, did advance
toward Arundell, and that they conceived them to be no Malignants. The
Certificate was drawn up by the Clerk of that Committee, and upon debate about
it, Colonel Blunt said, I see you have clothed Mr Culmers opposers, but you
send him away stark naked, one Mr Culmer: I dwell far from him, yet I have
observed his activeness in the common Cause: and once I made a Speech in the
Lords House, and he presently made another there, to good purpose: What say you
Gentlemen of East-Kent, who are his neighbors? Whereupon they clothed Mr
Culmer so well with Commendations, that his adversaries were unwilling to make
use of their Certificate. A little after that, Mr Culmer was advised to call
the Parishioners together after evening Sermon, and to read his Certificates
unto them; which he did accordingly: But so soon as they were read, the 500lb
man clamoured saying; Mr Culmer, Mr Culmer, Now the people have heard your
papers, they are as much against you as ever they were, if you be not speak ho:
whereupon only one man (J. W.) spoke, he cried out all, all, all, all: Then the
500lb man and some others spoke against Mr Culmer to incense the people against
him: The 500lb man fell a jeering him about his little flock at Mynster,
because he had mentioned that day, Fear not little flock. And one accused him
saying, Mr Culmer, you make dissension in the Parish; you say when you begin
your Sermons, you that fear God, hearken to the Word of God; as if some in the
Parish did fear God, and some in the Parish did not fear God; and so you divide
the Parish, and set us all at difference. Another cried out, Mr Culmer, you may
preach, but you get no Tithes of me but by Law, if you can come by them by Law,
so it is: Nor of me but by Law, said another, etc. Then said one, Mr Culmer,
you gave thanks for a Lie, for taking of Scarborow Castle, which is not yet
taken. But Mr. Culmer did indeed give thanks for the taking of Scarborow Town,
and regayning of Weymouth. Then the clamourer J. W. said he would take his Oath
on it, although it was false which he would so attest against Mr. Culmer. But
J. W. (that so clamoured all, all, and offered to swear falsely;) about a week
after being drunk, fell (in his drunken reel) under the wheels of a wagon laden
with 1500 house-tyles, and was crushed to death, vomiting up his blood at his
throat and mouth: God is known by the judgments which he executes. But some
notwithstanding continued after that to revile Mr. Culmer, publicly calling
him devilish roundheadid Priest; and Ha Blew Dick, the devil break your neck:
and roaring out of the Alehouse window, as he went by; You sir Jack Priest,
etc. And some came of purpose from other Parishes to jeer the Priest, and
affronted him at his door in such a manner as is unfit to be named, much less
committed to paper. And because he used not the Service Book, they called it
the Round-headed kind of Service. Come, will you hear the Roundheaded kind of
Christning too. And one that was married by him, affronted him in the Church at
the time of marriage, and told him he did not say right etc. but he had not
done right, who had made a whore of the Bride diverse months before the
marriage. And he was much reviled because he did not officiate at the grave:
but he said, he would not be Chaplain to the worms, to say grace to them
before they go to dinner and feed on the dead corpse: upon this account he was
threatened to be buried alive. He desired them to go into the Church after the
corpse was interred, and said he would there give them a word of Exhortation,
seeing so many were there met together: but their usual answer was, If we can
have nothing at the grave, we will have nothing in the Church. It were well if
all Ministerial speakings at the grave were prohibited, to take away all
appearance of evil; for by such officiating of the Minister, there is hardening
of popish, ignorant and superstitious people; as if some good came to the dead
by the Ministers speaking over the dead at the grave, and as if the devil will
not come nigh Holy Priesthood, Holy Church ground, Holy Service: And upon this
account there is much enmity raised against good Ministers, because some
Ministers practice it out of superstition, and some to humor and please the
people, least they should Article against them, or not pay their Tithes well.
At one burial when they began to raise at Mr. Culmer, because he did not
officiate there; one J. D. (a common swearer) fell flat on his belly, and
thrust his arm into the grave, and said aloud, We shall have him here, here,
here shortly: but this man (a young man) died a little after stark mad, cursing
and calling out, the devil, the devil. And one T. D. who had two wives living,
and children by them both, who did beat his own aged dearest father, was
isntrumental in the persecution of Mr. Culmer, whom he used to affront, and
said, he had as much to do at the Vicarage as he; and said, he would go no more
to the Steeple-house: this man was a little after hanged in Sussex. And when
Mr. Culmer gave meat and money to diverse poor people, the persecutors told the
people, that Mr. Culmer did that in policy to get their good wills, that they
should not join with the rich men against him; but they should not find him so
liberal afterward. A Grandee of the faction did use to lead many after him on
the Sabbath as they went to the next Parish, which when a worthy Gentleman of
that Parish observed; He sent the Grandee word, That it was a badge of malice
to leave Mr. Culmer, to come to hear at that Parish, where there was a
Preacher, whose gifts were far inferior to their own Ministers: But this is
an ordinary persecution of Ministers, as now, when lately in that Isle, a
drunken, scandalous, railing Priest was ejected, there comes scarce one of ten
to hear the godly Minister, placed in his room. And when Mr. Culmer reproved
them for setting up a Tree May Pole, it was told him to his face, That there
was a Bough strong enough to hang him on it: And when he preached not on their
Christmasse-day, as they call it; He was reviled for it in the Church, and
called Rogue, and assaulted in the Churchyard; and it was told him, Such a
Minister did preach then, and why not you? The usual saying of the 500lb man,
and his faction was, We don't take you for our Minister.

At last the Persecutors plotted to advance their design against Mr Culmer by
articling against him, before the Committee for Plundered Ministers, thereby to
make public shows of numerous Witnesses, and to manifest their implacable and
violent opposition against him; Only by that pretense of enmity against him, to
prevail to remove him; because thereupon it would be conceived, That he was not
like to do any good amongst them, who acted with such animosity, charge,
trouble, or travel: That was the mystery of the iniquity of all that
opposition, a confidence to prevail merely upon the account of pretended
opposition, and unlikelihood of not edifying by him upon that account: That Is
the knack of it all the Nation over; when only self-will, and malice, and
private interest, and self ends, are the weights that set all the Wheels a
going: For they could not be so sottish, as to imagine to prevail by the merits
of the cause. They had a Treasurer (at war, as I may so say) who kept the
money which was collected to defray the Charges in pursuance of those Articles,
to pay Witnesses, etc. They raised and spent above 300lb, (as appears by their
own confession) in prosecuting of him Some of the Articles are verbatim in the
printed Libels, viz.

That he was a fantastic narrow brained man. That false News was by a Proverb
called Culmers News. That he made a popular show, but gave very little. That he
denied to pay Parliament Texis. That he is an impudent man, and did piss in
the Cathedral in Canterbury. That he gave not the Communion at Harbledown as he
ought, etc. And (to steel their numerous, frivolous, wooden Articles, and to
set an edge on them) they accused him to be a common swearer, and a Protector
of Malignants. They carried whole Coaches full of Witnesses through Canterbury,
in a triumphant bravado; But at the hearing before the Committee, they could
not produce one Witness that ever heard him swear one oath, It is true, that
one Wild of Vpstreet (a Ditcher) was fitted with russet-boots, and
Yeoman-like, and carried up to Westminster to witness one Oath against M.
Culmer; But when he came to the Committee door, his heart failed him: For the
truth is, That he had falsely accused Mr. Culmer; whom he met one Morning, and
told him, He did ride upon a Round-headed horse; but Mr. Culmer said little to
him, using no oath or evil word against him, as Thomas Heath who heard all that
was spoken was ready to witness, if Mr. Culmer had been called to his defense:
But a little after Wild fell sick, and consumed, and died in a fearful
manner. And that scandal touching Mr. Culmers protecting of Malignants; It was
raised by the persecutors from Harbledown, because he dealt courteously with a
Gentleman, who was taken to be the Lord Digby, being found at an Inn there in
the night: But the true Lord Digby rid through Canterbury that day, and escaped
over Sea. The Gentleman in his frolic put his scarlet cloak on the Can-maker,
and he put on the Can-makers lethern apron, and so danced in his gold lace; But
upon suspicion) the house was beset, and Mr. Culmer (then Minister there) was
called up at midnight, and went to the Justice at Canterbury, and did write a
Warrant at the Justices bed side, and called up Richard Redwood then Constable:
The young Spark kept his room with his naked Rapier, which be thrust through the
glasse-window: But Mr. Culmer entered in upon him alone, and he yielded and put
up his Rapier; whereupon Mr. Culmer promised him gentle carriage, which was
performed: For he went (as he desired with his (...) by his side, and with Mr.
Culmer alone, and the rabble not near him, and was brough a back way privately
to the Justice, and there delivered to the Constable; but he proved no Lord
Digby, but, etc. And that Mr. Culmer was no protector of Malignants, his
recited Cathedral History, and the Records of the Committee for Examinations,
and of the Council of State can testify.

One of Canterbury that said, He would fain go like himself to Westminster, to
witness against M. Culmer, had about five pounds toward his charges, when he
went up to witness, where Mr. Culmer made water in a dusty corner behind old
boards and rubbage, in the body of the Cathedral (where afterward the
Ammunition-wagons stood, as in Paul's London, and where afterward the Dutch
prisoners were kept) which Mr. Culmer was necessitated unto, at the time of the
demolishing the Idols there, when all the doors were shut, and those without
ready to knock out his brains, if he had gone forth to make water. And a
Gentlewoman (then of Mynster, now of Canterbury) being asked by the Chair man
of that Committee, What she could witness against Mr Culmer, answered, That she
heard Mr. Culmer say, That if her husband William Goldfinch, Would not agree to
pay his small Tithes at a rate in money, he expected his Tithes in kind of
T(...), Pigs. And she said further, Sir, I told Mr. Culmer at our house, that I
wondered that he would not go away from Mynster, and that it did not move his
patience to be so hated and houted at. And Sir, his answer to me was, That he
was a choleric man by nature, and soon moved, but he did wear a hat with broad
brims, Which did keep the rain from his collar. This was all she did, or could
accuse Mr. Culmer of, as appears in the Records of that Committee; which
Committee said, They found nothing against Mr. Culmer fit for their Cognizance
to eject a Minister: And the worthy Chairman gave them good counsel, and in
conclusion bid them Go home and live quietly: Whereupon the faction to have
their wills against Mr. Culmer, then offered a Petition to the Committee,
wherein they freely offered to give Mr. Culmer during his life, the whole
revenue of the Vicarage, and to provide a Minister at their own charge, upon
condition that Mr. Culmer might be removed from them: And in that Petition it
is propounded as an argument to have him cast out, That they had spent in
prosecuting him, two hundred and fifty pounds, and clamoured by word of mouth,
That they had spent about three hundred pound. But the answer to that was very
unpleasing; and Mr. Culmer said, Beneficium propter officium, and Officium
propter beneficium. But Flictere si nequeo superos Acheronta movebo. Presently
after that the Prosecutors, being returned home, two of them stirred up others
to confederate to carry away all Mr. Culmers Tythecorn that harvest, which they
did (almost all) accordingly; One that paid him a little was reproved for it by
one of the Confederates, who said to him, You wrong all the Parish in paying
your Tithes, seeing we are all agreed to pay none. One (when the Tithes were
demanded) answered, saying, Others do not pay, I am loath to foul the
Vicarage-barn with our little Tythe-corn. Another said, We have possession,
which is eleven points of the Law: The first point in Hawking is hold-fast.
Another said, I will pay no Tithes, but go along with my Neighbors, as dogs go
to Church, and take Neighbors fare, come what will come; But he a little after
riding in a Cart, it overthrew and killed the child that was with him in it,
and crushed his own Leg so, that it cannot be cured, but remains with wounds
and bruises that he (continuing lame) cannot go along with his Neighbors. A
little before that, he (hearing Mr. Culmer say in his prayer, Lord, thy mercy
is great to us; there be many in Hell, that never sinned as we have done, and
yet are out of it, it is thy mercy we have time to call for mercy; thereupon)
vowed, never to come to Church more, if M. Culmer preached: And being disabled
to go elsewhere, remains obstinate to this day, and glories in keeping his
vows: He is called Will Wounds, because of his usual oaths, by Wounds, etc. but
now he and others may read his sin in his punishment.

Another (a Sectary Leveller of another Parish) denied his Tithes, and gave
this reason of it, saying, I desire the ruin of all the Ministers in England,
and know no way better to effect it, than by starving them out, by keeping
their maintenance from them; and if it were in my power, I would sheath my
sword in the bowels of all the Ministers in England. Another refusing to pay
his Tithes, said, If the Parliament set Mr. Culmer on work, if they provide us
servants, let them provide them wages. The Tithe robbers servants would cry out
in the field, when the Tithe was gone, Ha! the Bird is flown, the Bird is
flown, and would hollow and hoop like mad men. Come (said a Sectary) Don't the
Priests men want boughs to mark out their Tithes, etc? Some did threaten his
servants from off their ground, saying, We know the Law forty thing: By Law you
have nothing to do to meddle about setting out the Tithe, we by Law can tithe
when we list, whether you be present or absent: His tything servant was knocked
down, and beaten, and bruised, and was after stripped before the Justice, who,
with others, saw the bruises. They would not Tithe in his servants presence,
but some left a little Tythe-corn in their absence, to color the matter. If
his servants waited all day, they would let the corn lie unheaped, and go home
at night, and after arise at midnight, and leave what Tithe they pleased, and
change the Tithe, and bring bad corn from elsewhere, and trash out of the Barn
to put in the room of good Tithe: Come Ned arise, we must go and do righteous
things; No Knave to the pretended Religious Knave; No enemy to the pretended,
yet false friend: As he that overtook the honest Traveller over night, and
supped, and lay with him; but next day morning, when thieves assaulted and
robbed the true man, the pretended friend joined with them.

And many other Tythe-robbing tricks were used, against which tricks there is
no-remedy provided in the Law: Whereupon Mr. Culmer printed two Books touching
the frauds in Tything, hoping that upon such Discoveries of the Defects of Law
and Justice about Tithes, either Ministers should have been left wholly to the
charity of people, or that better Laws would be made for their enjoyment of
Tithes, which are esteemed as their Livelihood, and in consideration of them
they pay Taxes, Fifths, etc. Yet the frauds of the lawless Tytherobber are
such, that upon the matter (though not intended by the makers of former Laws)
Tithes in kind are but a State-cheat, or mock-maintenance, those good Laws
being now outplodded by malicious and covetous people: I pray God that those
Books, especially that called The Lawless Tythe-robber discovered, may never
rise up in judgment against the Higher Powers, or against any other that have
read them. But those confederated Tyth-robbers acted so against M. Culmer, that
for two years together he had not half so much Tythe-revenue (one way or other)
as would pay his Fifths, and Tenths, and Taxes, which were severely exacted of
him, when almost all his Tithes were in the peoples hands: He had ten Troopers
at a time quartered upon him, horse and man; and was constrained to borrow
money of the next Justices Mr. Thomas Paramor and Major Foach to pay his Taxes,
which Taxes have been assessed and exacted to the utmost farthing of his
Living, and more, when all the Parish was eased a fifth part, some a full half.
The Persecutions and oppressions that way have been unparalled, and yet he
never complained of it, until they made that injury a rule of other
assessements, wherein they ease themselves and burden him. There was then
little or no relief for Ministers in Sequestered Livings, though he made many
journeys for relief about his Tithes: And the Sesse-book was denied him, that
he might see who occupied Marshland, and the Order of the Deputy Lieutenants
slighted by the Persecutors, who answered them at Canterbury, That Mr. Culmer
should not see it, but by Law, and so matters rested. And to add to his
oppressions, besides the scoffs formerly rehearsed, it was clamoured to him as
he rid in Mynster-street, Look how the Priests horse ears loll, he goes so often
to London, and can get nothing: Yet these men paid their Tithes in corn to the
full to the Non-resident Doctor, who had 1s. 6d. per Acre for the Marshland,
and Mr. Culmer was contented with 1s, yet could not, nor cannot enjoy that, as
the Minister of W. H. in Kent, abated 2d. of 1s. due by custom for the Acre,
hoping they would pay that freely, but I heard him say, That if he had abated
10d, and took 2d, he finds they would have been as backward to pay that. And
although Mr Culmer have forborne many for five, seven, ten years, and has not
sued them; yet he finds it to redound to his greater loss, and to their, and
others hardening, only to avoid contention; least thereby they should prejudice
the Gospel; but they now find by experience, woeful experience, that their
forbearance has hardened men to be more unrighteous, as soft fires harden some
things: By bearing one injury wicked men are invited to do more injury. A
Minister in Essex (Mr Willet) for peace-sake remitted 20lb due to him for
Tithes taken from him in Harvest, 1652. and the same Tythe-robber carried away
all his Tythe-corn in Harvest, 1653. And Mr. Culmer had the same experience in
Mynster, because he sued not those that carried away all his Tythe-corn in
Harvest, 1646. they carried away all also in Harvest, 1647. But before Harvest,
1648. The Sword of the Lord, and of Gideon made them pay their dues. Oh blessed
Law and Sword of Magistracy, thou prevailest more with wicked men, than the Law
of Nature, of Conscience, of Reason, or the Law in judgments of God himself!
But this is observable, that there is not one of the wilful Tythe-robbers
then, or now, but are confounded as to their estates, one, and all, to
admiration: One being a prisoner at the suit of others had thirty pound
forgiven him by Mr Culmer; yet within two days after the first Parliaments
dissolution, he clapped two Actions on Mr. Culmer, who afterward had eight pound
costs in those Suites; Now their own ears loll in other Parishes, while they
make their houses their prison for fear of Lawyers, and have no revenue out of
which they may pay Tithes, unless it be Tithe lice. And it is to be
considered, that these oppressors of Mr. Culmer did not only pay their dues
fully and quietly to the Non-resident, but were exceeding bountiful to their
beloved Curates, and paid a kind of Tithe or Contribution of Hay and Pease,
etc. to him for horse-meat, besides continual gifts and entertainment of him
and his wife. And to oppress Mr. Culmer the more, they regard not the Limits
of their Parish that he may know his maintenance, utterly refusing to go the
Bounds of it, though he have often privately and publicly entreated them.

And besides all these oppressions, one thing more in point of livelihood, I
thought fit to mention, That Mr Culmer having laid out about 5lb in demolishing
the Monuments of Idolatry at Mynster, by special Order according to the Act of
Parliament for their demolishing, cannot get his money so laid out. At his
first coming thither he often desired the Churchwardens to do that work
according to that Act: But the 500lb man being Churchwarden refused to act, and
said, He could not get a Sailor at Sandwich to climb up to the Crosses on the
Spire of the Steeple under 15lb. So that that work was left undone about a
whole year after Mr Culmers coming thither; But then Mr. Culmer was jeered by a
Sequestered Malignant Priest, who said to him, Physician heal thy self; telling
him of his actings at Canterbury: These words took such deep impression on him,
that he would no longer wait the Churchwardens leisure: But a day or two after,
being the 5th of Novem. he got up into the Steeple before day, and by
Moonlight, got up to the top of the Spire, seven roods or poles from the
ground, and did sit on the round Globe there; and did with a rope affix ladders
so, that it was then little danger to go up and down from the flat Steeple to
the top of the Spire. And then he came down and hired Peter Wotton, and Thomas
Austin to go up the Ladder, and demolish the two crosses there: The huge wooden
Cross covered with lead under the Vane, and the iron cross above that. And many
other Idolatrous Monuments, were demolished, and the Chancel ground levelled,
etc. by the Workmen and Masons, whom Mr. Culmer satisfied, but to this day he
cannot get one farthing of those charges repayed him, though the Justices have
ordered it according to that Act: And although he never demanded any thing for
his own actings about that work of Reformation.

And all this oppression did not quench the burning malice of the 500lb man and
his faction: They said, The greatest cross (the Priest) was yet remaining. And
they suffered the Churchyard to be without a gate, that the pasture there might
be common, and so it continued: at last they put a Wattle or Hurdle, in stead
of a Gate, which continued so for diverse years, to the laughter and derision of
all that passed by: And they handled the matter so, that none durst help the
Sexton to ring the great Sermon-bell on the Sabbaths: But Mr Culmers own
Servants did constantly do that service. After that one of the chief of the
faction took away the Key of the Church from the Sexton, and kept the doors
locked, when about two hundred people (Parishioners and others) were assembled
in the Churchyard, on the Sabbath morning, so that they were all constrained to
return home without any public Worship. A Grandee said aloud, The Church-doors
shall not be opened: Another crowded up to the door, and said, Let me see who
dares break open the Church-door? And the next Sabbath Mr Culmer got into the
Church at the broken Chancel windows, which were left unrepaired about half a
year by the 500lb man, in hope that Mr. Culmer should pay for all the ruins,
which came through the wilful neglect of the 500lb man's speedy reparations of
those windows, which belonged to him to repair as Parson, according to the said
Act of Parliament; There was not at first ten foot of glass broken there: And
when Mr. Culmer was gotten into the Church, he rung the Bells, and when people
were come thither, he unbolted one door, which had no lock, and let them into
the Church: But about a quarter of an hour after he had begun the Public
Worship, there came into the Church seven men of the Parish with their hats on,
clamouring and yelling like Tigers: Five of them rushed into his Desk: One
called him Thief, because he came not in at the door, but at the window: And
those five laid hands on him, and thrust him violently, and the other two at
the door tugged and pulled him; but they could not move him, until the
Constable Robert Wells (seeing him look pale, as if he were fainting) prayed
him to give way: They thrust his ribs on the edge or point of a plank, and bent
them, and crushed his body so, that he vomited blood, and purged blood: They
dragged him by head and shoulders out of the Church; but he did not lift up his
hand against them; yet I have heard him say, He could easily have killed them
every one with his steeletto: But he often said, He blessed God, who kept his
hands from shedding their bloods; and that he admired at the goodness of God
to him, that gave him such a spirit of meekness upon such an occasion,
contrary to his natural and usual disposition in his own defense, when violence
has been done him: But when he was gotten out of their clutches in the
Churchyard, he presently ran into the Church at the other Church-door, and went
on in the Public Worship, and anon the Rioters came in again, clamouring with
their hats on: But Mr. Culmer went on in his reading of the Chapter, and then
many good people were come into the Church: And Mr. Har(...)is of Birchington,
and many Parishioners came out of their seats, one said, They should have his
heart-bloud before they should touch Mr. Culmer again: And then they laid hands
on the Rioters, who pressed forwards to come at Mr. Culmer: But they were all
crowded and tugged in a throng down to the lower end of the Church, where being
left, they went out into the Churchyard, to (...) themselves; But while Mr.
Culmer was praying before Sermon(...)he Pulpit, they came in again clamouring as
before, but (...) press toward him; But they interrupted him, and said, He
should not preach then, though it should cost them their lives: Then said M^
Culmer, though you will not let me preach, yet (I hope) you will let me read a
little Scripture out of the Bible, and I will come down: They yielded to that:
Then he read out of Genesis 19. how they pressed upon Lots door in Sodom, and how
fire and brimstone presently consumed them, and he applied it to the Rioters.
Then he read Numb. 16. of Corah, Dathan and Abiram; And 2 Chronicles. 36. 15. They
abused his Messengers, etc. Then Jer. 18. 18. and Matthew. 23. Oh Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, etc. Then they clamoured: But Mr.
Culmer desired them to hear one Text of Scripture more, and he said, he would
come down; whereupon they were silent: Then he read, Romans 13. All Powers are
ordained of God, etc. and he that resists receives damnation. Then he
dismissed the Congregation, and came down.

No marvel if his Highness in his Commission for Ejecting scandalous
Ministers, and placing Godly Ministers in their rooms, provide against Riots,
which, it seems, there was just cause to fear. Such practices have been in many
other Parishes also, where the Bishops, Non-residents, and ignorant, and
drunken Curates have let in the Devil, who, now he is to be cast out in these
blessed days of the Son of Man, rends and tears, as he dealt with the
possessed man in the Gospel, when he saw he must be cast out: When there was
like Priest like people, and where it is so now, and the strong man is in
possession, all was and is in peace, and honey-love between Minister and people
in many Parishes, where there is no articling or complaint against most
scandalous Priests, that humor the people in their superstition and
profaneness. But if faithful Ministers be placed in their rooms; then the
Devil roars against such Ministers; He moves his Vassals to spend their bodies
in journeys, their estates in expenses, their souls in Tythe-robbings, lies,
slanders, riots, persecutions, to worry out such Ministers; They seem to say,
when such Ministers of Christ are sent to them, as the Devils said to Christ
himself, Art thou come to torment us before the time? Neighbors, stand to it
against this devilish Round-headed Priest, and either keep him out, or weary
him out, or else we shall be weary of our lives, we shall be so plagued with
him, with his bawling at Church, and new Round-headed tricks.

But (to proceed) in the afternoon of that rioted Sabbath, they placed a guard
of men under the broken Chancel windows, which they had be daubed with filthy
sir-reverence; but Mr. Culmer vaulted over the heads of the guard, who had not
the hearts to touch him; and (being got into the Church) he tolled the Bells,
and unbolted the Church-door, and preached that afternoon, and no Rioters acted
against him; But the next Sabbath (when he was got into the Church in the
morning, and went to ring) the clappers were all taken out of all the five
Bells, so that none of the Bells could speak (as they use to say:) But he went
home, and took his wives great iron-pestle, and went up into the Steeple, and
tonged the Bells with the pestle, in stead of clappers, and did preach twice
that Sabbath.

One of these Rioters, who said Mr. Culmer was a thief, was after that a
Pirate, a thief at Sea, being a Cavalier Captain, and was slain at Sea. And
another of the Rioters that pulled out the clappers, a lusty young man, was the
first of that Parish that wanted a clapper to ring his knell: He used, when he
saw Mr Culmer returned from London (whether he was necessitated to go often in
his own defense, and needs must he run whom the Devil drives) the Rioter used
to swear fearfully, and say, Has not the Devil broke his neck yet? Is he not
hanged yet? And the next Sabbath after the Riot, they sent about the Parish, to
warn people from coming to Church, and when any said, They would come, then the
Messenger prayed them that they would not tell that they were sent; but now the
Messenger is lame, and another looks behind him. At last there came a Warrant
from the Committee of Parliament for Plundered Ministers, to the Sheriff to
raise Forces and assist Mr Culmer against the Ricters; And some of the Parish,
who opposed the Rioters, went to the Earl of Warwick, who was Lord Admiral
then, and lay at Walmer Castle; He presently sent his Warrant to have the Peace
kept. Afterward two Justices did sit upon the Riot, and the Rioters were bound
over to the Sessions; and there indicted and found guilty, and fined each of
them forty shillings, which they received again from their good masters and
dames, by a Collection in the Parish. But Mr Culmer did not prosecute the Law
against any of them for the assault and battery, neither had he his charges
expended at the Justices sitting about the Riot, and about journeys, Warrants,
etc. about 8lb. He had no recompense for his blood and bruises, though the
Physicians and Chyrurgions bills were costly. When the Justices sat at Mynster
upon the Riot, a godly man of the next Parish (St Laurence Parish) where they
had no Minister at all, seeing these actings, said, Here is a stir against a
Minister, we would praise God if we had a Minister: Then the 500lb man, and
three more (I have their Names in writing) said, Would to God, if it were Gods
blessed will, that we were in your case, and had no Minister neither, if it
were Gods sweet will and pleasure. At the Sessions the Ringleader and
Incendiary of the Rioters, being called to the Bar, the Judge called him the
Trumpeter, because he being decrepid and limping, only clamoured: But he put up
a Petition, and these Articles to the Bench against Mr Culmer; These Articles,
I say, and only these,

1. That the said Mr. Culmer did preach, That many be like the Dog in the
manger, that will not let the Horse eat, nor eat himself. 2. That he preached,
That a man was taken up at Sea alive, swimming with a Testament in his bosom,
and his flesh soaked, as if sodden. 3. That the Popish-Priest did drink all,
supernaclum. 4. That the Papists reserve the Communion bread in a box, and give
it to dying men, who die with their mouths full of it. 5. That Satan was a
subtle Fox, and was above five thousand year old. 6. That one called him a
soul-murtherer, and he took no course to clear himself. 7. That he said in his
Prayer, Lord, thou know there be many in hell, better than we, which is a
dangerous thing to bring weak Christians into the sin of despair. 8. That he
prayed, Lord, how long will thou avenge our blood on them that dwell on the
earth? Lord, give the scarlet whore plenty of blood to drink, for she is
worthy: We do think it a dangerous thing to meddle with the judgment of God,
to direct him how he shall punish sinners. 9. He said the Rebels in Ireland
caused a Protestants guts to be wound out alive. 10. That he laid aspersion of
Malignants upon some of the Parish. 11. When the Parishioners pitched upon Mr.
to be their Minister, Mr. Culmer said, The poor of the Parish did set their
hands, because he would give two messes of porridge to Mr. Culmers one, which
is enough to discourage any Minister from coming amongst us, as if we more
regarded the food of our bodies, than of our souls, which are immortal.
These Articles are to be seen under their own hands, they were delivered to
Mr. Culmer after the Justices had perused them: But the two last Articles were
wholly forged against him; And that of the man taken up at Sea, is in the Book
of Martyrs. And after this Riot, the Minister of the next Parish dying, most of
that place came usually to Mynster Church; And especially two Justices of
Peace, and Deputy Lieutenants came with their Families constantly, for about
two years, until it did please God to provide a godly Minister for them in
their own Parish: But their coming pleased not the faction; for (to use the
Gentlemen's own words) the style over which they were to come on the Sabbath to
the Church, was bedawbed with reaking hot sir-reverence, of purpose by some
that waited their coming, so that they were constrained to have a gap made in
the hedge to go through. And the wife of the 500lb man (who told her husband,
She edified most by Mr. Culmer 's Ministry, and desired him to carry her no
more about to other Parishes with him on the Sabbath) when she was gone home in
the Sabbath noontide, a sir-reverence was laid in her Pew in the Church: But a
stranger (a Gentlewoman of London) coming from the next Parish before her to
Church, when Divine Worship was begun, kneeling down suddenly in the Pew, was
so bedawbed with that stinking excrement, that she was constrained to strip her
white Sattin-peticoat over her feet in public, in the Church, in the time of
divine Worship, and wrapping it up, gave it to her man over the Pew, in the
face of all the Congregation. And many other abuses at home and abroad have
been put upon M. Culmer for his good affection to the present Powers and
Government, enough to fill a volume.

One of the Grandees of the Faction that cried All, All in the Church at
Mynster (seeing him in Sandwich when the mock-Prince was there, the day before
the Kentish Petitioning with Swords) made a clamor against him in the open
streets as he passed by, to incense the numerous crew there against Mr. Culmer,
but he then escaped.

And at Canterbury, he coming thither from London about Noon upon the 25th day
of December, 1647. called Christmas Day; and being in his Inn, a tumult was
made in the streets against godly men which opened their Shops that day; and
when Mr. Culmer heard the Mayor was knocked down, he was running out to help the
Mayor: But Mr Joseph Phillips at the sign of the Saracens-head, shut his doors,
and he and his men laid hands on Master Culmer, and kept him in, and a little
after he was persuaded to ride out at the back gate; But he was not gone half a
quarter of an hour, but the Rioters came in, and searched for him, and would
not be persuaded but that he was in the house, and swore, They would hang the
Round-headed Rogue; and afterward he was informed, they would have hanged him
over the Cathedral-gate, where he helped to pull down the large Image of
Christ, with the holy Ghost in form of a Dove over his head, in full
proportion. And he then riding through the back-street, there were few people
there: for all were in a tumult in the High Street, after some
Plumporridge-Priests (as M. Culmer used to call them) had ended their Sermons:
But at North gate street, some women seeing him ride that day with his Cloak
bag behind him, railed at him, saying, Oh Rogue, will not you give Christ his
day? he was compelled to escape the dirt thrown at him, to run the Gantlet,
or through Purgatory, as they call it. And on Moonday-morning (according to his
promise to a friend) he returned to Canterbury, having heard nothing of their
search for him the Saturday before: And at North-gate-street there were few
people: But two women there asked him, If he were Mr. Culmer, which when they
knew, Oh Sir, said they, ride no further, for the City-gates are shut, and they
are all together by the ears, and some in Canterbury swore, If they had taken
you upon Saturday, they would have stoned you to death, or hanged you: But
(being mindful of his promise) rid on to the midst of Ruttenton-lane; but upon
better consideration, he took this as a warning from God, and returned to
Forditch, where he wrote a Letter to excuse his not coming according to
promise, and then he rode to Sir James Oxendens, where after Dinner the News
being seconded of the Rising in Canterbury, he and his Son (being
Deputy Lieutenants) sent Orders to raise the trained Bands; and a Regiment came
from the Wild of Kent, which quelled the Rioters, who were many of them
carried to Leeds Castle: But when Mr. Culmer came to Canterbury at the coming
in of those forces, a woman in North-gate said Oh Mr Culmer, there is good
quarter for you now in Canterbury. But I cannot conceive for which of Mr.
Culmers good works in Canterbury any there should stone him, whose Ministry
they enjoyed gratis for many years, and where he endeavored with the hazard of
his life, to quench their fires in Dover-lane, and elsewhere, and where he has
leaped into a deep whirl-pit, and dived to save life, and fetched up the party
from the bottom, when he was Minister at Harbledown, as hundreds there know,
being eyewitnesses thereof.

But in the year 1648. the Scout and the 500lb man, and their Faction, One, and
All, All, All, proved themselves Malignants with a witness, by their practice
and actings in the Kentish Rising, wherein diverse of them were Commanders, and
were Sequestered; The Scout was a Captain therein. Two days before the Rising
they summoned a meeting at Church, to sign the Cavaller-Petition, which when
Mr. Culmer had read, he earnestly dissuaded them from subscribing it; The
Petition cried down Taxes, and would have the Army disbanded, etc. But Mr.
Culmer showed them the necessity of Taxes, to defend our selves against the
enemies of our Religion, lives, etc. and that wars were chargeable, as Physic
in sickness, more chargeable than ordinary Diet, and that we were in a
Tempest, and at such times men throw their goods overboard, to save their
lives, and that these Taxes were not ordinary, but upon necessity; And that the
Kings Taxes of Ship Money, etc. were made without a Parliament, and without
necessity, and that these illegal pressures were taken away. Then one of the
chief of the Faction (who after was a Commander, and an Imprisoner) said, The
Parliament has taken a Flea out of our bosom, and put in a Serpent: And Mr
Culmer speaking against the disbanding the Soldiers, said, The Wolves would
make peace with the Shepherds, upon condition they would hang up their Dogs;
The Shepherds desirous of peace, hung up their Dogs, but when the Dogs were
gone, the Wolves devoured Sheep and Shepherds too: And this my father applied,
showing, that the Army kept us, Governors and People from bloody Wolves in
Ireland, Papists, Atheists, etc. Many thereupon refused to subscribe, but the
All, All, All-man cried out, Pen and Ink: Then Mr Culmer left them subscribing:
And the next day Richard Langley of St Laurence Parish (a very godly man, and
active for the State) was set upon, and put to it to fly for his life, and was
pursued to Mynster, and murdered there upon Thourn-down: But the Gentleman
Cavalier that sent out the pursuers, and furnished them with Horse and Pistols,
did afterward cut his own wife in pieces, and was hanged at Sandwich. This man
was a great jeerer at praying by the Spirit, a contemner of public Ordinances,
a great Incendiary against Mr. Culmer, and came to him, reviled and berogued
him before hundreds of people at a public meeting in the Tents at Mynster at a
muster. And Mr. Culmer being at home, when the Rising began, knew nothing of
it, or of the murder of Langley, until his servant came home, and told him how
matters stood, and that they were arming in the street to fall upon him, and
that there was a Court of Guard at Ebbsfleet, and at Sarr: Whereupon he
(knowing himself unable to defend himself in his own house) presently escaped
out, before they came to his house; And (night coming on) he went to the River
side next Ash, and did swim in his clothes over the River; and having left his
Boots when he took water, he went without shoes on the South of the River, till
he was past Ebbsfleet, where the Court of Guard was, on the other side of the
River: And then he crossed the Haven again nearer Sandwich, at a place called
Little-joy. And who it was shot at him, God knows, but he was fain to play
the Dydapper, and crossing the Haven again below Sandwich (Mr Wade now
Gentleman Usher at White Hall can tell more of this.) Then he traveled
barefoot on the sands to Deal, where he had entertainment at Pilot Culmers
house, whither he came at break of day, and there he had a gray Suit, and
refreshed himself: But presently there begun a Tumult before the door against
him, and they swore, They would hang the Round-headed Priest, and the Rout
increased; but by means of Mr Wood a Physician there, and his said Kinsman John
Culmer and Mr Potter, he escaped and got safe to Deal-Castle to Col.
Rainsborow, which was his intent, when he first set out. The noble Colonel
used him very courteously. And Mr ^^lmer of Sandwich (coming newly out of the
Isle) told Mr. Culmer how his friend Richard Langly lay in his blood, and that
they said, If they had taken him, he should not have died that death; and that
he had no way to escape them, but by swimming. And that day the Colonel
carried Mr Culmer aboard with him in his Longboat, and put him aboard Captain
Nubery, in the Hunter Frigot, which was then dispatched for London, whither M
Culmer came one Saturday night late. And the next day he preached in his gray
Pilots suit at Mr Whitakers Church, called St Mary Bermonsey, and encouraged
the people to stand fast and cleave to the present Cause, etc. And when the
Lord Fairfax marched into Kent, he returned homeward with the Army, and came
safe to his Family and Charge, where they had plundered him of horses and other
goods: But in Mr. Culmers absence, the Faction had got a like Priest, like
People, and they had Service Book worship, Gloria Patri, and Dominus vobiscum,
etc. Afterward they compelled Mr. Culmer to pay what they had lavished upon a
Malignant Priest in his absence, and he (for peace sake) gave them their
demands.

And in his absence a grand Persecutor of his of another Parish (who came to
the Ale house at Mynster) incensed them against him, jeering and calling him,
The godly, able, orthodox Divine. This man sent word to Mr Paramour (at his
first advance in that Rising) That he never did see a Sword scarletted, but he
was slain at Wye, and left stark naked lying in his blood. And a little after
that Rising the 500lb man died: And for diverse years after Mr. Culmer lived
peaceably without disturbance, until he entered upon the Administration of the
Lord's Supper, and refused to give it to all, as all the Island Ministers then
gave it. (Hinc illae lachryma) Then some opposed that way publicly, and a new
stir began against him; The Communion Table Carpet was cut out into Breeches,
slanders raised, Tithes detained. And diverse did hate him upon other grounds
also, because after private and public means used by him in his Ministry to
reform abuses in the Parish, and that not prevailing, and all others refusing
to act by complaints to the Magistrate, Mr. Culmer complained against diverse
swearers and drunkards, and prophaners of the Sabbath; And (amongst the rest)
he complained of the Scouts prodigious executions; And he indicted him (with
the consent of diverse of the Parish) for erecting two new Cottages there, to
the great prejudice of the Commonwealth, and of that Parish, which has been
lately charged with above 300lb a year to the poor, who cannot all be employed
there, and will (in all likelihood, if Cottages and Inmates be so increased)
pull the rich men out of their houses, as they have done the Minister out of
the Church. It is not so proper, I confess, for a Minister to indict such men,
and to attend the public Sessions, with such complaints, though for the common
good, as England finds by experience, and will find more need of, and
encouragements to such Indictments: but in that Parish none dare act or show
themselves publicly in such things, although the Parish be undone by them: But
I heard Mr. Culmer say, He was resolved to wave the scandal, and odium, and
prejudice, that came to him by such actings, seeing they were of neicessity for
the common good, and all others refuse to act, the conceived himself to have a
calling from God to do it as a Parishioner there. Upon which account he
conceives himself bound in conscience, never to cease such endeavors for the
common good, though it much prejudice his private. And Mr Culmer indicted the
Scout for barring a common sheep-way, for which he had a Verdict against him at
the last Summer Sessions at Canterbury.

For these and other actings for the public, Mr Culmer is hated and
persecuted, especially now by the Scout, who (being no Parishioner of Mynster,
yet occupying Lands there) to be avenged of Mr. Culmer, has detained his
Tithes for three years last past, and has procured five more to join with him
to put into the Exchequer a joint Answer with him, wherein they inserted
scandalous and false Articles, and did swear, That Mr. Culmer is an enemy to
the present State, etc. But the Honorable Barons of that Court, ordered Mr.
Culmer five pounds costs merely for the scandal in their Answer, which they
ordered to be expunged. Whereupon the enraged Scout, and his Adherents went
lately to a Justice of Peace, who is a Commissioner for Ejecting of Scandalous
Ministers in Kent, to whom they accused Mr. Culmer, as follows, viz

That his breath smelt of drink one Evening. That he said, that Pontius was his
Christen-name, and Pilate his surname. That he preached on Psalm. 51. 18. and
said, by Sion was meant the Church, and by Jerusalem the Civil State. That he
preached. That a Toleration was better than a Persecution. And when the Justice
said, He was sorry to hear complaints against a Minister upon such weak
grounds: It was replied (by him that first clamoured against Mr. Culmer for
want of prayers in his Christmas-holy-dayes, and Trumpeter in the Riot on the
Sabbath) That if they above had that about a Toleration before them, they would
make something of it. This man was lately brought in to be Parish-Clark by the
Faction, for his good service done against Mr. Culmer many ways, especially in
being Ringleader in that Riot, and for railing at Mr Culmer at the Church-wall
before and after Sermon, and never going to Church elsewhere, only attending
that evil work, and affronting Mr Culmer coming and going to Church for diverse
years, they would have no assistant to the Minister to save charges, so that Mr
Culmer besides praying, reading, expounding, and preaching twice every Sabbath,
and catechizing constantly, was constrained to name and read the Psalms to the
people, for this man reads very false, and now he comes to Church for gain; he
uses when Mr Culmer is preaching on the Sabbath to make mows and Apes faces,
and laugh, and make other ridiculous gestures in the Church, to move contempt
against Mr Culmer, and laughter; which diverse godly men make great complaint
of, to see Gods name so taken in vain, and his Ordinances and Sabbaths so
profaned, which is no small Persecution of, and grief to Mr Culmer. But the
truth is that Mr Culmer said, Pontius was as his Christen-name, etc. And the
Scout said openly at the Sessions, (when the Verdict was given against him) Mr.
Culmer, you have let my purse blood, but I will let your blood to some tune ere
long, I Will warrant you; But he may be silent about blood, if he look home (but
I forbear impertinent recriminations.) And (in prosecution of that
blood-letting) one of the said Answerers (endeavoring to fill up the measure
of his deceased Fathers persecutions against Mr. Culmer, from whom he has
detained his Tithes for above three years, to a great value, and who is a
profane scoffer at the Communicants, calling them, Mr. Culmer 's Disciples:
And in opposition leaves the Chancel windows unrepaired, so that the rain
dashed into Mr Culmers face lately at that Administration, and rained into the
Cup, and wet the bread exceedingly, and the Communion Table-cloath was as wet
as if it had been taken out of the water) came lately alone to the said
Commissioners house, and offered to put in Articles against Mr Culmer, but he
said, He had none written, only he desired to see the Ordinance for the
Ejecting of Scandalous Ministers, which was read to him, as to the Sca^dals
therein enumerated, as just causes of the Ejection of such Ministers; and he
answered to every Article by it self, That he had nothing against Mr. Culmer
touching it. But in conclusion he said, Although I have nothing against M.
Culmer, which the Articles will reach, yet I will denl somewhere else against
him for words he has sp^ken of my wife: Whereupon he petitioned and complained
of Mr Culmer to his Highness, and thereupon it is since boasted in Canterbury,
That Mr. Culmer shall be cast out of Mynster. A quondam Singing-man of the
Cathedral, said in the open streets, That he heard Mr Culmer had routed C. S.
at the Sessions, but C. S. would rout him out of Mynster; And a Cavalier of
Canterbury said to one of Mynster, N^w your Round-headed Priest of Mynster
shall be cast out. And they boast of their friends above in the Army. But they
need not seek further revenge for that then their own avenging themselves by
their calumnies, and false accusations and railings against Mr Culmer; Besides
the real wrongs they have done Mr Culmer, especially in keeping his Maintenance
from him, and combining to undo him by charges in Law. But it seems nothing
will satisfy their malice and rage, but his purses bleeding to death, by
taking away his means of Livelihood and Subsistence, by his Ejection or Removal
from his place and Station.

But if this project against Mr Culmer should prevail without the merits of the
Cause, to have their wills of him at such a cheap rate without their price of
near 200lb per annum, or (rather than fail) I suppose so much as Haman offered
to pay into the Exchequer for the ruin of Mordecai, and others: Then what
triumph would the Cathedral, Prelatical, Cavalier party in Canterbury, and
elsewhere, make against him, and against all his worthy friends, and against
that Cause of God to which he has constantly adhered? How would they insult,
against whom Personally he has acted, for the suppressing of vice, and brought
them to condign punishment? They triumph already in hope and confidence to
prevail; but then (no doubt) they would rejoice, and send gifts one to another,
at the ruin of him, who had tormented them; They would make, if not Bonfires,
yet Books and Ballads, as they did in the rehearsed Libel, called, The Razing
of the Record, viz.

When the strongest was King, there rose up a thing
Some called a Divine for a Cause a, etc.
And there was found in Canterbury, at the beginning of this Parliament, a base
jeering, quibling Catch, or Libel, written against Mr Culmer, viz.

And what is the News in Kent?
They want a Parliament:
I drink to thee Jack Bennet,
And what is the News in Tennet?
Blew Dick must out of Mynster,
His Wife must now turn Spinster:
He loved the Parliament;
But now he does lament:
The Bishops he did hate;
But now Dick's out of Date:
Cathedral he did maul;
But now he spits his gall:
He broke the painted-Glass,
But now he cries alas:
Then drink to me brave Jack,
And let the Roundhead pack
And if pretenses of not Edifying be cause of oppositions, and general enmity
should prevail to remove a Minister without the merits of the Cause (which I
fear is the only ground of the present attempt against Mr Culmer) especially
when such a rioting, mutinous, persecuting crew act against him: If they should
be so indulged, as to wave the Commissioners and Common Law; Would not other
Parishes be thereby encouraged to endless unwearied, impudent Persecutions of
faithful Ministers, in hope to prevail and weary him out one way or other, one
time or other, especially under that pretense of not Edifying. And many times
there is pretense of universal cordial opposition in a Parish, when only one or
two lead all the rest, to subscribe Petitions, clamor, etc. against a
Minister, and all follow the Ring leaders for company, or other respects, as
Sheep follow a Ram drawn through a gap, or leap out of a Boat, as daily
experience shows, as they at Harbledown did, where they barked for company.
It Is a sure sign commonly, that a Minister is good, when all the Parish is
against him: and commonly when a whole Parish loves a Minister, and speaks well
of him, he is stark naught (Woe be unto you when all men shall speak well of
you) A like Priest like people; as a Neighbour-Priest to Mr Culmer said to the
Parishioners, when he had called them up into the Chancel; Neighbors, I would
gladly give you all content, pray do I read too much or too little of the
Service Book? And every Parish has as much right to have the Minister removed,
because they oppose him, as any one Parish, and thereby faithful Ministers
shall be runagates, and wandering Levites, all the Nation over. Besides the very
removal of a Minister, which is not voluntary, is scandalous and prejudicial to
his Ministry, whithersoever he is removed; Mr Culmers Persecution from
Goodnestone was taken up as a scandal, and cause of opposition, and clamor
against him at Harbledown: And whithersoever M. Culmer is removed, he (above
all Ministers) must expect hatred, and opposition, and persecution from
ignorant, profane, disaffected persons, which abound in every Parish; For not
only the Persecutors that have their wills of him to remove him, will pursue
him, and stir up enmity against him whithersoever he goes, as they at
Harbledowx did incense them at Mynster, and those at Mynster did incense them
at Cliff against him, if he had been removed thither, which was endeavored.
But some of the Parliament opposed it for reasons of State, that Mutineers
should not be encouraged, etc. It is the nature of persecutors so to pursue the
persecuted (read Act. 14. 19.) And he must the rather expect such opposition,
because the Ly-bels, printed and published, and spread all the Nation over,
have many lies so loud against him in all places: He was assaulted at
Billingsgate in London (in the time of the Kentish Rising after he was fled to
London in 1648.) where the people were incensed against him by a Scribe that
did belong to the Archbishops Registry at Canterbury, and Mr. Culmer hardly
escaped with his life, retreating in Summers-Key with his Rapier-Cane, and Mr
Mapsden took him into his house: And about two years since P. K. a debauched
Malignant-Priest, incensed the people against him in the Minories without
Algate; but the Gentleman that is now Deputy there, prayed Mr. Culmer to come
into his house, lest they should murder him. And an Elder and Preacher of J. T.
pretended Separate Congregation (who is Curate to that Non-resident Pastor, who
lives near thirty miles from diverse of his scandalous flock at Mynster) meeting
Mr Culmer lately upon the road, affronted him, and used opprobrious terms, and
cried out, Mr. Culmer, Mr. Culmer, Pray sell me four pounds-worth of the holy
Ghost, repeating those words again and again, and said, I know you had enough
of the holy Ghost from the Bishop to afford a good pennyworth. And afterward
overtaking Travelers, boasted of this, and told them, How he had handled the
Antichristian Priest. And this Sectary said at Sandwich to Mr. Culmer before
many witnesses, If you be not all Antichristian Priests then the Devil fetch me
away before all this company; And being reproved for his execration, he said,
If you be not all Antichristian Priests, then I pray God to command the Devil
to fetch me away body and soul before all this company. So that it is now come
to pass that M. Culmer may say with St Paul, In journeying often, in perils of
waters, in perils of robbers, in perils by mine own countrymen, in perils by
the Heathen, in perils in the city, in perils in the wilderness, in perils in
the Sea, in perils amongst false brethren, 2 Cor. 11. 26.

But to conclude, whatsoever the Adversaries of Mr Culmer suggest against him
in their secret or public accusations, and calumnies as if he were such a
Pestilent fellow, etc. yet he is still the same man as he was before attested
to be, both in his life, and doctrine, and good affection to the present
Powers: And of this assertion, I will only set down some late Testimonials, and
conclude: One of these Testimonials is from Captain Thomas Wilson, who is the
present Deputy Governor of Dover-Castle, and a Commissioner for Ejecting of
Scandalous Ministers, as follows,

For my very Loving Friend Mr. Richard Culmer, Minister of the Word at Mynster
in the Isle of Thanet, These.
Worthy Sir,
I have herein enclosed sent you (knowing your active and public spirit) some
of the Armies Declarations, which show the grounds of the late Acts; pray let
Major Foach receive one, with my due respects; and use the best means you can
to let them be published, and made known to the honest people of the Isle, as
in your wisdom you shall judge meet. In haste I remain,

Sir, Dover-Castle, April 24. 1653. Your assured Friend, Thomas Wilson.


Another Testimonial is subscribed by nine of the said Commissioners in Kent,
as follows:

We whose Names are here under written, do hereby testify, that Richard Culmer
Minister of Mynster in the Isle of Thanet, in the County of Kent, is of good
Life and Conversation, and a diligent Preacher of Gods Word, and has
constantly and eminently showed his good affection to the State, and to
Reformation. Dated the 27th of June, 1655.

Henry Oxenden, John Boys, John Dixwell, Thomas Foach, Thomas Monius, Francis
Tayleur Preacher of Christs-Church Canterbury, John Durant Preacher there
likewise, John Player, John Swan, Nicholas Thorowgood Minister of Muncton,
Robert Webber Minister of Sandwich.

Another Testimonial is from the chief Sea-Town in that Isle (where Mr Culmer
(with others) preaches a weekly Lecture gratis) as follows,

We Parishioners of S(...)s in the Isle of Thanet, in the County of Kent, whose
Names are here under written, do hereby freely certify, that Mr. Richard
Culmer Minister of Mynster in the said Isle, does (with others) freely preach a
weekly Lecture in the said Parish, to the good liking of the said Parishioners;
and that we receive much benefit by his Ministry, to our Edification and
Consolation: In witness whereof we have hereunto set our hands this ninth Day
of August, 1656.

Gregory Parker, Stephen Bishop Churchwarden, Richard Genuey, William Rook,
William Prince, John Busher, John Piers, John Tomlyn, Humphrey Pudner, William
Grant, Thomas Mussared, William Terry, Roger Wright, Richard Omer, John Biggs,
Thomas Watts, etc.

And it may add something to this Apology and defense, for the continuing and
upholding of Mr Culmer in his place, that he being threescore years of age,
has laid out (besides Fifths and Taxes) above 200lb in Reparations, Buildings,
Gardens, Orchyards, Pond, Fences, etc. at the Vicarage-house in Mynster, which
was an unfit habitation at his first coming thither; There having lived no
resident hous-keeping Vicar in fifty years before; And he was at all this cost
upon a Sequestered Vicarage, chiefly relying on the Justice and favor of his
Highness, knowing that Vicarage to be only in his Highnesses Personal Patronage
and disposal; after the death of the present sequestered Incumbent; And all this
Mr. Culmer often said he did, In faith and confidence of Gods continuing to own
his own Cause, and the present Government under His Highness, whom God
preserve. But that which does especially blast and weaken the project and
pretenses, for his removal from his place and station (wherein he was settled by
Authority, and has been upheld by the Justice of the Higher Powers, and
preserved by the special Providence of God) is, that there he has edified
souls; Having (maugre the Devil and all his Instruments) the seal of his
Ministry there, by the beating down with the spiritual weapons of his warfare
the strongholds of Satan, ignorance, drunkenness, etc. He having by his
Ministry there, turned many from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan
to God which the most obstinate Adversaries have confessed in diverse places.
There was lately one of Canterbury, who being with his Tenant at the Inn at
Mynster, heard one railing on Mr Culmer, to whom he said, I have heard you
speak evil of Mr. Culmer, I have known him better spoken of: But have you no
good to say of him? Pray deal plainly, Does he no good amongst you? The answer
was, We think the Parish is better for him in two things, One is, That there is
more knowledge, (because besides his Preaching) he does constantly c(...)chise.
And the other is, That there is not half so much drunkenness in the Parish, as
there was before he came to be Minister here. And if any should maliciously and
impudently deny this Seal of his Ministry, and clamor, whisper, or suggest,
that he ought to be removed, because he does no good there, nor never will,
because he is opposed, which (as is showed before) is the usual plea of
Persecutors, to have their wills without the merits of the cause, in an
arbitrary way, and move the Christian Magistrate to join in the Persecution;
yet the thing it self does speak and confute that untruth: For many in the
Parish (the chiefest) are convinced by the power of the Word in his Ministry;
and are come in freely to the ways and Government of Jesus Christ in
Church Fellowship, giving a particular account of their Christian knowledge;
and promising to be willing to be admonished, etc. And the number of visible
Saints increases in that Parish daily, blessed be God: And there is not only a
very great Reformation in that Parish, but in the whole Isle, as to good
affection to the Present State, and to Reformation; since the establishing of a
Godly, Well-affected Magistracy there, and since the settling of a faithful
Ministry, almost in all the seven Parishes of that Isle, Wherein (as in Zabulon
and Napthali) by the way of the Sea, the people that sat in darkness see
great light.

FINIS.

