THE True Intellectual System OF THE UNIVERSE: THE FIRST PART; WHEREIN, All the
REASON and PHILOSOPHY OF ATHEISM is Confuted; AND Its IMPOSSIBILITY
Demonstrated.

By R. CVDWORTH, D. D.

Origenes, (...).

LONDON, Printed for Richard Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred MAJESTY,
MDCLXXVIII.

VICTORY Aristotle (...) Pythagoras THEISTS (...)

CONFUSION (...) Epicurus A^^^^mandes ATHEISTS (...)

^^LIGION



(...). Plato. L. 10. de leg:

To the Right Honorable HENEAGE LORD FINCH, BARON of Daventry, Lord High
CHANCELLOVR of England, and one of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
MY LORD,
THE many Favors I have formerly Received from You, as they might justly
challenge, whenever I had a fit opportunity, a Public and Thankful
Acknowledgment; so have they encouraged me at this time, to the Presumption of
this Dedication to Your Lordship. Whom, as Your Perspicacious Wit, and Solid
Judgment, together with Your Acquired Learning, render every way a most
Accomplished and Desirable Patron; so did I persuade my self, that Your Hearty
Affection to Religion, and Zeal for it, would make You not Unwilling, to take
that into Your Protection, which is written wholly in the Defense thereof; so
far forth, as its own Defects, or Miscarriages, should not render it incapable
of the same. Nor can I think it probable, that in an Age of so much Debauchery,
Skepticism, and Infidelity, an Undertaking of this kind, should be judged by
You, Useless or Unseasonable. And now, having so fit an Opportunity, I could
most willingly expatiate in the large Field of Your Lordship's Praises; both
that I might do an Act of Justice to Your self, and provoke others to Your
Imitation. But I am sensible, that as no Eloquence, less then that of Your own,
could be fit for such a Performance; so the Nobleness and Generosity of Your
Spirit is such, that You take much more pleasure in Doing Praiseworthy things,
then in Hearing the Repeated Echo's of them. Wherefore in stead of pursuing
Encomiums, which would be the least pleasing to Your self, I shall Offer up my
Prayers to Almighty God, for the Continuation of Your Lordship's Life and
Health; That so His MAJESTY may long have such a Loyal Subject and Wise
Counselor; the Church of England, such a Worthy Patron; the High Court of
Chancery, such an Oracle of Impartial Justice; and the whole Nation, such a
Pattern of Virtue and Piety. Which shall ever be the Hearty Desire of,

MY LORD, YOUR LORDSHIP'S Most Humble and most Affectionate Servant, R.
Cudworth.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
THOUGH, I confess, I have seldom taken any great pleasure, in reading other
men's Apologies, yet must I at this time make some my self. First therefore, I
acknowledge, that when I engaged the Press, I intended only a Discourse
concerning Liberty and Necessity, or to speak out more plainly, Against the
Fatal Necessity of all Actions and Events; which upon whatsoever Grounds or
Principles maintained, will (as We Conceive) Serve The Design of Atheism, and
Undermine Christianity, and all Religion; as taking away all Guilt and Blame,
Punishments and Rewards, and plainly rendering a Day of Judgment, Ridiculous:
And it is Evident that some have pursued it of late, in order to that End. But
afterward We considered, That this which is indeed a Controversy, concerning
The True Intellectual System of the Universe, does, in the full Extent thereof,
take in Other things; the Necessity of all Actions and Events being maintained
by Several Persons, upon very Different Grounds, according to that Tripartite
Fatalism, mentioned by us in the beginning of the First Chapter. For First, The
Democritick Fate, is nothing but The Material Necessity of all things without a
God: it supposing Senseless Matter, Necessarily Moved, to be the only Original
and Principle of all things: Which therefore is called by Epicurus, The
Physiological; by us, the Atheistick Fate. Besides which, The Divine Fate is
also Bipartite; Some Theists supposing God, both to Decree and Do all things
in us, ( Evil as well as Good) or by his Immediate Influence to Determine all
Actions, and so make them alike Necessary to us. From whence it follows, That
his Will is no way Regulated or Determined, by any Essential and Immutable
Goodness, and Justice; or that he has nothing of Morality in his Nature, he
being only Arbitrary Will Omnipotent. As also That all Good and Evil Moral,
to us Creatures are mere Theticall or Positive things; (...), and not (...), by
Law or Command only, and not by Nature. This therefore may be called, The
Divine Fate Immorall, and Violent. Again, There being other Divine Fatalists,
who acknowledge such a Deity, as both suffers other things, besides it self, to
Act, and has an Essential Goodness and Justice in its Nature; and
consequently, That there are things, Just and Unjust to us Naturally, and not
by Law and Arbitrary Constitution only; and yet nevertheless take away from
men, all such Liberty, as might make them capable of Praise and Dispraise,
Rewards and Punishments, and Objects of Distributive Justice: they conceiving
Necessity to be Intrinsecall to the Nature of every thing, in the Actings of
it; and nothing of Contingency to be found any-where; from whence it will
follow, That nothing could possibly have been Otherwise, in the whole World,
then it Is. And this may be called The Divine Fate Moral, (as the other
Immorall,) and Natural, (as the other Violent;) it being a Concatenation, or
Implexed Series of Causes, all in themselves Necessary, depending upon a Deity
Moral, (if we may so speak) that is, such as is Essentially Good, and
Naturally Just, as the Head thereof; the First Contriver and Orderer of all.
Which kind of Divine Fate, has not only been formerly asserted by the
Stoics, but also of late, by diverse Modern Writers. Wherefore of the Three
Fatalisms, or False Hypotheses of the Universe, mentioned in the beginning of
this Book; One is Absolute Atheism: Another Immorall Theism, or Religion
without any Natural Justice and Morality: (all Just and Unjust, according to
this Hypothesis, being mere Theticall or Factitious things, Made by Arbitrary
Will and Command only:) The Third and Last, such a Theism, as acknowledges not
only a God, or Omnipotent Understanding Being, but also Natural Justice and
Morality, Founded in him, and Derived from him; nevertheless no Liberty from
Necessity anywhere, and therefore no Distributive or Retributive Justice in the
World. Whereas these Three Things are, (as we conceive) the Fundamentals or
Essentials of True Religion. First, That all things in the World, do not Float
without a Head and Governor; but that there is a God, an Omnipotent
Understanding Being, Presiding over all. Secondly, That this God being
Essentially Good and Just, there is (...), Something in its own Nature,
Immutably and Eternally Just, and Unjust; and not by Arbitrary Will, Law, and
Command only. And Lastly, That there is Something (...), or, That we are so
far forth Principles or Masters of our own Actions, as to be Accountable to
Justice for them, or to make us Guilty and Blameworthy for what we do Amiss,
and to Deserve Punishment accordingly. Which Three Fundamentals of Religion,
are Intimated by the Author to the Hebrews, in these Words; He that Comes to
God, must Believe that He Is, and That He is a Rewarder of those who seek him
out. For to Seek out God here, is nothing else, but to Seek a Participation of
his Image, or the Recovery of that Nature and Life of his, which we have been
Alienated from. And these Three Things, namely, That all things do not Float
without a Head and Governor; but there is an Omnipotent Understanding Being
Presiding over all: That this God, has an Essential Goodness and Justice, and
That the Differences of Good and Evil Moral, Honest and Dishonest, are not by
mere Will and Law only, but by Nature; and consequently, That the Deity cannot
Act, Influence, and Necessitate men, to such things as are in their Own Nature,
Evil: and Lastly, That Necessity is not Intrinsecall to the Nature of every
thing; But that men have such a Liberty, or Power over their own Actions, as
may render them Accountable for the same, and Blameworthy when they do Amiss;
and consequently, That there is a Justice Distributive of Rewards and
Punishments, running through the World; I say, These Three, (which are the most
Important Things, that the Mind of man can employ it self upon) taken all
together, make up the Wholeness and Entireness of that, which is here called by
us, The True Intellectual System of the Universe; in such a Sense, as Atheism
may be called, a False System thereof: The Word Intellectual, being added, to
distinguish it from the other, Vulgarly so called, Systems of the World, (that
is, the Visible and Corporeal World) the Ptolemaick, Tychonick, and Copernican;
the Two Former of which, are now commonly accounted False, the Latter True. And
thus our Prospect being now Enlarged, into a Threefold Fatalism, or Spurious
and False Hypothesis of the Intellectual System, making all things Necessary
upon several Grounds; We accordingly Designed the Confutation of them all, in
Three Several Books. The First, Against Atheism, (which is the Democritick
Fate) wherein all the Reason and Philosophy thereof is Refelled, and the
Existence of a God Demonstrated; and so that (...), or Material Necessity of
all things, Overthrown. The Second, For such a God as is not mere Arbitrary
Will Omnipotent, Decreeing, Doing, and Necessitating all Actions, Evil as well
as Good; but Essentially Moral, Good and Just; and For a Natural Discrimen
Honestorum and Turpium; whereby another Ground of the Necessity of all Humane
Actions will be Removed. And the Third and Last, Against Necessity Intrinsecall
and Essential to all Action; and for such a Liberty, or Sui-Potestas, in
Rational Creatures, as may render them Accountable, capable of Rewards and
Punishments, and so Objects of Distributive or Retributive Justice: by which
the now only remaining Ground, of the Fatal Necessity of all Actions and
Events, will be Taken away. And all these Three under that One General Title,
of The True Intellectual System of the Universe. Each Book having besides, its
own Particular Title: as, Against Atheism; For Natural Justice and Morality,
Founded in the Deity; For Liberty from Necessity, and a Distributive Justice of
Rewards and Punishments in the World. And this we conceive may fully satisfy,
concerning our General Title, all those, who are not extremely Critical or
Captious, at least as many of them as have ever heard of the Astronomical
Systems of the World: so that they will not think us hereby Obliged, to Treat
of the Hierarchy of Angels, and of all the Several Species of Animals,
Vegetables, and Minerals, etc. that is, to write De Omni Ente, of whatsoever is
Contained within The Complexion of the Universe. Though the Whole Scale of
Entity is here also taken notice of; and the General Ranks of Substantial
Beings, below the Deity, (or Trinity of Divine Hypostases) Considered: which
yet, according to our Philosophy, are but Two; Souls of several Degrees, (
Angels themselves being included within that Number) and Body or Matter: as
also the Immortality of those Souls Proved. Which notwithstanding is Suggested
by us, only to Satisfy some men's Curiosity. Nevertheless we confess that this
General Title, might well have been here spared by us, and this Volume have
been Presented to the Reader's View, not as a Part or Piece, but a Whole
Complete and Entire thing by it self, had it not been for Two Reasons; First,
Our beginning with those Three Fatalisms, or False Hypotheses of the
Intellectual System, and Promising a Confutation of them all, then when we
thought to have brought them within the Compass of One Volume; and Secondly,
Every other Page's, throughout this whole Volume, accordingly bearing the
Inscription, of Book the First, upon the Head thereof. This is therefore that
which in the First place, we here Apologize for, our Publishing One Part or
Book alone by it self; We being surprised in the Length thereof; Whereas we had
otherwise Intended Two more along with it. Notwithstanding which, there is no
Reason, why this Volume should therefore be thought Imperfect and Incomplete,
because it has not All the Three Things at first Designed by us; it containing
All that belongs to its own Particular Title and Subject, and being in that
respect no Piece, but a Whole. This indeed must needs beget an Expectation, of
the Two following Treatises, (especially in such as shall have received any
Satisfaction from this First;) concerning those Two other Fatalisms, or False
Hypotheses mentioned; to make up our Whole Intellectual System Complete: The
One, to Prove, That God is not mere Arbitrary Will Omnipotent, (without any
Essential Goodness and Justice) Decreeing and Doing all things in the World, as
well Evil as Good; and thereby making them alike Necessary to us; from whence
it would follow, that all Good and Evil Moral, are mere Thetical, Positive, and
Arbitrary things, that is, not Nature, but Will; Which is the Defense of
Natural, Eternal, and Immutable Justice, or Morality: The Other, That Necessity
is not Intrinsecal to the Nature of Every thing, God and all Creatures, or
Essential to all Action; but, That there is Something (...), or, That we have
some Liberty, or Power over our own Actions: Which is the Defense of a
Distributive or Retributive Justice, dispensing Rewards and Punishments
throughout the whole World. Wherefore we think fit here to advertize the
Reader concerning these, That though they were, and still are, really intended
by us; yet the Complete Finishing and Publication of them, will notwithstanding
depend upon many Contingencies; not only of our Life and Health, the Latter of
which, as well as the Former, is to us very Uncertain; but also of our Leisure,
or Vacancy from other Necessary Employments.

In the next place, We must Apologize also, for the Fourth Chapter; inasmuch
as, th^ugh in regard of its Length, it might rather be called a Book, then a
Chapter; yet it does not Answer all the Contents Prefixed to it. Here therefore
must we again, confess our selves Surprised; who when we wrote those Contents,
did not suspect in the least, but that we should have Satisfied them all within
a lesser Compass. And our Design then was, besides Answering the Objection,
against the Naturality of the Idea of God, from the Pagan Polytheism, (we
having then so fit an Occasion) to give such a further Account of the Idolatry
and Religion of the Gentiles, as might prepare our way for a Defense of
Christianity, to be subjoyned in the Close: it being not only agreeable to the
Sense of Ancient Doctors, but also expressly declared in the Scripture, That One
Design of Christianity, was to abolish and extirpate the Pagan Polytheism and
Idolatry. And our Reasons for this Intended Defense of Christianity, were.
First; Because we had Observed, that some Professed Opposers of Atheism, had
either incurred a Suspicion, or at least suffered under the Imputation, of
being mere Theists, or Natural Religionists only, and no hearty Believers of
Christianity, or Friends to Revealed Religion. From which either Suspicion or
Imputation therefore, we thought it Justice to free our selves, we having so
Unshaken a Belief, and firm Assurance, of the Truth of the whole Christian
Doctrine. But, Secondly and Principally; Because we had further Observed it, to
have been the Method of our Modern Atheists, to make their First Assault
against Christianity, as thinking that to be the most Vulnerable; and that it
would be an easy Step for them from thence, to Demolish all Religion, and
Theism. However, since the Satisfying the Former Part of those Contents, had
already taken up so much Room, that the Pursuit of the Remainder, would have
quite Excluded, our principally Intended Confutation of all the Atheistick
Grounds; the forementioned Objection being now sufficiently Answered; there was
a necessity, that we should there break off, and leave the further Account of
the Pagan Idolatry and Religion, together with our Defense of Christianity, to
some other more convenient Opportunity.

And now we shall Exhibit to the Reader's view, a Brief and General Synopsis,
of the whole following Work, together with some Particular Reflections upon
several Parts thereof; either for his better Information concerning them, or
for their Vindication: some of which therefore, will be of greater Use, after
the Book has been read, then before. The First Chapter, is an Account of the
Atomick Physiology, as made the Foundation of the Democritick Fate. Where the
Reader is to understand, that this Democritick Fate, which is One of the Three
False Hypotheses of the Intellectual System, there Mentioned, is the very
Self-same thing with the Atomick Atheism; the only Form of Atheism, that has
publicly appeared upon the Stage, as an Entire Philosophic System; or has
indeed been much taken notice of in the World, for these Two Thousand years
past. For, Though it be true, That Epicurus, (who was also an Atomick Atheist,
(as is afterward declared) having, in all probability, therefore a Mind to
Innovate Something, that he might not seem to have borrowed all from
Democritus,) did by violence introduce Liberty of Will, into his Hypothesis;
for the Salving whereof, he ridiculously devized, That his Third Motion of
Atoms, called by Lucretius, -- Exiguum Clinamen Principiorum: Yet was this, as
Cicero long since observed, a most Heterogeneous Patch, or Assumentum of his,
and altogether as Contradictious to the Tenor of his own Principles, as it was
to the Doctrine of Democritus himself. There can be nothing more Absurd, then
for an Atheist to assert Liberty of Will: but it is most of all Absurd, for an
Atomick One. And therefore our Modern Atheists do here plainly disclaim
Epicurus, (though otherwise so much Admired by them;) and declare open War
against this Liberty of Will: they Apprehending that it would unavoidably
Introduce Incorporeal Substance; as also well Knowing, that Necessity, on the
contrary, Effectually overthrows all Religion; it taking away Guilt and Blame,
Punishments and Rewards; to which might be added also, Prayers and Devotions.

And as there was a necessity for us here, to give some Account of that Ancient
Atomick Physiology, with which Atheism now became thus Blended and Complicated;
so do we in this First Chapter, chiefly insist upon Two things concerning it.
First, That it was no Invention of Democritus nor Leucippus, but of much
greater Antiquity: not only from that Tradition transmitted by Posidonius the
Stoic, That it derived its Original from one Moschus a Phoenician, who lived
before the Trojan Wars, (which plainly makes it to have been Mosaicall;) but
also from Aristotle's Affirmation, That the greater part of the Ancient
Philosophers entertained this Hypothesis; and further because it is certain,
that diverse of the Italicks, and particularly Empedocles, before Democritus,
Physiologized Atomically: which is the Reason, he was so much applauded by
Lucretius. Besides which, it is more then a Presumption, that Anaxagoras his
Homoeomery or Similar Atomology, was but a Degeneration from the True and
Genuine Atomology of the Ancient Italicks, that was an Anomoeomery, or Doctrine
of Dissimilar and Unqualified Atoms. Wherefore all that is True concerning
Democritus and Leucippus, is only this, That these men were indeed, the First
Atheizers of this Ancient Atomick Physiology, or the Inventors and Broachers of
the Atomick Atheism. Which is Laertius his True meaning, (though it be not
commonly understood,) when he records of them, that they were the First, who
made Unqualified Atoms, the Principles of all things in the Universe without
exception; that is, not only of Inanimate Bodies, (as the other Ancient
Religious Atomists, the Italicks, before had done) but also of Soul and Mind.

And whereas we conceive this Atomick Physiology, as to the Essentialls
thereof, to be Unquestionably True, viz. That the only Principles of Bodies,
are Magnitude, Figure, Site, Motion, and Rest; and that the Qualities and Forms
of Inanimate Bodies, are Really nothing, but several Combinations of these,
Causing several Phancies in us: (Which excellent Discovery therefore, so long
ago made, is a Notable Instance of the Wit and Sagacity of the Ancients:) So
do we in the Next place, make it manifest, that this Atomick Physiology rightly
understood, is so far from being either the Mother or Nurse of Atheism, or any
ways Favorable thereunto, (as is Vulgarly supposed;) that it is indeed, the
most directly Opposite to it of any, and the greatest Defense against the same.
For, First, we have Discovered, That the Principle, upon which this Atomology
is Founded, and from whence it Sprung, was no other then this, Nothing out of
Nothing, in the True Sense thereof; or, That Nothing can be Caused by Nothing:
from whence it was concluded, that in Natural Generations, there was no new
Real Entity produced, which was not before: the Genuine Consequence whereof was
Twofold; That the Qualities and Forms of Inanimate Bodies, are no Entities
Really distinct from the Magnitude, Figure, Site and Motion of Parts; and, That
Souls are Substances Incorporeal, not Generated out of Matter. Where we have
showed, That the Pythagorick Doctrine, of the Prae-Existence of Souls, was
founded upon the very same Principle, with the Atomick Physiology. And it is
from this very Principle rightly understood, that Ourselves afterward,
undertake to Demonstrate, The Absolute Impossibility of all Atheism. Moreover,
we have made it undeniably Evident, That the Intrinsic Constitution of this
Atomick Physiology also is such, as that whosoever admits it, and rightly
understands it, must needs acknowledge Incorporeal Substance; which is the
Absolute Overthrow of Atheism. And from hence alone, is it certain to us,
without any Testimonies from Antiquity, that Democritus and Leucippus, could
not possibly be the First Inventors of this Philosophy, they either not rightly
Understanding it, or else wilfully Depraving the same: and the Atomick Atheism,
being Really nothing else, but a Rape committed upon the Atomick Physiology.
For which Reason, we do by no means here Applaud Plato, nor Aristotle, in their
Rejecting this most Ancient Atomick Physiology, and Introducing again, that
Unintelligible First Matter, and those Exploded Qualities and Forms, into
Philosophy. For though this were probably done by Plato, out of a Disgust and
Prejudice against the Atomick Atheists, which made him not so well Consider nor
Understand that Physiology; yet was he much disappointed of his Expectation
herein; That Atomology which he Exploded, (rightly understood), being really
the Greatest Bulwark against Atheism; and on the contrary, Those Forms and
Qualities which he Espoused, the Natural Seed thereof; they, besides their
Unintelligible Darkness, bringing Something out of Nothing, in the Impossible
Sense; which we show to be, the Inlet of all Atheism. And thus in this First
Chapter, have we not only quite Disarmed Atheism of Atomicism, or showed that
the Latter, (rightly understood,) affords no manner of Shelter or Protection
to the Former; But also made it manifest, that it is the greatest Bulwark and
Defense against the same. Which is a thing afterward further insisted on.

As to the Second Chapter, we have no more to say, but only this; That here we
took the Liberty, to Reveal the Arcane Mysteries of Atheism, and to Discover
all its Pretended Grounds of Reason, that we could find anywhere suggested in
Writings; those only excepted, that are peculiar to the Hylozoick Form, (which
is directly contrary to the Atomick;) and that to their best advantage too:
nevertheless to this end, that these being afterward, all Baffled and
Confuted, Theism might by this means, Obtain the Greater and Juster Triumph
over Atheism.

In the Third Chapter, we thought it necessary, in order to a fuller
Confutation of Atheism, to consider all the other Forms thereof, besides the
Atomick. And here do we first of all, make a Discovery of a certain Form of
Atheism, never before taken notice of, by any Modern Writers, which we call the
Hylozoick: which notwithstanding, though it were long since started by Strato,
in way of Opposition to the Democritick and Epicurean Hypothesis; yet because
it afterward slept in perfect Silence and Oblivion, should have been here by
us passed by Silently; had we not had certain Knowledge of its being of late
Awakened and Revived, by some, who were so sagacious, as plainly to perceive,
that the Atomick Form could never do their business, nor prove Defensible: and
therefore would attempt to carry on this Cause of Atheism, in quite a different
way, by the Life and Perception of Matter: as also that this in all
probability, would ere long publicly appear upon the Stage, though not
Barefaced, but under a Disguize. Which Atheistick Hypothesis, is partly
Confuted by us, in the Close of this Third Chapter, and partly in the Fifth.

In the next place, it being certain, that there had been other Philosophic
Atheists in the world before those Atomicks, Epicurus and Democritus; we
declare, out of Plato and Aristotle, what that most Ancient Atheistick
Hypothesis was; namely, the Eduction of all things, even Life and Understanding
it Self, out of Matter, in the way of Qualities; or as the Passions and
Affections thereof, Generable and Corruptible. Which Form of Atheism is styled
by us, not only Hylopathian, but also Anaximandrian: however we grant some
probability of that Opinion, That Anaximander held an Homoeomery of Qualified
Atoms, as Anaxagoras afterward did; the difference between them being only
this, that the Latter asserted an Unmade Mind, whereas the Former Generated all
Mind and Understanding, out of those Qualified Atoms, Hot and Cold, Moist and
Dry, Compounded together: because we Judged this Difference not to be a
sufficient Ground to multiply Forms of Atheism upon. And here do we give
notice, of that strange kind of Religious Atheism, or Atheistick Theogonism,
which asserted, not only other Understanding Beings, Superior to Men, called
by them Gods; but also amongst those, one Supreme or Jupiter too; nevertheless
Native, and Generated at First out of Night and Chaos, (that is, Senseless
Matter) as also Mortal and Corruptible again into the same.

Besides which, there is yet a Fourth Atheistick Form taken notice of, out of
the Writings of the Ancients, (though perhaps Junior to the rest, it seeming to
be but the Corruption and Degeneration of Stoicism) which concluded the whole
World, not to be an Animal, (as the Pagan Theists then generally Supposed) but
only One Huge Plant or Vegetable, having an Artificial, Plantal, and Plastic
Nature; as its Highest Principle, Orderly disposing the Whole, without any Mind
or Understanding. And here have we set down, the Agreement of all the
Atheistick Forms, (however differing so much from one another) in this One
General Principle, viz. That all Animality, Conscious Life and Understanding,
is Generated out of Senseless Matter, and Corruptible again into it.

Wherefore in the Close of this Third Chapter, we insist Largely, upon an
Artificial, Regular and Plastic Nature, devoid of express Knowledge and
Understanding, as subordinate to the Deity: Chiefly in way of Confutation, of
those Cosmo-Plastick, and Hylozoick Atheisms. Though we had a further Design
herein also, for the Defense of Theism: for as much as without such a Nature,
either God must be supposed to Do all things in the world Immediately, and to
Form every Gnat and Fly, as it were with his own hands; which seems not so
Becoming of him, and would render his Providence, to Humane Apprehensions,
Laborious and Distractious; or else the whole System of this Corporeal
Universe, must result only from Fortuitous Mechanism, without the Direction of
any Mind: which Hypothesis once admitted, would Unquestionably, by degrees,
Supplant and Undermine all Theism. And now from what we have declared, it may
plainly appear, that this Digression of ours, concerning an Artificial, Regular
and Plastic Nature, (Subordinate to the Deity) is no Wen, or Excrescency, in
the Body of this Book; but a Natural and Necessary Member thereof.

In the Fourth Chapter; After the Idea of God fully declared, (where we could
not omit his Essential Goodness and Justice, or (if we may so call it) the
Morality of the Deity; though that be a thing properly belonging to the Second
Book, The Confutation of the Divine Fate Immoral) There is a large Account
given of the Pagan Polytheism; to satisfy a very considerable Objection, that
lay in our way from thence, Against the Naturality of the Idea of God, as
Including Oneliness and Singularity in it. For had that, upon enquiry, been
found True, which is so commonly taken for granted, That the generality of the
Pagan Nations, had constantly, Scattered their Devotions, amongst a multitude
of Self-Existent, and Independent Deities, they acknowledging no One Sovereign
Numen; This would much have Stumbled the Naturality of the Divine Idea. But now
it being on the Contrary, clearly Proved, That the Pagan Theologers all along,
acknowledged One Sovereign and Omnipotent Deity, from which all their other
Gods were Generated or Created; we have thereby not only Removed the
forementioned Objection out of the way; but also Evinced, That the Generality
of mankind, have constantly had a certain Prolepsis or Anticipation in their
Minds, concerning the Actual Existence of a God, according to the True Idea of
him. And this was the rather done Fully and Carefully by us; because we had not
met with it sufficiently performed before: A. Steuchus Eugubinus, having
labored m^st in this Subject: from whose profitable Industry though we shall
no way detract; yet whosoever will compare, what he has written, with ours,
will find no Just Cause to think ours Superfluous and Unnecessary; much less, a
Transcription out of his. In which, besides other things, there is no Account
at all given, of the Many Pagan, Poetical and Political Gods, what they were;
which is so great a part of our Performance, to prove them Really to have been,
but the Polyonymy of one God. From whence it follows also, That the Pagan
Religion, though sufficiently Faulty, yet was not altogether so Nonsensical, as
the Atheists would represent it, out of design; that they might from thence
infer, all Religion to be nothing but a mere Cheat and Imposture: they
worshipping only One Supreme God, in the several Manifestations of his
Goodness, Power, and Providence throughout the World, together with his
Inferior Ministers. Nevertheless we cann^t deny, that being once engaged in
this Subject, we thought our Selves the more Concerned, to do the business
thoroughly and effectually, because of that Controversy lately Agitated,
concerning Idolatry, (which cannot otherwise be Decided, then by giving a True
Account of the Pagan Religion;) and the so Confident Affirmations of some, That
none could possibly be Guilty of Idolatry, in the Scripture Sense, who Believed
One God the Creator of the whole world: Whereas it is most certain on the
contrary, that the Pagan Polyteism and Idolatry, consisted not in worshipping
Many Creators, or Uncreateds, but in giving Religious Worship to Creatures,
besides the Creator; they directing their Devotion, (as Athanasius plainly
affirms of them,) (...), To One Uncreated only; but besides him, to many
Created Gods. But as for the Polemick Management of this Controversy,
concerning Idolatry, we leave it to other Learned Hands, that are already
engaged in it.

Moreover, We have in this Fourth Chapter, largely Insisted also upon the
Trinity. The Reason whereof was, Because it came in our way; and our Contents
engaged us thereunto, in order to the giving a full Account of the Pagan
Theology: it being certain, that the Platonicks and Pythagoreans at least, if
not other Pagans also, had their Trinity, as well as Christians. And we could
not well avoid, the Comparing of these Two together: Upon which Occasion we
take notice of a Double Platonic Trinity; the One Spurious and Adulterated, of
some latter Platonists; the Other True and Genuine, of Plato himself,
Parmenides, and the Ancients. The Former of which, though it be Opposed by us
to the Christian Trinity, and Confuted; yet betwixt the Latter and that, do we
find a Wonderful Correspondence: which is Largely Pursued, in the Platonic
Christians Apology. Wherein notwithstanding, nothing must be looked upon, as
Dogmatically Asserted by us, but only Offered, and Submitted to the Judgment
of the Learned in these Matters; We confining our selves, in this Mysterious
Point of the Holy Trinity, within the Compass of those its Three Essentials
declared: First, That it is not a Trinity of mere Names and Words, or of
Logical Notions only: But of Persons or Hypostases. Secondly, That none of
those Persons or Hypostases, are Creatures, but all Uncreated. And Lastly, That
they are all Three, Truly and Really One God. Nevertheless we acknowledge,
That we did therefore, the more Copiously insist upon this Argument, because of
our then Designed, Defense of Christianity; we conceiving that this
Parallelism, betwixt the Ancient or Genuine Platonic, and the Christian
Trinity, might be of some use to satisfy those amongst us, who Boggle so much
at the Trinity, and look upon it as the Choak-Pear of Christianity; when they
shall find, that the Freest Wits amongst the Pagans, and the Best Philosophers,
who had nothing of Superstition, to Determine them that way, were so far from
being shy of such an Hypothesis, as that they were even Fond thereof. And that
the Pagans had indeed such a Cabbala amongst them, (which some perhaps will yet
hardly believe, notwithstanding all that we have said,) might be further
convinced, from that memorable Relation in Plutarch, of Thespesius Solensis,
who after he had been looked upon as Dead for Three days, Reviving; Affirmed
amongst other things, which he thought he saw or heard in the mean time in his
Ecstasy, This, Of Three Gods in the Form of a Triangle, pouring in Streams into
one another; Orpheus his Soul, being said to have arrived so far; accordingly
as from the Testimonies of other Pagan Writers, we have proved, that a Trinity
of Divine Hypostases, was a part of the Orphick Cabbala. True indeed, our
Belief of the Holy Trinity, is Founded upon no Pagan Cabbala's, but only
Scripture Revelation: it being that which Christians are, or should be, all
Baptized into: Nevertheless these things are Reasonably noted by us to this
end; That that should not be made a Prejudice Against Christianity, and
Revealed Religion; nor looked upon as such an Affrightfull Bugbear or Mormo in
it; which even Pagan Philosophers themselves, and those of the most
Accomplished Intellectuals, and Uncaptivated Minds, though having neither
Councils, nor Creeds, nor Scriptures; had so great a Propensity and Readiness
to entertain, and such a Veneration for.

In this Fourth Chapter, We were necessitated by the Matter it self, to run out
into Philology and Antiquity; as also in the other Parts of the Book, we do
often give an Account, of the Doctrine of the Ancients: which however some
Over-severe Philosophers, may look upon Fastidiously, or Undervalue and
Depretiate; yet, as we conceived it often Necessary, so possibly may the
Variety thereof not be Ungrateful to others; and this Mixture of Philology,
throughout the Whole, Sweeten and Allay the Severity of Philosophy to them: The
main thing which the Book pretends to, in the mean time, being the Philosophy
of Religion. But for our parts, we neither call Philology, nor yet Philosophy,
our Mistress; but serve our selves of Either, as Occasion requires.

As for the Last Chapter; Though it Promise only a Confutation of all the
Atheistick Grounds; yet do we therein also Demonstrate, the Absolute
Impossibility of all Atheism, and the Actual Existence of a God. We say
Demonstrate; not A Priori, which is Impossible and Contradictious; but by
Necessary Inference, from Principles altogether Undeniable. For we can by no
means grant to the Atheists; That there is no more, then a Probable Persuasion,
or Opinion to be had, of the Existence of a God; without any Certain Knowledge
or Science. Nevertheless it will not follow from hence; That whosoever shall
Read these Demonstrat^ons of ours, and Understand all the words of them, must
therefore of Necessity, be presently Convinced, whether he will or no, and put
out of all manner of Doubt or Hesitancy, concerning the Existence of a God. For
we Believe That to be True, which some have Affirmed, That were there any
Interest of Life, any Concernment of Appetite and Passion, against the Truth of
Geometrical Theorems themselves; as of a Triangle's Having Three Angles Equal
to Two Right; whereby men's Judgments might be Clouded and Bribed;
Notwithstanding all the Demonstrations of them, many would remain, at least
Skeptical about them. Wherefore mere Speculation, and Dry Mathematical Reason,
in Minds Vnpurified, and having a Contrary Interest of Carnality, and a heavy
Load of Infidelity and Distrust sinking them down; cannot alone beget an
Unshaken Confidence and Assurance of so High a Truth as this, The Existence of
One Perfect Understanding Being, the Original of all things. As it is certain
also on the contrary, That Minds Cleansed and Purged from Vice, may without
Syllogisticall Reasonings, and Mathematical Demonstrations, have an Undoubted
Assurance of the Existence of a God, according to that of the Philosopher;
(...), Purity Possesses men with an Assurance of the Best things: whether this
Assurance be called a Vaticination or Divine Sagacity, (as it is by Plato and
Aristotle) or Faith, as in the Scripture. For the Scripture-Faith, is not a
mere Believing of Historical Things, and upon Inartificiall Arguments, or
Testimonies only; but a Certain Higher and Diviner Power in the Soul, that
peculiarly Correspondeth with the Deity. Notwithstanding which, Knowledge or
Science, added to this Faith, (according to the Scripture Advice) will make it
more Firm and Steadfast; and the better able to resist those Assaults of
Sophistical Reasonings, that shall be made against it.

In this Fifth Chapter, as sometimes elsewhere, we thought Our selves
concerned, in Defense of the Divine Wisdom, Goodness, and Perfection, against
Atheists, to maintain, (with all the Ancient Philosophic Theists,) the
Perfection of the Creation also; or that the Whole System of things taken all
together, could not have been Better Made and Ordered then it is. And indeed,
This Divine Goodness and Perfection, as Displaying and Manifesting it self in
the Works of Nature and Providence, is supposed in Scripture, to be the very
Foundation of our Christian Faith; when that is Defined, to be the Substance
and Evidence Rerum Sperandarum; that is, of Whatsoever is (by a Good man) to be
hoped for. Notwithstanding which, it was far from our Intention, therefore to
Conclude, That Nothing neither in Nature nor Providence, could be Otherwise
then it is; or, That there is Nothing left to the Free Will and Choice of the
Deity. And though we do in the Third Section, insist largely, upon that Ancient
Pythagorick Cabbala, That Souls are always United to some Body or other; as
also, That all Rational and Intellectual Creatures, consist of Soul and Body;
and suggest several things, from Reason and Christian Antiquity, in favor of
them both: yet would we not be Understood, to Dogmatize in either of them, but
to Submit all to better Judgments.

Again, we shall here Advertise the Reader, (though we have Cautioned
concerning it, in the Book it self) That in our Defense of Incorporeal
Substance against the Atheists, However we thought our selves concerned, to say
the utmost that possibly we could, in way of Vindication of the Ancients, who
generally maintained it to be Unextended, (which to some seems an Absolute
Impossibility;) yet we would not be supposed Ourselves, Dogmatically to Assert
any more in this Point, then what all Incorporealists agree in, That there is a
Substance Specifically distinct from Body; namely such, as Consists Not of
Parts Separable from one another; and which can Penetrate Body; and Lastly, is
Self-Active, and has an Internal Energy, distinct from that of Local Motion.
(And thus much is undeniably Evinced, by the Arguments before proposed.) But
whether this Substance, be altogether Unextended, or Extended otherwise then
Body; we shall leave every man to make his own Judgment concerning it.

Furthermore, We think fit here to Suggest, That whereas throughout this
Chapter and Whole Book, we constantly Oppose the Generation of Souls, that is,
the Production of Life, Cogitation and Understanding, out of Dead and Senseless
Matter; and assert all Souls to be as Substantial as Matter it self; This is
not done by us, out of any fond Addictedness to Pythagorick Whimseys, nor
indeed out of a mere Partial Regard to that Cause of Theism neither, which we
were engaged in, (though we had great reason to be tender of that too;) but
because we were enforced thereunto, by Dry Mathematical Reason; it being as
certain to us, as any thing in all Geometry, That Cogitation and Understanding,
can never possibly Result out of Magnitudes, Figures, Sites, and Local
Motions, (which is all that ourselves can allow to Body) however Compounded
together. Nor indeed in that other way of Qualities, is it better Conceiveable,
how they should emerge out of Hot and Cold, Moist and Dry, Thick and Thin;
according to the Anaximandrian Atheism. And they who can persuade themselves of
the Contrary, may Believe, That any thing may be Caused by any thing; upon
which Supposition, we confess, it Impossible to us, to prove the Existence of a
God, from the Phenomenon.

In the Close of this Fifth Chapter; Because the Atheists do in the Last place
Pretend, Theism and Religion to be Inconsistent with Civil Sovereignty; we were
necessitated, briefly to Unravel and Confute, all the Atheistick Ethics and
Politics, (Though this more properly belong to our Second Book Intended:)
Where we make it plainly to appear, That the Atheists Artificial and
Factitious Justice, is Nothing but Will and Words; and That they give to Civil
Sovereigns, no Right nor Authority at all, but only Belluine Liberty, and
Brutish Force. But on the contrary, as we Assert Justice and Obligation, not
Made by Law and Commands, but in Nature; and Prove This, together with
Conscience and Religion, to be the only Basis of Civil Authority; so do we
also maintain, all the Rights of Civil Sovereigns; giving both to Caesar, the
things that are Caesar's; and to God, the things that are God's.

And now, having made all our Apologies and Reflections, we have no more to
add, but only the Retractation or Retraction of one Passage, Page 761. Where
mentioning that Opinion of a Modern Atheistick Writer, That Cogitation is
nothing else but Local Motion, we could not think Epicurus and Democritus to
have sunk to such a Degree, either of Sottishness or Impudence, as this;
whereas we found Cause afterward, upon further Consideration, to Change our
Opinion herein, Page 846. For as much as when Epicurus Derived Liberty of Will
in men, merely from that Motion of Senseless Atoms Declining Uncertainly from
the Perpendicular; it is Evident, that according to him, Volition it self must
be really Local Motion. As indeed in the Democritick Fate, and Material
Necessity of all things, it is Implied, That Humane Cogitations are but
Mechanism and Motion. Notwithstanding which, both Democritus and Epicurus
supposed, That the World was made without Cogitation, though by Local Motion.
So that the meaning of these Besotted Atheists, (if at least they had any
meaning) seems to have been this, That all Cogitation is Really Nothing else
but Local Motion; nevertheless all Motion, not Cogitation; but only in such
and such Circumstances, or in Bodies so Modified.

And now we are not Ignorant, That some will be ready to condemn this whole
Labor of ours, and of others in this Kind, Against Atheism, as altogether
Useless and Superfluous; upon this Pretense, that an Atheist is a mere
Chimaera, and there is no such thing any-where to be found in the World. And
indeed we could heartily wish, upon that condition, that all this Labor of
ours, were Superfluous and Useless. But as to Atheists, These so confident
Exploders of them, are both Unskilled in the Monuments of Antiquity, and
Unacquainted with the Present Age, they live in; others having found too great
an Assurance, from their own Personal Converse, of the Reality of Them.
Nevertheless this Labor of ours, is not Intended only for the Conversion of
Downright and Professed Atheists, (of which there is but Little Hope, they
being sunk into so great a degree of Sottishness;) but for the Confirmation of
Weak, Staggering, and Scepticall Theists. And unless these Exploders of
Atheists, will affirm also, that all men have constantly, an Unshaken Faith,
and Belief of the Existence of a God, without the least mixture of Doubtful
Distrust, or Hesitancy, (which if it were so, the world could not possibly be
so bad as now it is) they must needs Grant, such Endeavors as these, for the
Confirming and Establishing of men's Minds in the Belief of a God, by
Philosophic Reasons, in an Age so Philosophical, not to be Superfluous and
Useless.

Imprimatur Hic Liber, cui Titulus, The True Intellectual System of the
Universe, etc. Sam. Parker, Reverendmo in Christo Patri ac Domino, Domino
Gilberto, Divina Providentia Archiep. Cantuar. a Sacr. Dom. Maii 29. 1671.

Place the Contents at the latter end of the Book.

Book I.
CHAP. I.
1. The Fatal Necessity of all Humane Actions and Events maintained upon three
several Grounds, which are so many false Hypotheses of the Intellectual System
of the Universe. 2. Concerning the Mathematical or Astrological Fate. 3.
Concerning the Opinion of those who suppose a Fate superior to the Highest
Deity. 4. The Moderation of this Discourse. 5. The Atheistical Hypothesis or
Democritical Fate, being founded upon the Atomical Physiology; the necessity of
giving an Account of it, and that first briefly described. 6. The Antiquity of
this Physiology, and the account which is given of it by Aristotle. 7. A clear
and full record of the same Physiology in Plato that has not been taken notice
of. 8. That neither Democritus, nor Leucippus, nor Protagoras, nor any Atheists
were the first Inventours of this Philosophy; and of the Necessity of being
thoroughly acquainted with it, in order to the confutation of Atheism. 9. The
Tradition of Posidonius the Stoic, that Moschus an ancient Phaenician was the
first Inventour of the Atomical Physiology. 10. That this Moschus the Inventour
of the Atomical Physiology was probably the same with Mochus the Physiologer in
Jamblichus, with whose successors, Priests and Prophets, Pythagoras conversed
at Sidon. 11. Other Probabilities for this, that Pythagoras was acquainted with
the Atomical Physiology. 12. That Pythagoras his Monads were Atoms. 13. Proved
plainly that Empedocles, who was a Pythagorean, Physiologized Atomically. 14.
The same further convinced from Plato, Aristotle, Plutarch and Stobaeus. 15.
That Anaxagoras was a spurious Atomist, or unskilful Imitatour of that
Philosophy. 16. That Ecphantus the Pythagorean, Zenocrates, Heraclides,
Diodorus and Metrodorus Chius were all ancient Asserters of the Atomical
Physiology; together with Aristotle's Testimony that the ancient Physiologers
generally went that way. 17. How Aristotle is to be reconciled with himself,
and the credit of other Writers to be salved, who impute this Philosophy to
Leucippus and Democritus; That they were the first Atheizers of it, or the
Founders of that Philosophy which is Atheistically Atomical. 18. That the
Atomists before Democritus were Asserters of a Deity and Substance Incorporeal.
19. A confutation of those Neotericks, who deny that Incorporeal Substance was
ever asserted by any of the Ancients, and the Antiquity of that Doctrine proved
from Plato, who himself professedly maintained it. 20. That Aristotle likewise
asserted Incorporeal Substance. 21. That Epicurus endeavored to confute this
Opinion, as that which Plato and others of the Ancients had maintained. 22.
That all those Philosophers who held the Immortality of the Soul and a Deity
distinct from the World, held Incorporeal Substance, and that besides Thales,
Pythagoras was a grand Champion for the same, who also asserted a Divine Triad.
23. Parmenides an Asserter of Incorporeal Substance, together with all those
who maintained that all things did not flow, but something stand. 24.
Empedocles vindicated from being either an Atheist or Corporealist at large.
25. Anaxagoras a plain Asserter of Incorporeal Substance. 26. Inferred that the
Ancient Atomists before Democritus were both Theists and Incorporealists. 27.
That there is not only no Inconsistency between Atomology and Theology, but
also a Natural Cognation, proved from the Origin of the Atomical Physiology,
and first a general account thereof. 28. A more particular account of the
Origin of this Philosophy from that Principle of Reason, That in Nature,
Nothing comes from Nothing, nor goes to Nothing. 29. That the same Principle
which made the Ancients discard substantial Forms and Qualities, made them also
to assert Incorporeal Substance. 30. That from the same Ground of Reason also
they asserted the Immortality of Souls. 31. That the Doctrine of Preexistence
and Transmigration of Souls had its original from hence also. 32. That the
Ancients did not confine this to Humane Souls only, but extend it to all Souls
and Lives whatsoever. 33. All this proved from Empedocles, who asserted the
Preexistence as well as the Postexistence of all Souls upon that Ground. 34. A
Censure of this Doctrine; that the Reason of it is irrefragable for the
Post-eternity of all Humane Souls, and that the Hypothesis of the Creation of
Humane Souls, which salves their Immortality without Preexistence, is Rational.
35. A new Hypothesis to salve the Incorporeity of the Souls of Brutes without
their Postexistence and successive Transmigrations. 36. That this will not
prejudice the Immortality of Humane Souls. 37. That the Empedoclean Hypothesis
is more Rational than the Opinion of those that would make the Souls of Brutes
Corporeal. 38. That the Constitution of the Atomical Physiology is such, that
whosoever entertains it, and thoroughly understands it, must needs hold
Incorporereal Substance, in five Particulars. 39. Two general Advantages of the
Atomical or Mechanical Physiology; first that it renders the Corporeal World
intelligible. 40. The second Advantage of it, that it prepares an easy and
clear way for the Demonstration of Incorporeal Substance. 41. Concluded, That
the ancient Moschical Philosophy consisted of two Parts, Atomical Physiology,
and Theology or Pneumatology. 42. That this entire Philosophy was afterward
mangled and dismembered, some taking one part of it alone, and some the other.
43. That Leucippus and Democritus, being Atheistically inclined, took the
Atomical Physiology endeavoring to make it subservient to Atheism, and upon
what occasion they did it, and how unsuccessfully. 44. That Plato took the
Theology and Pneumatology of the Ancients, but rejected their Atomical
Physiology, and upon what accounts. 45. That Aristotle followed Plato herein,
with a Commendation of Aristotle's Philosophy.

THEY that hold the Necessity of all humane Actions and Events, do it upon one
or other of these two Grounds; Either because they suppose that Necessity is
inwardly essential to all Agents whatsoever, and that Contingent Liberty is
(...), a Thing Impossible or Contradictious, which can have no Existence any
where in Nature; The sense of which was thus expressed by the Epicurean Poet,
-- Quod res quaeque Necessum
Intestinum habeat cunctis in rebus agendis, etc.
That every thing Naturally labors under an Intestine Necessity: Or else,
because though they admit Contingent Liberty not only as a thing Possible, but
also as that which is actually Existent in the Deity, yet they conceive all
things to be so determined by the Will and Decrees of this Deity, as that they
are thereby made Necessary to us. The former of these two Opinions, that
Contingent Liberty is (...), such a Thing as can have no Existence in Nature,
may be maintained upon two different Grounds; Either from such an Hypothesis as
this, That the Universe is nothing else but Body, and Local motion, and Nothing
moving it self, the Action of every Agent is determined by some other Agent
without it; and therefore that (...), Material and Mechanical Necessity must
needs reign over all things: Or else, though Cogitative Beings be supposed to
have a certain Principle of Activity within themselves, yet that there can be
no Contingency in their Actions, because all Volitions are determined by a
Necessary antecedent Understanding.

Plotinus makes another Distribution of Fatalists, which yet in the Conclusion
will come to the same with the Former, (...)^ A man (says he) will not do
amiss that will divide all Fatalists first into these two General Heads,
namely, That they derive all things from One Principle, or Not; The former of
which may be called Divine Fatalists, the latter Atheistical. Which Divine
Fatalists he again subdivides into such as First make God by Immediate
Influence to do all things in us; as in Animals the Members are not determined
by themselves, but by that which is the Hegemonick in every one: And Secondly,
such as make Fate to be an Implexed Series or Concatenation of Causes, all in
themselves Necessary, whereof God is the chief. The Former seems to be a
Description of that very Fate that is maintained by some Neoterick Christians;
the Latter is the Fate of the Stoics.

Wherefore Fatalists that hold the Necessity of all Humane Actions and Events,
may be reduced to these Three Heads; First, such as asserting the Deity,
suppose it irrespectively to Decree and Determine all things, and thereby make
all Actions necessary to us; Which kind of Fate, though Philosophers and other
ancient Writers have not been altogether silent of it, yet it has been
principally maintained by some Neoterick Christians, contrary to the Sense of
the Ancient Church. Secondly, such as suppose a Deity, that acting Wisely, but
Necessarily, did contrive the General Frame of things in the World; from whence
by a Series of Causes does unavoidably result whatsoever is now done in it.
Which Fate is a Concatenation of Causes, all in themselves Necessary, and is
that which was asserted by the Ancient Stoics Zeno and Chrysippus, whom the
Jewish Essenes seemed to follow. And Lastly, such as hold the Material
Necessity of all things without a Deity; which Fate Epicurus calls (...), The
Fate of the Naturalists, that is, indeed, the Atheists, the Assertors whereof
may be called also the Democritical Fatalists. Which three Opinions concerning
Fate, are so many several Hypotheses of the Intellectual System of the
Universe. All which we shall here propose, endeavoring to show the Falseness
of them, and then substitute the true Mundane System in the Room of them.

II. The Mathematical or Astrological Fate so much talked of, as it is a thing
no way considerable for the Grounds of it, so whatsoever it be, it must needs
fall under one or other of those two General Heads in the Plotinical
Distribution last mentioned, so as either to derive all things from one
Principle, or Not. It seems to have had its first Emersion amongst the
Chaldaeans, from a certain kind of blind Polytheism (which is but a better sort
of disguised Atheism) but it was afterward Adopted and fondly nursed by the
Stoics in a way of subordination to their Divine Fate. For Manilius, Firmicus
and other Masters of that Sect were great Promoters of it. And there was too
much attributed to Astrology also, by those that were no Fatalists, both
Heathen and Christian Philosophers, such as were Plotinus, Origin, Simplicius
and others: Who though they did not make the Stars to necessitate all Humane
Actions here below, yet they supposed that Divine Providence (fore-knowing all
things) had contrived such a strange Coincidence of the Motions and
Configurations of the Heavenly Bodies with such Actions here upon Earth, as
that the former might be Prognostics of the latter. Thus Origin determines
that the Stars do not Make but Signify; and that the Heavens are a kind of
Divine Volume, in whose Characters they that are skilled, may read or spell out
Humane Events. To the same purpose Plotinus, (...)^ The Motion of the Stars was
intended for the Physical Good of the whole; but they afford also another Use
collaterally in order to Prognostication, namely that they who are skilled in
the Grammar of the Heavens may be able from the several Configurations of the
Stars, as it were Letters to spell out future Events, by making such Analogical
Interpretations as they use to do in Augury: As when a Bird flies high, to
interpret this of some High and Noble Exploit. And Simplicius in like manner,
(...)^ The Fatal Conversion of the Heavens is made to correspond with the
Production of Souls into Generation at such and such times, not Necessitating
them to will this or that, but conspiring agreeably with such Appetites and
Volitions of theirs. And these Philosophers were the rather inclinable to this
Persuasion from a Superstitious Conceit which they had, that the Stars being
animated, were Intellectual Beings of a far higher Rank than Men. And since God
did not make them, nor any thing else in the World, singly for themselves
alone, but also to contribute to the Public Good of the Universe, their
Physical Influence seeming inconsiderable, they knew not well what else could
be worthy of them, unless it were to portend Humane Events. This indeed is the
best Sense that can be made of Astrological Prognostication; But it is a
business that stands upon a very weak and tottering, if not Impossible
Foundation.

III. There is another Wild and Extravagant Conceit which some of the Pagans
had, who though they Verbally acknowledged a Deity, yet supposed a certain Fate
superior to it, and not only to all their other Petty Gods, but also to
Jupiter himself. To which purpose is that of the Greek Poet, Latin'd by Cicero,
Quod fore paratum est id summum exuperat Jovem; and that of Herodotus, (...)^
It is impossible for God himself to avoid the destined Fate; and (...), God
himself is a Servant of Necessity. According to which Conceit, Jupiter in Homer
laments his Condition, in that the Fates having determined that his beloved
Sarpedon should be slain by the Son of Menaetius, he was not able to withstand
it. Lact. I. 1. c. 11. Lucian. Jupi-Confutatus.
Though all these passages may not perhaps imply much more than what the
Stoical Hypothesis it self imported; for that did also in some sense make God
himself a Servant to the Necessity of the Matter, and to his own Decrees, in
that he could not have made the smallest thing in the World otherwise than now
it is, much less was able to alter any thing. According to that of Seneca,
Eadem Necessitas and Deos alligat. Irrevocabilis Divina pariter atque Humana
cursus vehit. Ille ipse omnium Conditor ac Rector scripsit quidem Fata sed
sequitur. Semper paret semel jussit. One and the same Chain of Necessity ties
God and Men. The same irrevocable and unalterable Course carries on Divine and
Humane things. The very Maker and Governor of all things that writ the Fates
follows them. He did but once command but he always obeys. But if there were
this further meaning in the Passages before cited, that a Necessity without
God, that was invincible by him, did determine his Will to all things; this was
nothing but a certain Confused and Contradictious Jumble of Atheism and Theism
both together; or an odd kind of Intimation, that however the Name of God be
used in compliance with Vulgar Speech and Opinion, yet indeed it signifies
nothing, but Material Necessity; and the blind Motion of Matter is really the
Highest Numen in the World. And here that of Balbus the Stoic in Cicero is
opportune: Non est Natura Dei Praepotens and Excellens, siquidem ea subjecta
est ei vel Necessitati vel Naturae qua Coelum, Maria, Terraeque reguntur. Nihil
autem est praestantius Deo. Nulli igitur est Naturae obediens aut subjectus
Deus. God would not be the most Powerful and Excellent Being, if he were
subject to that either Necessity or Nature, by which the Heavens, Seas and
Earth are governed. But the Notion of a God implies the most Excellent Being.
Therefore God is not Obedient or Subject to any Nature.

IV. And now we think fit here to suggest, that however we shall oppose those
three Fatalisms before mentioned, as so many false Hypotheses of the Mundane
System and Economy, and endeavor to exclude that severe Tyranness (as
Epicurus calls it) of Universal Necessity reigning over all, and to leave some
Scope for Contingent Liberty to move up and down in, without which neither
Rational Creatures can be blame worthy for any thing they do, nor God have any
Object to display his Justice upon, nor indeed be justified in his Providence;
Yet, as we vindicate to God the glory of all Good, so we do not quite banish
the Notion of Fate neither, nor take away all Necessity; which is a thing the
Clazomenian Philosopher of old was taxed for; Affirming (...)^ That Nothing at
all was done by Fate, but that it was altogether a vain Name. And the
Sadduceans among the Jews have been noted for the same: (...)^ They take away
all Fate, and will not allow it to be any thing at all, nor to have any Power
over Humane Things, but put all things entirely into the hands of Men's own
Free Will. And some of our own, seem to have approached too near to this
Extreme, attributing, perhaps, more to the Power of Free Will, than either
Religion or Nature will admit. But the Hypothesis that we shall recommend, as
most agreeable to Truth, of a (...) Placable Providence, of a Deity Essentially
Good, presiding over all, will avoid all Extremes, asserting to God the Glory
of Good, and freeing him from the Blame of Evil; and leaving a certain
proportionate Contemperation and Commixture of Contingency and Necessity both
together in the World: As Nature requires a mixture of Motion and Rest, without
either of which there could be no Generation. Which Temper was observed by
several of the Ancients; as the Pharisaick Sect amongst the Jews who determined
(...), That some things and not all were the Effects of Fate, but some things
were left in Men's own Power and Liberty. And also by Plato amongst the
Philosophers, (...)^ Plato inserts something of Fate into Humane Lives and
Actions, and he joins with it Liberty of Will also. He does indeed suppose
Humane Souls to have within themselves the Causes of their own Changes to a
Better or Worser State, and every where declares God to be blameless for their
Evils, and yet he somewhere makes the three Fatal Sisters notwithstanding,
Clotho, Lachesis and Atropos, to be busy about them also. For according to the
sense of the Ancients, Fate is a Servant of Divine Providence in the World, and
takes place differently upon the different Actings of Free-willed Beings. And
how Free a thing soever the Will of Man may seem to be, to some, yet I conceive
it to be out of Question, that it may contract upon it self such Necessities
and Fatalities, as it cannot upon a sudden rid it self of at pleasure. But
whatsoever is said in the Sequel of this Discourse by way of Opposition to that
Fatalism of the Neoterick Christians, is intended only to vindicate what was
the constant Doctrine of the Christian Church in its greatest purity, (as shall
be made manifest) and not to introduce any Newfangled conceit of our own.

V. We must now proceed to give a more full and perfect account of these three
several Fates, or Hypotheses of the Mundane System before mentioned, together
with the Grounds of them, beginning first with that which we Principally intend
the Confutation of, the Atheistical or Democritical Fate. Which as it is a
thing of the most dangerous Consequence of all, so it seems to be most
spreading and infectious in these latter times.

Now this Atheistical System of the World that makes all things to be
Materially and Mechanically Necessary, without a God, is built upon a peculiar
Physiological Hypothesis, different from what has been generally received for
many Ages; which is called by some Atomical or Corpuscular, by others
Mechanical: of which we must therefore needs give a full and Perfect Account.
And we shall do it first in General, briefly, not descending to those minute
Particularities of it, which are disputed amongst these Atomists themselves, in
this manner.

The Atomical Physiology supposes that Body is nothing else but (...), that is,
Extended Bulk; and resolves therefore that nothing is to be attributed to it,
but what is included in the Nature and Idea of it, viz. more or less Magnitude
with Divisibility into Parts, Figure, and Position, together with Motion or
Rest, but so as that no part of Body can ever Move it Self; but is always
moved by something else. And consequently it supposes that there is no need of
any thing else besides these simple Elements of Magnitude, Figure, Site and
Motion (which are all clearly intelligible as different Modes of extended
Substance) to salve the Corporeal Phenomenon by; and therefore, not of any
Substantial Forms distinct from the Matter; nor of any other Qualities really
existing in the Bodies without, besides the Results, or Aggregates of those
simple Elements, and the Disposition of the Insensible Parts of Bodies in
respect of Figure, Site and Motion; nor of any Intentional Species or Shows,
propagated from the Objects to our Senses; nor, lastly, of any other kind of
Motion or Action really distinct from Local Motion (such as Generation and
Alteration) they being neither Intelligible, as Modes of extended Substance,
nor any ways necessary. Forasmuch as the Forms and Qualities of Bodies may well
be conceived, to be nothing but the Result of those simple Elements of
Magnitude, Figure, Site and Motion, variously compounded together; in the same
manner as Syllables and Words in great variety result from the different
Combinations and Conjunctions of a few Letters, or the simple Elements of
Speech; and the Corporeal Part of Sensation, and particularly that of Vision,
may be salved only by Local Motion of Bodies, that is, either by Corporeal
Effluvia (called Simulachra, Membranae and Exuviae) streaming continually from
the Surface of the Objects, or rather, as the later and more refined Atomists
conceived, by Pressure made from the Object to the Eye, by means of Light in
the Medium. So that (...)^ The Sense taking Cognizance of the Object by the
Subtle Interposed Medium that is tense and stretched, (thrusting every way from
it upon the Optic Nerves) does by that as it were by a Staff touch it. Again,
Generation and Corruption may be sufficiently explained by Concretion and
Secretion, or Local Motion, without Substantial Forms and Qualities. And
lastly, those sensible Ideas of Light and Colors, Heat and Cold, Sweet and
Bitter, as they are distinct things from the Figure, Site and Motion of the
insensible Parts of Bodies, seem plainly to be nothing else but our own
Phansies, Passions and Sensations however they be vulgarly mistaken for
Qualities in the Bodies without us.

VI. Thus much may suffice for a General Account of the Atomical Physiology. We
shall in the next Place consider the Antiquity thereof, as also what notice
Aristotle has taken of it, and what Account he gives of the same. For though
Epicurus went altogether this way, yet it is well known that he was not the
first Inventor of it. But it is most commonly fathered on Democritus, who was
Senior both to Aristotle and Plato, being reported to have been born the year
after Socrates; from whose Fountains Cicero says that Epicurus watered his
Orchards, and of whom Sex. Empiricus and Laertius testify that he did (...),
cashier Qualities; and Plutarch, that he made the first Principles of the whole
Universe (...), Atoms devoid of all Qualities and Passions. But Laertius will
have Leucippus, who was somewhat Senior to Democritus, to be the first Inventor
of this Philosophy, though he wrote not so many Books concerning it as
Democritus did. Aristotle who often takes notice of this Philosophy, and
ascribes it commonly to Leucippus and Democritus jointly, gives us this
description of it in his Metaphysics, (...)^ Leucippus and his Companion
Democritus make the first Principles of all things to be Plenum and Vacuum (
Body and Space) whereof one is Ens the other Non-ens, and the differences of
Body, which are only Figure, Order and Position, to be the Causes of all other
things. Which Differences they call by these Names Rysmus, Diathigte and Trope.
And in his Book De Anima, having declared that Democritus made Fire and the
Soul to consist of Round Atoms, he describes those Atoms of his after this
manner, (...)^ They are (says he) like those Ramenta or dusty Particles which
appear in the Sunbeams, an Omnifarious Seminary whereof Democritus makes to be
the first Elements of the whole Universe, and so does Leucippus likewise.
Elsewhere the same Aristotle tells us, that these two Philosophers explained
Generation and Alteration without Forms and Qualities by Figures and Local
Motion. (...)^ Democritus and Leucippus having made Figures, (or variously
figured Atoms) the first Principles, make Generation and Alteration out of
these; namely Generation together with Corruption, from the Concretion and
Secretion of them, but Alteration from the change of their Order and Position.
Again he elsewhere takes notice of that Opinion of the Atomists, that all Sense
was a kind of Touch, and that the Sensible Qualities of Bodies were to be
resolved into Figures, imputing it not only to Democritus, but also to the
Generality of the old Philosophers, but very much disliking the same: (...)^
Democritus and most of the Physiologers here commit a very great Absurdity, in
that they make all Sense to be Touch, and resolve sensible Qualities into the
Figures of insensible Parts or Atoms. And this Opinion he endeavors to confute
by these Arguments. First, because there is Contrariety in Qualities, as in
Black and White, Hot and Cold, Bitter and Sweet, but there is no Contrariety in
Figures; for a Circular Figure is not Contrary to a Square or Multangular; and
therefore there must be Real Qualities in Bodies distinct from the Figure, Site
and Motion of Parts. Again, the variety of Figures and Dispositions being
Infinite, it would follow from thence, that the Species of Colors, Odours, and
Tastes should be Infinite likewise, and Reducible to no certain Number. Which
Arguments I leave the Professed Atomists to answer. Furthermore Aristotle
somewhere also censures that other Fundamental Principle of this Atomical
Physiology, That the sensible Ideas of Colors and Tastes, as Red, Green,
Bitter and Sweet, formally considered, are only Passions and Phansies in us,
and not real Qualities in the Object without. For as in a Rainbow there is
really nothing without our sight, but a Rorid Cloud diversely refracting and
reflecting the Sunbeams, in such an Angle; nor are there really such Qualities
in the Diaphanous Prisme, when refracting the Light, it exhibits to us the same
Colors of the Rainbow: whence it was collected, that those things are properly
the Phantasms of the Sentient, occasioned by different Motions on the Optic
Nerves: So they conceived the case to be the same in all other Colors, and
that both the Colors of the Prisme and Rainbow were as real as other Colors,
and all other Colors as Fantastical as they: And then by parity of Reason
they extended the business further to the other Sensibles. But this Opinion
Aristotle condemns in these words, (...)^ The former Physiologers were
generally o^t in this, in that they thought there was no Black or White without
the Sight, nor no Bitter or Sweet without the Taste. There are other Passages
in Aristotle concerning this Philosophy, which I think superfluous to insert
here; and I shall have occasion to cite some of them afterward for other
Purposes.

VII. But in the next place it will not be amiss to show that Plato also has
left a very full Record of this Mechanical or Atomical Physiology (that has
hardly been yet taken notice of) which notwithstanding he does not impute
either to Democritus (whose name Laertius thinks he purposely declined to
mention throughout all his Writings) or to Leucippus, but to Protagoras.
Wherefore in his Theoetetus, having first declared in general that the
Protagorean Philosophy made all things to consist of a Commixture of Parts (or
Atoms) and Local Motion, he represents it, in Particular concerning Colors,
after this manner; (...)^ First as to that which belongs to the Sight, you must
conceive that which is called a White or a Black Color not to be any thing
absolutely existing either without your Eyes or within your Eyes; but Black and
White and every other Color, is caused by different Motions made upon the Eye
from Objects differently modified: so that it is nothing either in the Agent
nor the Patient absolutely, but something which arises from between them both.
Where it follows immediately, (...)^ Can you or any man else be Confident, that
as every Color appears to him, so it appears just the same to every other Man
and Animal, any more than Tastes and Touches, Heat and Cold do? From whence it
is plain that Protagoras made Sensible Qualities, not to be all absolute things
existing in the Bodies without, but to be Relative to us, and Passions in us;
and so they are called presently after (...), certain Phansies, Seemings, or
Appearances in us. But there is another Passage in which a fuller Account is
given of the whole Protagorean Doctrine, beginning thus; (...), etc. The
Principle upon which all these things depend is this, That the whole Universe
is Motion (of Atoms) and nothing else besides; which Motion is considered two
ways, and accordingly called by two Names, Action and Passion; from the mutual
Congress, and as it were Attrition together of both which, are begotten
innumerable Offsprings, which though infinite in Number, yet may be reduced to
two general Heads, Sensibles and Sensations, that are both generated at the
same time; the Sensations are Seeing and Hearing and the like, and the
Correspondent Sensibles, Colors, Sounds, etc. Wherefore when the Eye, or such
a proportionate Object meet together, both the (...) and the (...), the
Sensible Idea of White and black and the Sense of Seeing are generated
together, neither of which would have been produced if either of those two had
not met with the other. (...)^ The like is to be conceived of all other
Sensibles, as Hot and Cold, etc. that none of these are Absolute things in
themselves, or Real Qualities in the Objects without, but they are begotten
from the mutual Congress of Agent and Patient with one another, and that by
Motion: So that neither the Agent has any such thing in it before its Congress
with the Patient, nor the Patient before its Congress with the Agent. (...)^
But the Agent and Patient meeting together, and begetting Sensation and
Sensibles, both the Object and the Sentient are forthwith made to be so and so
qualified, as when Honey is tasted, the Sense of Tasting and the Quality of
Sweetness are begotten both together, though the Sense be vulgarly attributed
to the Taster and the Quality of Sweetness to the Honey. The Conclusion of all
which is summed up thus (...), That none of those Sensible things is any thing
absolutely in the Objects without, but they are all generated or made
Relatively to the Sentient. There is more in that Dialogue to this purpose,
which I here omit; but I have set down so much of it in the Author's own
Language, because it seems to me to be an excellent Monument of the Wisdom and
Sagacity of the old Philosophers. That which is the main Curiosity in this
whole business of the Mechanical or Atomical Philosophy, being here more fully
and plainly expressed, than it is in Lucretius himself, viz. That Sensible
things, according to those Ideas that we have of them, are not real Qualities
absolutely Existing without us, but (...), Phansies or Phantasms in us: So that
both the Latin Interpreters Ficinus and Serranus, though probably neither of
them at all acquainted with this Philosophy, as being not yet restored, could
not but understand it after the same manner: the one expressing it thus, Color
ex Aspectu Motuque Medium quiddam resultans est. Talis circa Oculos Passio; and
the other Ex varia Aspicientis diathesi, variaque sensilis specie colores
varios and videri and fieri, it a tamen ut sint (...) nec nisi in animo
subsistant. However it appears by Plato's manner of telling the story, and the
Tenor of the whole Dialogue, that himself was not a little prejudiced against
this Philosophy. In all probability the rather, because Protagoras had made it
a Foundation both for Skepticism and Atheism.

VIII. We have now learnt from Plato, that Democritus and Leucippus were not
the sole Proprietaries in this Philosophy, but that Protagoras, though not
vulgarly taken notice of for any such thing (being commonly represented as a
Sophist only) was a sharer in it likewise: which Protagoras indeed Laertius and
others affirm to have been an Auditor of Democritus; and so he might be,
notwithstanding what Plutarch tells us, that Democritus wrote against his
taking away way the Absolute Natures of things. However we are of Opinion that
neither Democritus, nor Protagoras, nor Lencippus was the first Inventour of
this Philosophy; and our reason is, because they were all three of them
Atheists (though Protagoras alone was banished for that Crime by the Athenians)
and we cannot think that any Atheists could be the Inventours of it, much less
that it was the Genuine Spawn and Brood of Atheism it self, as some conceit,
because however these Atheists adopted it to themselves, endeavoring to serve
their turns of it, yet if rightly understood, it is the most effectual Engine
against Atheism that can be. And we shall make it appear afterward, that never
any of those Atheists, whether Ancient or Modern (how great Pretenders soever
to it) did thoroughly understand it, but perpetually contradicted themselves in
it. And this is the Reason why we insist so much upon this Philosophy here, not
only because without the perfect knowledge of it, we cannot deal with the
Atheists at their own Weapon; but also because we doubt not but to make a
Sovereign Antidote against Atheism, out of that very Philosophy, which so many
have used as a Vehiculum to convey this Poison of Atheism by.

IX. But besides Reason, we have also good Historical probability for this
Opinion, that this Philosophy was a thing of much greater Antiquity than either
Democritus or Leucippus: and first, because Posidonius, an Ancient and Learned
Philosopher, did (as both Empiricus and Strabo tell us) avouch it for an old
Tradition, that the first Inventour of this Atomical Philosophy was one Moschus
a Phoenician, who, as Strab^ also notes, lived before the Trojan Wars.

X. Moreover it seems not altogether Improbable, but that this Moschus a
Phoenician Philosopher, mentioned by Posidonius, might be the same with that
Mochus a Phoenician Physiologer in Jamblichus, with whose Successors, Priests
and Prophets, he affirms that Pythagoras, sometimes sojourning at Sidon (which
was his native City) had converst: Which may be taken for an Intimation, as if
he had been by them instructed in that Atomical Physiology which Moschus or
Mochus the Phoenician is said to have been the Inventour of. Mochus or Moschus
is plainly a Phoenician Name, and there is one Mochus a Phoenician Writer cited
in Athenaeus, whom the Latin Translator calls Moschus; and Mr. Seldom approves
of the Conjecture of Arcerius, the Publisher of Jamblichus, that this Mochus
was no other than the Celebrated Moses of the Jews, with whose Successors the
Jewish Philosophers, Priests and Prophets, Pythagoras conversed at Sidon. Some
Fantastic Atomists perhaps would here catch at this, to make their Philosophy
to stand by Divine Right, as owing its Original to Revelation; whereas
Philosophy being not a Matter of Faith but Reason, Men ought not to affect (as
I conceive) to derive its Pedigree from Revelation, and by that very pretense
seek to impose it Tyrannically upon the minds of Men, which God has here
purposely left Free to the use of their own Faculties, that so finding out
Truth by them, they might enjoy that Pleasure and Satisfaction which arises
from thence. But we aim here at nothing more, than a Confirmation of this
Truth, That the Atomical Physiology was both older than Democritus, and had no
such Atheistical Original neither. And there wants not other Good Authority for
this, That Pythagaras did borrow many things from the Jews, and translate them
into his Philosophy.

XI. But there are yet other Considerable Probabilities for this, that
Pythagoras was not unacquainted with the Atomical Physiology. And first from
Democritus himself, who as he was of the Italick Row, or Pythagorick
Succession; so it is recorded of him in Laertius, that he was a great Emulator
of the Pythagoreans, and seemed to have taken all his Philosophy from them:
Insomuch that if Chronology had not contradicted it, it would have been
concluded, that he had been an Auditour of Pythagoras himself, of whom he
testified his great admiration in a Book entitled by his Name. Moreover some of
his Opinions had a plain Correspondency with the Pythagorick Doctrines,
forasmuch as Democritus did not only hold, (...), That the Atoms were carried
round in a Vortex; but also together with Leucippus, (...), That the Earth was
carried about the Middle or Center of this Vortex (which is the Sun) turning in
the mean time round upon its own Axis: And just so the Pythagorick Opinion is
expressed by Aristotle, (...)^ That the Earth, as one of the Stars (that is a
Planet) being carried round about the Middle or Center (which is Fire or the
Sun) did in the mean time by its Circumgyration upon its own Axis make day and
night. Wherefore it may be reasonably from hence concluded, that as Democritus
his Philosophy was Pythagorical, so Pythagoras his Philosophy was likewise
Democritical or Atomical.

XII. But that which is of more Moment yet; we have the Authority of Ecphantus
a famous Pythagorean for this, that Pythagoras his Monads, so much talked of,
were nothing else but Corporeal Atoms. Thus we find it in Stobaeus, (...),
Ecphantus (who himself asserted the Doctrine of Atoms) first declared that the
Pythagorick Monads were Corporeal, i.^. Atoms. And this is further confirmed
from what Aristotle himself writes of these Pythagoreans and their Monads,
(...)^ They suppose their Monads to have Magnitude: And from that he elsewhere
makes Monads and Atoms to signify the same thing, (...)^ Its all one to say
Monades or small Corpuscula. And Gassendus has observed out of the Greek
Epigrammatist, that Epicurus his Atoms were sometimes called Monads too; --
(...)
(...).


XIII. But to pass from Pythagoras himself; That Empedocles, who was a
Pythagorean also, did Physiologize Atomically, is a thing that could hardly be
doubted of, though there were no more Proof for it than that one Passage of his
in his Philosophic Poems; -- (...)
(...)^
Nature is nothing but the Mixture and Separation of things mingled; or thus,
There is no production of any thing anew, but only mixture and separation of
things mingled. Which is not only to be understood of Animals, according to the
Pythagorick Doctrine of the Transmigration of Souls, but also, as himself
expounds it, Universally of all Bodies, that their Generation and Corruption is
nothing but Mixture and Separation; or as Aristotle expresses it, (...),
Concretion and Secretion of Parts, together with Change of Figure and Order. It
may perhaps be objected, that Empedocles held four Elements, out of which he
would have all other Bodies to be compounded; and that as Aristotle affirms, he
made those Elements not to be transmutable into one another neither. To which
we reply, that he did indeed make four Elements, as the first general
Concretions of Atoms, and therein he did no more than Democritus himself, who,
as Laertius writes, did from Atoms moving round in a Vortex (...), Generate all
Concretions, Fire, Water, Air and Earth, these being Systems made out of
certain Atoms. And Plato further confirms the same; for in his Book De Legibus
he describes (as I suppose) that very Atheistical Hypothesis of Democritus,
though without mentioning his Name, representing it in this Manner; That by the
Fortuitous Motion of Senseless Matter were first made those four Elements, and
then out of them afterward Sun, Moon, Stars and Earth. Now both Plutarch and
Stobaeus testify, that Empedocles compounded the four Elements themselves out
of Atoms. (...)^ Empedocles makes the Elements to be compounded of other small
Corpuscula, which are the least, and as it were the Elements of the Elements.
And the same Stobaeus again observes, (...)^ Empedocles makes the smallest
Particles and Fragments of Body (that is, Atoms) to be before the four
Elements. But whereas Aristotle affirms that Empedocles denied the
Transmutation of those Elements into one another, that must needs be either a
slip in him, or else a fault in our Copies; not only because Lucretius, who was
better versed in that Philosophy, and gives a particular Account of Empedocles
his Doctrine (besides many others of the Ancients) affirms the quite contrary;
but also because himself, in those Fragments of his still preserved, expressly
acknowledges this Transmutation: (...).

Besides all this, no less Author than Plato affirms, that according to
Empedocles, Vision and other Sensations were made by (...), the Defluxions of
Figures, or Effluvia of Atoms, (for so Democritus his Atoms are called in
Aristotle (...), because they were Bodies which had only Figure without
Qualities) he supposing that some of these Figures or Particles corresponded
with the Organs of one Sense, and some with the Organs of another. (...)^ You
say then according to the Doctrine of Empedocles, that there are certain
Corporeal Effluvia from Bodies of different Magnitudes and Figures, as also
several Pores and Meatus's in us diversely Corresponding with them: So that some
of these Corporeal Effluvia agree with some pores, when they are either too big
or too little for others. By which it is evident, that Empedocles did not
suppose Sensations to be made by intentional Species or Qualities; but as to
the Generality, in the Atomical way; in which notwithstanding there are some
differences among these Atomists themselves. But Empedocles went the same way
here with Democritus, for Empedocles's (...), Defluxions of figured Bodies, are
clearly the same thing with Democritus his (...), Insinuations of Simulachra,
or Exuvious Images of Bodies. And the same Plato adds further, that according
to Empedocles, the Definition of Color was this, (...), The Defluxion of
Figures, or figured Corpuscula (without Qualities) Commensurate to the Sight
and Sensible. Moreover, that Empedocles his Physiology was the very same with
that of Democritus, is manifest also from this Passage of Aristotle's; (...)^
Empedocles and Democritus deceiving themselves, unawares destroy all Generation
of Things out of one another, leaving a seeming Generation only: For they say
that Generation is not the Production of any new Entity, but only the Secretion
of what was before Inexistant; as when diverse kinds of things confounded
together in a Vessel, are separated from one another. Lastly, we shall confirm
all this by the clear Testimony of Plutarch, or the Writer de Placitis
Philosophorum: (...)^ Empedocles and Epicurus, and all those that compound the
World of small Atoms, introduce Concretions and Secretions, but no Generations
or Corruptions properly so called; neither would they have these to be made
according to Quality by Alteration, but only according to Quantity by
Aggregation. And the same Writer sets down the Order and Method, of the
Cosmopoeia according to Empedocles; (...) (...) Empedocles writes, that Ether
was first of all Secreted out of the Confused Chaos of Atoms, afterward the
Fire, and then the Earth, which being Constringed, and as it were Squeezed by
the Force of Agitation, sent forth Water bubling out of it; from the
Evaporation of which did proceed Air. And from the Ether was made the Heavens,
from Fire the Sun. We see therefore that it was not without cause that
Lucretius did so highly extol Empedocles, since his Physiology was really the
same with that of Epicurus and Democritus; only that he differed from them in
some Particularities, as in excluding Vacuum, and denying such Physical Minima
as were Indivisible.

XV. As for Anaxagoras, though he Philosophized by Atoms too, substituting
Concretion and Secretion in the Room of Generation and Corruption, insisting
upon the same Fundamental Principle that Empedocles, Democritus and the other
Atomists did; which was (as we shall declare more fully afterward) That Nothing
could be made out of Nothing, nor reduced to Nothing; and therefore that there
were neither any new Productions nor Destructions of any Substances or Real
Entities: Yet, as his Homoeomeria is represented by Aristotle, Lucretius and
other Authors, that Bone was made of Bony Atoms, and Flesh of Fleshy, Red
things of Red Atoms, and Hot things of Hot Atoms; these Atoms being supposed to
be endued originally with so many several Forms and Qualities Essential to
them, and Inseparable from them, there was indeed a wide difference betwixt his
Philosophy and the Atomical. However, this seems to have had its Rise from
nothing else but this Philosophers not being able to understand the Atomical
Hypothesis, which made him decline it, and substitute this Spurious and
Counterfeit Atomism of his own in the room of it.

XVI. Lastly, I might add here, that it is recorded by Good Authors
concerning diverse other Ancient Philosophers, that were not addicted to
Democriticism or Atheism, that they followed this Atomical way of
Physiologizing, and therefore in all probability did derive it from those
Religious Atomists before Democritus. As for Example; Ecphantus the Syracusian
Pythagorist, who, as Stobaeus writes, made (...), Indivisible Bodies and Vacuum
the Principles of Physiology, and as Theodoret also testifies, taught (...),
That the Corporeal World was made up of Atoms; Zenocrates that made (...),
Indivisible Magnitudes the first Principles of Bodies; Heraclides that resolved
all Corporeal things into (...), certain smallest Fragments of Bodies;
Asclepiades, who supposed all the Corporeal World to be made (...), not of
Similar Parts (as Anaxagoras) but of Dissimilar and inconcinn Moleculae, i. e.
Atoms of different Magnitude and Figures; and Diodorus that salved the Material
Phenomenon by (...), the smallest Indivisibles of Body. And Lastly, Metrodorus
(not Lamsacenus the Epicurean, but) Chius, who is reported also to have made
Indivisible Particles and Atoms the first Principles of Bodies. But what need
we any more proof for this, that the Atomical Physiology was ancienter than
Democritus and Leucippus, and not confined only to that Sect, since Aristotle
himself in the Passages already cited does expressly declare, that besides
D^mocritus, the Generality of all the other Physiologers went that way; (...),
etc. Democritus and the most of the Physiologers make all Sense to be Touch,
and resolve sensible Qualities, as the Tastes of Bitter and Sweet, etc. into
Figures. And again he imputes it generally to all the Physiologers that went
before him, (...), The former Physiologers (without any exception) said not
well in this, that there was no Black and White without the Sight, nor Bitter
and Sweet without the Taste. Wherefore, I think, it cannot be reasonably
doubted, but that the Generality of the Old Physiologers before Aristotle and
Democritus, did pursue the Atomical way, which is to resolve the Corporeal
Phenomenon, not into Forms, Qualities and Species, but into Figures, Motions
and Phancies.

XVII. But then there will seem to be no small difficulty in reconciling
Aristotle with himself, who does in so many places plainly impute this
Philosophy to Democritus and Leucippus, as the first Source and Original of it:
As also in salving the Credit of Laertius, and many other ancient Writers, who
do the like: Democritus having had for many Ages almost the general cry and
vogue for Atoms. However, we doubt not but to give a very good account of this
Business, and reconcile the seemingly different Testimonies of these Ancient
Writers, so as to take away all Contradiction and Repugnancy between them. For
although the Atomical Physiology was in use long before Democritus and
Leucippus, so that they did not Make it but Find it; yet these two with their
confederate Atheists (whereof Protagoras seems to have been one) were
undoubtedly the first that ever made this Physiology to be a complete and
entire Philosophy by it self, so as to derive the Original of all things in the
whole Universe from senseless Atoms, that had nothing but Figure and Motion,
together with Vacuum, and made up such a System of it, as from whence it would
follow, that there could not be any God, not so much as a Corporeal one. These
two things were both of them before singly and apart. For there is no doubt to
be made, but that there has been Atheism lurking in the minds of some or other
in all Ages; and perhaps some of those Ancient Atheists did endeavor to
Philosophize too, as well as they could, in some other way. And there was
Atomical Physiology likewise before, without Atheism. But these two thus
complicated together, were never before Atomical-Atheism or Atheistical
Atomism. And therefore Democritus and his Comrade Leucippus need not be envied
the glory of being reputed the first Inventors or Founders of the Atomical
Philosophy Atheized and Adulterated.

XVIII. Before Leucippus and Democritus, the Doctrine of Atoms was not made a
whole entire Philosophy by it self, but looked upon only as a Part or Member of
the whole Philosophic System, and that the meanest and lowest part too, it
being only used to explain that which was purely Corporeal in the World;
besides which they acknowledged something else, which was not mere Bulk and
Mechanism, but Life and Self Activity, that is, Immaterial or Incorporeal
Substance; the Head and Summity whereof is a Deity distinct from the World. So
that there has been two Sorts of Atomists in the World, the One Atheistical,
the Other Religious. The first and most ancient Atomists holding Incorporeal
Substance, used that Physiology in a way of Subordination to Theology and
Metaphysics. The other allowing no other Substance but Body, made senseless
Atoms and Figures, without any Mind and Understanding ( i. e. without any God)
to be the Original of all things; which latter is that that was vulgarly known
by the Name of Atomical Philosophy, of which Democritus and Leucippus were the
Source.

XIX. It has been indeed of late confidently asserted by some, that never any
of the ancient Philosophers dreamed of any such thing as Incorporeal Substance;
and therefore they would bear men in hand, that it was nothing but an upstart
and new fangled Invention of some Bigotical Religionists; the falsity whereof
we shall here briefly make to appear. For though there have been doubtless in
all Ages such as have disbelieved the Existence of any thing but what was
Sensible, whom Plato describes after this manner; (...)^ That would contend,
that whatsoever they could not feel or grasp with their hands, was altogether
nothing; yet this Opinion was professedly opposed by the best of the Ancient
Philosopher^ and condemned for a piece of Sottishness and Stupidity. Wherefore
the same Plato tells us, that there had been always, as well as then there was,
a perpetual War and Controversy in the World, and as he calls it, a kind of
Gigantomachy betwixt these two Parties or Sects of men; The one that held there
was no other Substance in the World besides Body; The Other that asserted
Incorporeal Substance. The former of these Parties or Sects is thus described
by the Philosopher; (...)^ These (says he) pull all things down from Heaven
and the Invisible Region, with their hands to the Earth, laying hold of Rocks
and Oaks; and when they grasp all these hard and gross things, they confidently
affirm, that that only is Substance which they can feel, and will resist their
Touch, and they conclude that Body and Substance are one and the self same
thing; and if any one chance to speak to them of something which is not Body,
i.e. of Incorporeal Substance, they will altogether despise him, and not hear a
word more from him. And many such the Philosopher there says he had met withal.
The other he represents in this manner. (...)^ The Adversaries of these
Corporealists do cautiously and piously assault them from the Invisible Region,
fetching all things from above by way of Descent, and by strength of Reason
convincing, that certain Intelligible and Incorporeal Forms are the true or
First Substance, and not Sensible things. But betwixt these two there has
always been (says he) a great War and Contention. And yet in the Sequel of his
Discourse he adds, that those Corporealists were then grown a little more
modest and shame-faced than formerly their great Champions had been, such as
Democritus and Protagoras; for however they still persisted in this, that the
Soul was a Body, yet they had not (it seems) the Impudence to affirm, that
Wisdom and Virtue were Corporeal Things, or Bodies, as others before and since
too have done. We see here that Plato expressly asserts a Substance distinct
from Body, which sometimes he calls (...), Incorporeal Substance, and sometimes
(...), Intelligible Substance, in opposition to the other which he calls (...)
Sensible. And it is plain to any one, that has had the least acquaintance with
Plato's Philosophy, that the whole Scope and Drift of it, is to raise up men's
Minds from Sense to a belief of Incorporeal Things as the most Excellent:
(...), as he writes in another place. For Incorporeal Things, which are the
greatest and most excellent things of all, are (says he) discoverable by
Reason only and nothing else. And his Subterraneous Cave, so famously known,
and so elegantly described by him, where he supposes men tied with their backs
toward the Light, placed at a great distance from them, so that they could not
turn about their Heads to it neither, and therefore could see nothing but the
shadows (of certain Substances behind them) projected from it, which Shadows
they concluded to be the only Substances and Realities, and when they heard the
Sounds made by those Bodies that were betwixt the Light and them, or their
reverberated Eccho's, they imputed them to those shadows which they saw. I say,
all this is a Description of the State of those Men, who tak^ Body to be the
only Real and Substantial thing in the World, and to do all that is done in it;
and therefore often impute Sense, Reason and Understanding, to nothing but
Blood and Brains in us.

XX. I might also show in the next place, how Aristotle did not at all dissent
from Plato herein, he plainly asserting (...), another Substance beside
Sensibles, (...), a Substance separable and also actually separated from
Sensibles, (...), an Immovable Nature or Essence (subject to no Generation or
Corruption) adding that the Deity was to be sought for here: Nay such a
Substance (...), as has no Magnitude at all; but is Impartible and
Indivisible. He also blaming Zeno (not the Stoic, who was Junior to Aristotle,
but an ancienter Philosopher of that Name) for making God to be a Body, in
these words; (...) (...); Zeno implicitly affirms, God to be a Body, whether he
mean him to be the whole Corporeal Universe, or some particular Body; for if
God were Incorporeal, how could he be Spherical? nor could he then either Move
or Rest, being not properly in any Place; but if God be a Body, then nothing
hinders but that he may be moved. From which, and other Places of Aristotle, it
is plain enough also, that he did suppose Incorporeal Substance to be
Unextended, and as such, not to have Relation to any Place. But this is a thing
to be disputed afterward. Indeed some learned men conceive Aristotle to have
reprehended Zeno without Cause, and that Zeno made God to be a Sphere, or
Spherical, in no other sense, than Parmenides did in that known Verse of his;
(...). Wherein he is understood to describe the Divine Eternity. However, it
plainly appears from hence, that according to Aristotle's sense, God was (...),
an Incorporeal Substance distinct from the World.

XXI. Now this Doctrine, which Plato especially was famous for asserting, that
there was (...), Incorporeal Substance, and that the Souls of Men were such,
but principally the Deity; Epicurus taking notice of it, endeavored with all
his might to confute it, arguing sometimes after this manner; There can be no
Incorporeal God (as Plato maintained) not only because no man can frame a
Conception of an Incorporeal Substance, but also because whatsoever is
Incorporeal must needs want Sense, and Prudence, and Pleasure, all which things
are included in the Notion of God; and therefore an Incorporeal Deity is a
Contradiction. And concerning the Soul of Man; (...), etc. They who say that
the Soul is Incorporeal, in any other sense, than as that word may be used to
signify a Subtle Body, talk Vainly and Foolishly; for then it could neither be
able to Do nor Suffer any thing. It could not Act upon any other thing, because
it could Touch nothing; neither could it Suffer from any thing, because it
could not be Touched by any thing; but it would be just like to Vacuum or Empty
Space, which can neither Do nor Suffer any thing, but only yield Bodies a
Passage through it: From whence it is further evident, that this Opinion was
professedly maintained by some Philosophers before Epicurus his time.

XXII. But Plato and Aristotle were not the first Inventors of it: For it is
certain, that all those Philosophers who held the Immortality of the Humane
Soul, and a God distinct from this visible World, (and so properly the Creator
of it and all its parts) did really assert Incorporeal Substance. For that a
Corporeal Soul cannot be in its own Nature Immortal and Incorruptible, is plain
to every one's Understanding, because of its parts being separable from one
another; and whosoever denies God to be Incorporeal, if he make him any thing
at all, he must needs make him to be either the whole Corporeal World, or else
a part of it: Wherefore if God be neither of these, he must then be an
Incorporeal Substance. Now Plato was not the first who asserted these two
things, but they were both maintained by many Philosophers before him.
Pherecydes Syrus, and Thales, were two of the most ancient Philosophers among
the Greeks; and it is said of the former of them, that by his Lectures and
Disputes concerning the Immortality of the Soul, he first drew off Pythagoras
from another Course of life to the study of Philosophy. Pherecydes Syrus (says
Cicero) Primus dixit animos hominum esse sempiternos. And Thales in an Epistle
directed to him, congratulates his being the First that had designed to write
to the Greeks concerning Divine Things, which Thales also (who was the Head of
the Ionick Succession of Philosophers, as Pythagoras of the Italick) is joined
with Pythagoras and Plato, by the Writer De Placitis Philosophorum, after this
manner. (...)^ All these determined the Soul to be Incorporeal, making it to be
Naturally Self-moving (or Self-active) and an Intelligible Substance, that is,
not Sensible. Now he that determines the Soul to be Incorporeal, must needs
hold the Deity to be Incorporeal much more. Aquam dixit Thales esse initium
rerum (says Cicero) Deum autem eam Mentem quae ex aqua cuncta fingeret. Thales
said that Water was the first Principle of all Corporeal things, but that God
was that Mind which formed all things out of Water. For Thales was a Phoenician
by Extraction, and accordingly seemed to have received his two Principles from
thence, Water, and the Divine Spirit moving upon the Waters. The First whereof
is thus expressed by Sanchuniathon in his Description of the Phoenician
Theology, (...), a Turbid and Dark Chaos, and the Second is intimated in these
words, (...), the Spirit was affected with love toward its own Principles,
perhaps expressing the Force of the Hebrew word Merachepheth, and both of them
implyng an Understanding Prolifical Goodness, Forming and Hatching the
Corporeal World into this perfection; or else a Plastic Power, subordinate to
it. Zeno (who was also originally a Phoenician) tells us, that Hesiod's Chaos
was Water; and, that the Material Heaven, as well as Earth was made out of
Water, (according to the Judgment of the best Interpeters) is the genuine sense
of Scripture, 2 Pet. 3.5. by which water some perhaps would understand, a Chaos
of Atoms confusedly moved. But whether Thales were acquainted with the Atomical
Physiology or no; it is plain that he asserted, besides the Soul's Immortality,
a Deity distinct from the Corporeal World.

We pass to Pythagoras whom we have proved already to have been an Atomist; and
it is well known also that he was a professed Incorporealist. That he asserted
the Immortality of the Soul, and consequently its Immateriality, is evident
from his Doctrine of Preexistence and Transmigration: And that he likewise held
an Incorporeal Deity distinct from the World, is a thing not questioned by any.
But if there were any need of proving it, (because there are no Monuments of
his Extant) perhaps it might be done from hence, because he was the chief
Propagator of that Doctrine amongst the Greeks, concerning Three Hypostases in
the Deity.

For, that Plato and his Followers held (...), Three Hypostases in the Deity,
that were the first Principles of all things, is a thing very well known to
all. Though we do not affirm that these Platonic Hypostases are exactly the
same with those in the Christian Trinity. Now, Plato himself sufficiently
intimates this not to have been his own Invention; and Plotinus tells us, that
it was (...), an Ancient Opinion before Plato's time, which had been delivered
down by some of the Pythagoricks. Wherefore, I conceive, this must needs be one
of those Pythagorick Monstrosities, which Xenophon covertly taxes Plato for
entertaining, and mingling with the Socratical Philosophy, as if he had thereby
corrupted the Purity and Simplicity of it. Though a Corporealist may pretend to
be a Theist; yet I never heard, that any of them did ever assert a Trinity,
respectively to the Deity, unless it were such an one, as I think not fit here
to mention.

XXIII. That Parmenides, who was likewise a Pythagorean, acknowledged a Deity
distinct from the Corporeal World, is evident from Plato. And Plotinus tells us
also, that he was one of them that asserted the Triad of Divine Hypostases.
Moreover, whereas there was a great Controversy amongst the Ancient
Philosophers before Plato's time, between such as held all things to Flow, (as
namely Heraclitus and Cratylus;) and others who asserted that some things did
Stand, and that there was (...), a certain Immutable Nature, to wit, an Eternal
Mind, together with Eternal and Immutable Truths, (amongst which were
Parmenides and Melissus) the former of these were all Corporealists, (this
being the very Reason why they made all things to Flow, because they supposed
all to be Body) though these were not therefore all of them Atheists. But the
latter were all both Incorporealists and Theists; for whosoever holds
Incorporeal Substance must needs (according to Reason) also assert a Deity.

And although we did not before paticularly mention Parmenides amongst the
Atomical Philosophers, yet we conceive it to be manifest from hence, that he
was one of that Tribe, because he was an eminent Asserter of that Principle,
(...), That no Real Entity is either Made or Destroyed, Generated or Corrupted.
Which we shall afterward plainly show, to be the grand Fundamental Principle
of the Atomical Philosophy.

XXIV. But whereas we did evidently prove before, that Empedocles was an
Atomical Physiologer, it may notwithstanding with some Color of Probability be
doubted, whether he were not an Atheist, or at least a Corporealist, because
Aristotle accuses him of these following things. First, of making Knowledge to
be Sense, which is indeed a plain sign of a Corporealist; and therefore in the
next place also, of compounding the Soul out of the four Elements, making it to
understand every corporeal thing, by something of the same within it self, as
Fire by Fire, and Earth by Earth; and Lastly, of attributing much to Fortune,
and affirming that diverse of the Parts of Animals were made such by chance, and
that there were at first certain Mongrel Animals fortuitously produced, that
were (...), such as had something of the shape of an Ox, together with the
Face of a Man, (though they could not long continue) which seems to give just
Cause of Suspicion, that Empedocles Atheized in the same manner that Democritus
did.

To the first of these we reply, that some others who had also read
Empedocles's Poems, were of a different Judgment from Aristotle as to that,
conceiving Empedocles not to make Sense, but Reason the Criterion of Truth.
Thus Empiricus informs us: Others say that according to Empedocles, the
Criterion of Truth is not Sense but Right Reason; and also that Right Reason is
of two sorts, the one (...), or Divine, the other (...), or Humane: Of which
the Divine is inexpressible, but the Humane declarable. And there might be
several Passages cited out of those Fragments of Empedocles his Poems yet left,
to confirm this, but we shall produce only this one. (...). To this Sense;
Suspend thy Assent to the Corporeal Senses, and consider every thing clearly
with thy Mind or Reason.

And as to the Second Crimination, Aristotle has much weakened his own
Testimony here, by accusing Plato also of the very same thing. (...)^ Plato
compounds the Soul out of the four Elements, because Like is known by Like, and
things are from their Principles. Wherefore it is probable that Empedocles
might be no more guilty of this fault (of making the Soul Corporeal, and to
consist of Earth, Water, Air, and Fire) than Plato was, who in all men's
Judgments was as free from it, as Aristotle himself, if not more. For
Empedocles did in the same manner, as Pythagoras before him, and Plato after
him, hold the Transmigration of Souls, and consequently, both their Future
Immortality and Preexistence; and therefore must needs assert their
Incorporeity; Plutarch rightly declaring this to have been his Opinion; (...)^
That as well those who are yet Unborn, as those that are Dead, have a Being. He
also asserted Humane Souls to be here in a Lapsed State, (...), Wanderers,
Strangers, and Fugitives from God; declaring, as Plotinus tells us, that it was
a Divine Law, (...), That Souls sinning should fall down into these Earthly
Bodies. But the fullest Record of the Empedoclean Philosophy concerning the
Soul is contained in this of Hierocles; (...), -- (...). -- (...), (...),
(...).
(...) -- (...) -- (...). (...) -- (...)^ Man falls from his Happy State, as
Empedocles the Pythagorean says, -- By being a Fugitive, Apostate, and
Wanderer from God, acted with a certain Mad and Irrational Strife or
Contention. -- But he ascends again and recovers his former State, -- if he
decline and avoid these Earthly things, and despise this unpleasant and
wretched Place, where Murder and Wrath, and a Troop of all other Mischiefs
reign. Into which Place, they who fall, wander up and down through the Field of
Ate and Darkness. But the desire of him that flees from this Field of Ate,
carries him on toward the Field of Truth; which the Soul at first
relinquishing, and losing its Wings, fell down into this Earthly Body, deprived
of its Happy Life. From whence it appears that Plato's (...) was derived from
Empedocles and the Pythagoreans.

Now from what has been already cited it is sufficiently manifest, that
Empedocles was so far from being either an Atheist or Corporealist, that he was
indeed a Rank Pythagorist, as he is here called. And we might add hereunto,
what Clemens Alexandrinus observes, that according to Empedocles, (...), etc.
If we live holily and justly, we shall be happy here, and more happy after our
departure hence; having our Happiness not necessarily confined to time, but
being able to rest and fix in it to all Eternity; Feasting with the other
Immortal Beings, etc. We might also take notice, how, besides the Immortal
Souls of men, he acknowledged Demons or Angels; declaring that some of these
fell from Heaven, and were since prosecuted by a Divine Nemesis. or these in
Plutarch are called, (...)^ Those Empedoclean Demons lapsed from Heaven, and
pursued with Divine Vengeance; Whose restless Torment is there described in
several Verses of his. And we might observe likewise how he acknowledged a
Natural and Immutable Justice, which was not Topical and confined to Places and
Countries, and Relative to particular Laws, but Catholic and Universal, and
every where the same, through Infinite Light and Space; as he expresses it with
Poetic Pomp and Bravery. (...)
(...).
And the asserting of Natural Morality, is no small Argument of a Theist.

But what then shall we say to those other things which Empedocles is charged
with by Aristotle, that seem to have so rank a smell of Atheism? Certainly
those Mongril and Biforme Animals, that are said to have sprung up out of the
Earth by chance, look as if they were more akin to Democritus than Empedocles,
and probably it is the Fault of the Copies that it is read otherwise, there
being no other Philosopher that I know of, that could ever find any such thing
in Empedocles his Poems. But for the rest, if Aristotle do not misrepresent
Empedocles, as he often does Plato, then it must be granted, that he being a
Mechanical Physiologer, as well as Theologer, did something too much indulge to
Fortuitous Mechanism: which seems to be an Extravagancy that Mechanical
Philosophers, and Atomists, have been always more or less subject to. But
Aristotle does not charge Empedocles with resolving all things into Fortuitous
Mechanism, as some Philosophers have done of late, who yet pretend to be
Theists and Incorporealists, but only that he would explain some things in that
way. Nay he clearly puts a difference betwixt Empedocles and the Democritick
Atheists in those words subjoyned, (...), etc. which is as if he should have
said, Empedocles resolved some things in the Fabric and structure of Animals
into Fortuitous Mechanism; but there are certain other Philosophers, namely
Leucippus and Democritus, who would have all things whatsoever in the whole
World, Heaven and Earth and Animals, to be made by Chance and the Fortuitous
Motion of Atoms, without a Deity. It seems very plain that Empedocles his
Philia and Nichos, his Friendship and Discord, which he makes to be the (...),
the Active Cause, and Principle of Motion in the Universe, was a certain
Plastic Power, superior to Fortuitous Mechanism: and Aristotle himself
acknowledges somewhere as much. And Plutarch tells us, that according to
Empedocles, The Order and System of the World is not the Result of Material
Causes and Fortuitous Mechanism, but of a Divine Wisdom, assigning to every
thing (...), Not such a Place as Nature would give it, but such as is most
convenient for the Good of the whole. Simplicius, who had read Empedocles,
acquaints us, that he made two Worlds, the one Intellectual, the other
Sensible; and the former of these to be the Exemplar and Archetype of the
latter. And so the Writer De Placitis Philosophorum observes, that Empedocles
made (...), Two Suns, the one Archetypal and Intelligible, the other Apparent
or Sensible.

But I need take no more pains, to purge Empedocles from those two Imputations
of Corporealism and Atheism, since he has so fully confuted them himself, in
those Fragments of his still extant. First, by expressing such a hearty
Resentment of the Excellency of Piety, and the Wretchedness and Sottishness of
Atheism in these Verses. (...),
(...).
To this Sense: He is happy who has his mind richly fraught and stored with
the Treasures of Divine Knowledge; but he miserable, whose mind is Darkened, as
to the Belief of a God. And, Secondly, by denying God to have any Humane Form,
or Members, (...), etc. Or otherwise to be Corporeal, (...)
(...).
And then positively affirming what he is, (...),
(...).
Only a Holy and Ineffable Mind, that by Swift Thoughts agitates the whole
World.

XXV. And now we shall speak something also of Anaxagoras, having showed before
that he was a Spurious Atomist. For he likewise agreed with the other Atomists
in this, that he asserted Incorporeal Substance in general as the Active Cause
and Principle of Motion in the Universe, and Particularly, an Incorporeal Deity
distinct from the World. Affirming, that there was besides Atoms, (...), (as it
is expressed in Plato) An Ordering and Disposing Mind that was the Cause of all
things. Which Mind (as Aristotle tells us) he made to be (...)^ The only
Simple, Unmixed, and Pure thing in the World. And he supposed this to be that
which brought the Confused Chaos of Omnisarious Atoms into that Orderly
Compages of the World that now is.

XXVI. And by this time we have made it evident that those Atomical
Physiologers, that were before Democritus and Lencippus, were all of them
Incorporealists; joining Theology and Pneumatology, the Doctrine of Incorporeal
Substance and a Deity, together with their Atomical Physiology. This is a thing
expressly noted concerning Ecphantus the Pythagorean in Stobaeus. (...)^
Ecphantus held the Corporeal World to consist of Atoms, but yet to be Ordered
and Governed by a Divine Providence, that is, he joined Atomology and Theology
both together. And the same is also observed of Arcesilas, or perhaps
Archelaus, by Sidonius Apollinaris; Post hos Arcesilaus Divina Mente paratam
Conjicit hanc Molem, confectam Partibus illis
Quas Atomos vocat ipse leves.
Now, I say, as Ecphantus, and Archelaus, asserted the Corporeal World to be
made of Atoms, but yet notwithstanding held an Incorporeal Deity distinct from
the same, as the First Principle of Activity in it; so in like manner did all
the other ancient Atomists generally before Democritus, join Theology and
Incorporealism with their Atomical Physiology. They did Atomize as well as he,
but they did not Atheize; but that Atheistical Atomology was a thing first set
on foot afterward by Leucippus and Democritus.

XXVII. But because many seem to be so strongly possessed with this Prejudice,
as if Atheism were a Natural and Necessary Appendix to Atomism, and therefore
will conclude that the same persons could not possibly be Atomists, and
Incorporealists or Theists, we shall further make it Evident, that there is not
only, no Inconsistency betwixt the Atomical Physiology and Theology, but also
that there is on the Contrary, a most Natural Cognation between them.

And this we shall do two manner of ways; First, by inquiring into the Origin
of this Philosophy, and considering what Grounds or Principles of Reason they
were, which first led the Ancients into this Atomical or Mechanical way of
Physiologizing. And Secondly, by making it appear that the Intrinsecal
Constitution of this Physiology is such, that whosoever entertains it, if he do
but thoroughly understand it, must of necessity acknowledge that there is
something else in the World besides Body.

First therefore, this Atomical Physiology seems to have had its Rise and
Origin from the Strength of Reason exerting its own Inward Active Power and
Vigor, and thereby bearing it self up against the Prejudices of Sense, and at
length prevailing over them, after this manner. The Ancients considering and
revolving the Idea's of their own Minds, found that they had a clear and
distinct Conception of Two things, as the General Heads and Principles of
whatsoever was in the Universe; the one whereof was Passive Matter, and the
other Active Power, Vigor and Virtue. To the Latter of which belongs both
Cogitation, and the Power of Moving Matter, whether by express Consciousness or
no. Both which together, may be called by one General Name, of Life; so that
they made these two General Heads of Being or Entity, Passive Matter or Bulk,
and Self Activity or Life. The Former of these was commonly called by the
Ancients, the (...), that which suffers and receives, and the Latter the (...),
(...). Philo.
the Active Principle, and the (...), that from whence Motion Springs. In rerum
Natura (says Cicero) according to the General Sense of the Ancients) Duo
quaerenda sunt; Vnum, quae Materia sit, ex qua quaeque res efficiat^^; Alterum,
quae res sit quae quicque Efficiat: There are two things to be enquired after
in Nature; One, what is the Matter out of which every thing is made; Another,
what is the Active Cause or Efficient. To the same purpose Seneca; Esse debet
aliquid Vnde siat, deinde a Quo fiat; hoc est Causa, illud Materia: There must
be something Out of which a thing is made, and then something By which it is
made; the Latter is properly the Cause, and the Former the Matter. Which is to
be understood of Corporeal things and their Differences, that there must be
both Matter, and an Active Power, for the production of them. And so also that
of Aristotle, (...)^ That from whence the Principle of Motion is, is one Cause,
and the Matter is another. Where Aristotle gives that name of Cause to the
Matter also, though others did appropriate it to the Active Power. And the
Writer de Placitis Philosophorum expresses this as the General Sense of the
Ancients. (...)^ It is impossible that Matter alone should be the sole
Principle of all things, but there must of necessity be supposed also an Agent
or Efficient Cause. As Silver alone is not sufficient to make a Cup, unless
there be an Artificer to work upon it. And the same is to be said concerning
Brass, Wood, and other Natural Bodies.

Now as they apprehended a Necessity of these two Principles, so they conceived
them to be such, as could not be confounded together into one and the same
Thing or Substance; they having such distinct Idea's and Essential Characters
from one another: The Stoics being the only Persons, who offering Violence to
their own apprehensions, rudely and unskilfully attempted to make these two
distinct things to be one and the same Substance. Wherefore as the First of
these, viz. Matter, or Passive Extended Bulk, is taken by all for Substance,
and commonly called by the name of Body; so the other, which is far the more
Noble of the Two, being that which acts upon the matter and has a Commanding
Power over it, must needs be Substance too, of a different kind from Matter or
Body; and therefore Immaterial or Incorporeal Substance. Neither did they find
any other Entity to be conceivable, besides these two, Passive Bulk or
Extension, which is Corporeal Substance; and Internal Self-Activity or Life,
which is the Essential Character of Substance Incorporeal; to which Latter
belongs not only Cogitation, but also the Power of Moving Body.

Moreover, when they further considered the First of these, the Material or
Corporeal Principle, they being not able clearly to conceive any thing else in
it, besides Magnitude, Figure, Site, and Motion or Rest, which are all several
Modes of Extended Bulk, concluded therefore according to Reason, that there was
Really nothing else existing in Bodies without, besides the various Complexions
and Conjugations of those Simple Elements, that is, nothing but Mechanism.
Whence it necessarily followed, that whatsoever else was supposed to be in
Bodies, was, indeed, nothing but our Modes of Sensation, or the Phancies and
Passions in us begotten from them, mistaken for things really existing without
us. And this is a thing so obvious, that some of those Philosophers who had
taken little notice of the Atomical Physiology, had notwithstanding a suspicion
of it; as for Example Plotinus, who writing of the Criterion of Truth, and the
power of Reason, has these words, (...)^ Though the things of Sense seem to
have so clear a Certainty, yet notwithstanding it is doubted concerning them,
whether (the Qualities of them) have any Real Existence at all in the things
without us, and not rather a Seeming Existence only, in our own Passions; and
there is need of Mind or Understanding to judge in this Case, and to determine
the Controversy, which Sense alone cannot decide. But the ancient
Physiologists concluded without any hesitancy, (...), That the Nature of Honey
in it self, is not the same thing with my being sweetened, nor of Wormwood with
that Sense of bitterness which I have from it; (...)^ But that the Passion of
Sense differed from the Absolute Nature of the thing it self without; the
Senses not comprehending the Objects themselves, but only their own Passions
from them.

I say therefore, that the Ancients concluded the Absolute Nature of Corporeal
things in themselves, to be nothing but a certain Disposition of Parts, in
respect of Magnitude, Figure, Site, and Motion, which in Tastes cause us to be
differently affected with those Senses of Sweetness and Bitterness, and in
Sight with those Phancies of Colors, and accordingly in the other Senses with
other Phancies; and that the Corporeal World was to be explained by these Two
things, whereof one is Absolute in the Bodies without us, the various Mechanism
of them, the other Relative only to us, the different Phancies in us, caused by
the respective Differences of them, in themselves. Which Phancies or
Fantastic Idea's are no Modes of the Bodies without us, but of that only in
our selves which is Cogitative or Self-Active, that is, Incorporeal. For the
Sensible Idea's of Hot and Cold, Red and green, etc. cannot be clearly
conceived by us as Modes of the Bodies without us, but they may be easily
apprehended as Modes of Cogitation, that is, of Sensation, or Sympathetical
Perception in us.

The Result of all which was; That whatsoever is either in Our Selves, or the
Whole World, was to be reduced to one or other of these two Principles; Passive
Matter, and Extended Bulk, or Self-Active Power and Virtue; Corporeal or
Incorporeal Substance; Mechanism or Life; or else to a Complication of them
both together.

XXVIII. From this General Account, which we have now given of the Origin of
the Atomical Physiology, it appears that the Doctrine of Incorporeal Substance
sprung up together with it. But this will be further manifest, from that which
follows. For we shall in the next place show, how this Philosophy did, in
especial manner, owe its Original, to the Improvement of one Particular
Principle of Reason, over and besides all the rest; namely, that famous Axiom,
so much talked of amongst the Ancients, De Nihilo Nihil, in Nihilum Nil posse
reverti; That Nothing can come from Nothing, nor go to Nothing. For though
Democritus, Epicurus and Lucretius abused this Theorem, endeavoring to carry
it further than the Intention of the first Atomists, to the disproving of a
Divine Creation of any thing out of Nothing by it; Nullam rem a Nihilo gigni
Divinitus unquam; and consequently of a Deity: Yet as the meaning of it was at
first confined and restrained, That Nothing of it self could come from Nothing
nor go to Nothing, or that according to the Ordinary Course of Nature (without
an Extraordinary Divine Power) Nothing could be raised from Nothing, nor
reduced to Nothing; it is not only an undoubted Rule of Reason in it self, but
it was also the Principal Original of that Atomical Physiology, which,
discarding Forms and Qualities, acknowledged really nothing else in Body
besides Mechanism.

Wherefore it was not in vain, or to no purpose that Laertius in the Life of
Democritus takes notice of this as one of his Dogmata, (...)^ That Nothing was
made or Generated out of Nothing, nor Corrupted into Nothing. This being a
Fundamental Principle, not only of his Atheism, but also of that very Atomical
Physiology it self, which he pursued. And Epicurus in his Epistle to Herodotus
plainly fetches the beginning of all his Philosophy from hence. (...)^ We fetch
the beginning of our Philosophy (says he) from hence, that Nothing is made out
of Nothing or destroyed to Nothing; for if things were made out of Nothing,
then every thing might be made out of every thing, neither would there be any
need of Seeds. And if whatsoever is Corrupted were destroyed to Nothing, then
all things would at length be brought to Nothing. Lucretius in like manner
beginning here, insists more largely upon those Grounds of Reason hinted by
Epicurus: And first, That Nothing can be made out of Nothing he proves thus;
Nam si de nihilo fierent, ex omnibus rebus
Omne Genus nasci posset: Nil Semine egeret:
E mare primum Homines and terra posset oriri
Squamigerum Genus, etc.
Nec Fructus iidem Arboribus constare solerent,
Sed mutarentur: Far omnes omnia possent.
Praeterea cur Vere Rosam, Frumenta Calore,
Vites Autumno, fundi, suadente videmus? etc.
Quod si de Nihilo fierent, subito exorerentur
Incerto spatio atque alienis Partibus anni.


In like manner he argues, to prove that Nothing is Corrupted into Nothing.

Huc accedit uti quicque in sua Corpora rursum
Dissolvat Natura; neque ad Nihilum interimat res:
Nam si quid Mortale a cunctis Partibus esset,
Ex oculis res quaeque repent erepta periret.
Praeterea quaecunque Vetustate amovet aetas,
Si penitus perimit, consumens Materiam omnem,
Vnde Animale Genus generatim in Lumina Vitae
Redducit Venus? aut redductum Daedala Tellus
Vnde alit atque auget? generatim pabula praebens, etc.
Haud igitur penitus pereunt quaecunque videntur,
Quando aliud ex alio reficit Natura; nec ullam
Rem gigni patitur nisi morte adjutam aliena.
In which Passages, though it be plain that Lucretius does not immediately
drive at Atheism, and nothing else; but primarily at the establishing of a
peculiar kind of Atomical Physiology, upon which indeed these Democriticks
afterward endeavored to graft Atheism; yet to take away that suspicion, we
shall in the next place show, that generally the other Ancient Physiologers
also, who were Theists, did likewise build the structure of their Philosophy
upon the same Foundation, that Nothing can come from Nothing, nor go to
Nothing: As for Example, Parmenides, Melissus, Zeno, Xenophanes, Anaxagoras and
Empedocles; of Parmenides and Melissus, Aristotle thus writes, (...)^ They say
that no Real Entity is either Generated or Corrupted, that is, made anew out of
Nothing or destroyed to Nothing. And Simplicius tells us, that Parmenides gave
a notable Reason for the Confirmation of this Assertion, that Nothing in Nature
could be Made out of Nothing, (...)^ Because if any thing be made out of
Nothing, then there could be no cause why it should be then made, and neither
sooner nor later. Again Aristotle testifies of Xenophanes and Zeno, that they
made this a main Principle of their Philosophy (...)^ That it cannot be that
any thing should be made out of Nothing: And of this Xenophanes, Sextus the
Philosopher tells us, that he held (...)^ That there was but one God, and that
he was Incorporeal, speaking thus of him; (...),
(...).
Aristotle also writes in like manner concerning Empedocles, (...)^ Empedocles
acknowledges the very same with other Philosophers, that it is impossible any
thing should be Made out of Nothing or Perish into Nothing. And as for
Anaxagoras, it is sufficiently known to all, that his Homoeomeria or Doctrine
of Similar Atoms, (which was a certain Spurious kind of Atomism) was nothing
but a superstructure made upon this Foundation. Besides all which, Aristotle
pronounces universally concerning the Ancient Physiologers without any
exception, that they agreed in this one thing, (...)^ The Physiologers
generally agree in this (laying it down for a grand Foundation) that it is
Impossible that any thing should be made out of Nothing. And again he calls
this (...), the common Opinion of Naturalists; intimating also, that they
concluded it the greatest absurdity, that any Physiologer could be guilty of,
to lay down such Principles, as from whence it would follow, that any Real
Entity in Nature did come from Nothing and go to Nothing.

Now it may well be supposed, that all these Ancient Physiologers (the most of
which were also Theists) did not keep such a stir about this business for
nothing; and therefore we are in the next place to show, what it was that they
drove at in it. And we do affirm that one thing, which they all aimed at, who
insisted upon the forementioned Principle, was the establishing some Atomical
Physiology or other, but most of them at such as takes away all Forms and
Qualities of Bodies (as Entities really distinct from the Matter and Substance)
and resolves all into Mechanism and Fancy. For it is plain, that if the Forms
and Qualities of Bodies be Entities really distinct from the Substance, and its
various Modifications, of Figure, Site, and Motion, that then in all the
Changes and Transmutations of Nature, all the Generations and Alterations of
Body, (those Forms and Qualities being supposed to have no Real Existence any
where before) something must of necessity be Created or produced miraculously
out of Nothing; as likewise reduced into Nothing in the Corruptions of them,
they having no Being any where afterward. As for Example; when ever a Candle is
but lighted or kindled into a flame, there must needs be a new Form of fire,
and new Qualities of Light and Heat, really distinct from the Matter and
Substance, produced out of Nothing, that is, Created, and the same again
Reduced into Nothing, or Annihilated, when the flame is extinguished. Thus,
when Water is but Congealed at any time into Snow, Hail, or Ice, and when it is
again Dissolved; when Wax is by Liquefaction made Soft and Transparent, and
changed to most of our Senses; when the same kind of Nourishment taken in by
Animals, is turned into Blood, Milk, Flesh, Bones, Nerves, and all the other
Similar Parts; when that which was in the Form of bright Flame, appears in the
Form of dark Smoke; and that which was in the Form of Vapor, in the Form of
Rain or Water, or the like: I say, that in all these Mutations of Bodies there
must needs be something made out of Nothing But that in all the Protean
Transformations of Nature, which happen continually, there should be Real
Entities thus perpetually produced out of Nothing and reduced to Nothing,
seemed to be so great a Paradox to the Ancients, that they could by no means
admit of it. Because as we have already declared, First they concluded it
clearly impossible by Reason, that any Real Entity should of it self rise out
of Nothing; and Secondly, they thought it very absurd to bring God upon the
Stage, with his Miraculous extraordinary Power, perpetually at every turn; As
also, that every thing might be made out of every thing, and there would be no
Cause in Nature, for the Production of one thing rather than another, and at
this time rather than that, if they were Miraculously made out of Nothing.
Wherefore they sagaciously apprehended, that there must needs be some other
Mystery or Intrigue of Nature, in this business, than was commonly dreamed of,
or suspected; which they concluded to be this, That in all these
Transformations, there were no such Real Entities of Forms and Qualities
distinct from the Matter, and the various Disposition of its Parts, in respect
of Figure, Site and Motion (as is vulgarly supposed) Produced and Destroyed;
but that all these Feats were done, either by the Concretion and Secretion of
actually Inexistent Parts, or else by the different Modifications of the same
Preexistent Matter, or the Insensible parts thereof. This only being added
hereunto, that from those different Modifications of the small Particles of
Bodies, (they being not so distinctly perceived by our Senses) there are
begotten in us, certain confused Phasmata or Phantasmata, Apparitions,
Phancies, and Passions, as of Light and Colors, Heat and Cold, and the like,
which are those things, that are vulgarly mistaken for real Qualities existing
in the Bodies without us; whereas indeed there is Nothing Absolutely in the
Bodies themselves like to those Fantastic Idea's that we have of them; and
yet they are wisely contrived by the Author of Nature, for the Adorning and
Embellishing of the Corporeal World to us.

So that they conceived, Bodies were to be considered two manner of ways,
either as they are Absolutely in themselves, or else as they are Relatively to
us: And as they are absolutely in themselves, that so there never was any
Entity really distinct from the Substance, produced in them out of Nothing, nor
Corrupted or Destroyed to Nothing, but only the Accidents and Modifications
altered. Which Accidents and Modifications are no Entities really distinct from
their Substance; for as much as the same Body may be put into several Shapes
and Figures, and the same Man may successively Stand, Sit, Kneel and Walk,
without the production of any new Entities really distinct from the substance
of his Body. So that the Generations, Corruptions and Alterations of Inanimate
Bodies are not terminated in the Production or Destruction of any Substantial
Forms, or real Entities distinct from the Substance, but only in different
Modifications of it. But secondly, as Bodies are considered Relatively to us,
that so besides their different Modifications and Mechanical Alterations, there
are also different Phancies, Seemings and Apparitions begotten in us from them;
which unwary and unskilful Philosophers mistake for Absolute Forms and
Qualities in Bodies themselves. And thus they concluded, that all the
Phenomenon of Inanimate Bodies, and their various Transformations, might be
clearly resolved into these two things, Partly something that is Real and
Absolute in Bodies themselves, which is nothing but their different Mechanism,
or Disposition of Parts in respect of Figure, Site and Motion; and Partly
something that is Fantastical in the Sentient.

That the Atomical Physiology did emerge after this manner, from that Principle
of Reason, that Nothing comes from Nothing, nor goes to Nothing, might be
further convinced from the testimony of Aristotle, writing thus concerning it:
(...)^ The ancient Physiologers concluded, that because Contraries were made
out of one another, that therefore they were before (one way or other)
Inexistent, Arguing in this manner. That if whatsoever be made, must needs be
made out of Something or out of Nothing, and this latter (that any thing should
be made out of Nothing) is Impossible, according to the general Consent of all
the ancient Physiologers; then it follows of Necessity, that all Corporeal
things are Made or Generated, out of things that were really before and
Inexistent; though by reason of the smallness of their Bulks they were
Insensible to us. Where Aristotle plainly intimates that all the ancient
Philosophers, whosoever insisted upon this Principle, that Nothing comes from
Nothing, nor goes to Nothing, were one way or other Atomical, and did resolve
all Corporeal things into (...), Certain Moleculae or Corpuscula which by
Reason of their smallness were insensible to us, that is, into Atoms. But yet
there was a difference between these Atomists, forasmuch as Anaxagoras was such
an Atomist, as did notwithstanding hold Forms and Qualities, really distinct
from the Mechanical Modifications of Bodies. For he not being able (as it
seems) well to understand that other Atomical Physiology of the Ancients, that,
exploding Qualities, salved all Corporeal Phenomenon by Mechanism and Fancy;
and yet acknowledging, that that Principle of theirs which they went upon, must
needs be true, That Nothing could of it self come from Nothing nor go to
Nothing; framed a new kind of Atomology of his own, in supposing the whole
Corporeal World or Mass of Matter, to consist of Similar Atoms, that is, such
as were originally endued with all those different Forms and Qualities that are
vulgarly conceived to be in Bodies, some Bony, some Fleshy, some Fiery, some
Watery, some White, some Black, some Bitter, some Sweet, and the like, so that
all Bodies whatsoever had some of all sorts of these Atoms (which are in a
manner Infinite) specifically differing from one another in them. (...), etc.
That all things were in every thing mingled together, because they saw that
every thing was made of every thing; but that things seemed to differ from one
another and were denominated to be this or that, from those Atoms which are
most predominant in the Mixture, by reason of their Multiplicity: Whence he
concluded that all the Generations, Corruptions and Alterations of Bodies were
made by nothing but the Concretions, and Secretions of Inexistent and
Preexistent Atoms of different Forms and Qualities, without the Production of
any new Form and Quality out of Nothing, or the Reduction of any into Nothing.
This very account Aristotle gives of the Anaxagorean Hypothesis. (...)^
Anaxagoras seems therefore to make Infinite Atoms endued with several Forms
and Qualities to be the Elements of Bodies, because he supposed that Common
opinion of Physiologers to be true, that Nothing is Made of Nothing. But all
the other ancient Physiologers that were before Anaxagoras, and likewise those
after him, who insisting upon the same Principle of Nothing coming from Nothing
did not Anaxagorize, as Empedocles, Democritus and Protagoras, must needs make
(...), dissimilar Moleculae, and (...), Atoms unformed and unqualified,
otherwise than by Magnitude, Figure and Motion, to be the Principles of Bodies,
and cashiering Forms and Qualities (as real Entities distinct from the Matter)
resolve all Corporeal Phenomenon into Mechanism and Phancie. Because, if no
Real Entity can come from Nothing, nor go to Nothing, then one of these two
things is absolutely Necessary, that either these Corporeal Forms and
Qualities, being real Entities distinct from the Matter, should exist before
Generations and after Corruptions, in certain insensible Atoms originally such,
according to the Anaxagorean Doctrine; Or else that they should not be Real
Entities distinct from the Matter, but only the different Modifications and
Mechanisms of it, together with different Phancies. And thus we have made it
evident that the genuine Atomical Physiology did spring originally from this
Principle of Reason, that no Real Entitie does of it self come from Nothing nor
go to Nothing.

XXIX. Now we shall in the next place show how this very same Principle of
Reason which induced the Ancients to reject Substantial Forms and Qualities of
Bodies, and to Physiologize Atomically, led them also unavoidably to assert
Incorporeal Substances, and that the Souls of Men and Animals were such,
neither Generated nor Corrupted. They had argued against Substantial Forms and
Qualities as we have showed, in this manner, that since the Forms and Qualities
of Bodies are supposed by all to be Generated and Corrupted, made anew out of
Nothing and destroyed to Nothing, that therefore they could not be Real
Entities distinct from the Substance of Matter, but only different
Modifications of it in respect of Figure, Site and Motion, causing different
Sensations in us; and were all to be resolved into Mechanism and Fancy. For as
for that Conceit of Anaxagoras, of Prae and Post-existent Atoms, endued with
all those several Forms and Qualities of Bodies Ingenerably and Incorruptibly;
it was nothing but an Adulteration of the genuine Atomical Philosophy, and a
mere Dream of his, in which very few followed him. And now they argue
contrariwise for the Souls of Men and Animals, in this manner; Because they are
plainly Real Entities distinct from the Substance of Matter and its
Modification, and Men and Brutes are not mere Machins, neither can Life and
Cogitation, Sense and Consciousness, Reason and Understanding, Appetite and
Will, ever result from Magnitudes, Figures, Sites and Motions, that therefore
they are not Corporeally Generated and Corrupted, as the Forms and Qualities of
Bodies are. (...)^ It is impossible for a real Entity to be made or Generated
from Nothing preexisting. Now there is Nothing of Soul and Mind, Reason and
Understanding, nor indeed of Cogitation and Life, contained in the
Modifications and Mechanism of Bodies; and therefore to make Soul and Mind to
rise out of Body whenever a man is generated, would be plainly to make a real
Entity to come out of Nothing, which is impossible. I say, because the Forms
and Qualities of Bodies are Generated and Corrupted, Made and Unmade, in the
ordinary course of Nature, therefore they concluded, that they were not real
Entities distinct from the Substance of Body and its various Modifications: but
because Soul and Mind is plainly a real Entity distinct from the Substance of
Body, its Modification and Mechanism; that therefore it was not a thing
Generated and Corrupted, Made and Unmade, but such as had a Being of its own, a
Substantial Thing by it self. Real Entities and Substances are not Generated
and Corrupted, but only Modifications.

Wherefore these Ancients apprehended that there was a great difference betwixt
the Souls of Men and Animals, and the Forms and Qualities of other inanimate
Bodies, and consequently betwixt their several Productions. Forasmuch as in the
Generation of Inanimate Bodies there is no new real Entity acquired distinct
from the Substance of the thing it self, but only a peculiar Modification of
it. The Form of Stone, or of Timber, of Blood, Flesh and Bone, and such other
Natural Bodies Generated, is no more a distinct Substance or Entity from the
Matter, than the Form of an House, Stool or Table is: There is no more new
Entity acquired in the Generation of Natural Bodies, than there is in the
Production of Artificial ones. When Water is turned into Vapor, Candle into
Flame, Flame into Smoke, Grass into Milk Blood and Bones, there is no more
miraculous Production of Something out of Nothing, than when Wool is made into
cloth, or Flax into Linen, when a rude and Unpolished Stone is hewn into a
beautiful Statue, when Brick, Timber and Mortar, that lay together before
disorderly, is brought into the Form of a stately Palace; there being Nothing
neither in one nor other of these but only a different Disposition and
Modification of preexistent Matter. Which Matter of the Universe is always
Substantially the same, and neither more nor less, but only Proteanly
transformed into different Shapes. Thus we see that the Generation of all
Inanimate Bodies is nothing but the change of Accidents and Modifications, the
Substance being really the same both before and after. But in the Generations
of Men and Animals, besides the new disposition of the Parts of Matter and its
Organization, there is also the Acquisition and Conjunction of another Real
Entity or Substance distinct from the Matter, which could not be Generated out
of it, but must needs come into it some other way. Though there be no
Substantial difference between a Stately House or Palace standing, and all the
Materials of the same ruinated and demolished, but only a difference of
Accidents and Modifications; yet between a living Man and a dead Carcass, there
is besides the Accidental Modification of the Body, another Substantial
difference, there being a Substantial Soul and Incorporeal Inhabitant, dwelling
in the one and acting of it, which the other is now deserted of. And it is very
observable that Anaxagoras himself, who made Bony and Fleshy Atoms, Hot and
Cold, Red and Green, and the like, which he supposed to exist before
Generations and after Corruptions, always immutably the same, (that so Nothing
might come from Nothing and go to Nothing) yet he did not make any Animalish
Atoms Sensitive and Rational. The Reason whereof could not be because he did
not think Sense and Understanding to be as Real Entities as Hot and Cold, Red
and Green; but because they could not be supposed to be Corporeal Forms and
Qualities, but must needs belong to another Substance that was Incorporeal. And
therefore Anaxagoras could not but acknowledge, that all Souls and Lives did
Prae and Post-exist by themselves, as well as those Corporeal Forms and
Qualities, in his Similar Atoms.

XXX. And now it is already manifest, that from the same Principle of Reason
before mentioned, That Nothing of it self can come from Nothing nor go to
Nothing, the Ancient Philosophers were induced likewise to assert the Soul's
Immortality, together with its Incorporeity or Distinctness from the Body. No
substantial Entity ever vanishes of it self into Nothing; for if it did, then
in length of time all might come to be Nothing. But the Soul is a Substantial
Entity, Really distinct from the body, and not the mere Modification of it; and
therefore when a Man dies, his Soul must still remain and continue to have a
Being somewhere else in the Universe. All the Changes that are in Nature, are
either Accidental Transformations and different Modifications of the same
Substance, or else they are Conjunctions and Separations, or Anagrammatical
Transpositions of things in the Universe; the Substance of the whole remaining
always entirely the same. The Generation and Corruption of Inanimate Bodies,
is but like the making of a House, Stool or Table, and the Unmaking or Marring
of them again, either different Modifications of one and the same Substance, or
else diverse Mixtures and Separations, Concretions and Secretions. And the
Generation and Corruption of Animals is likewise nothing but -- (...), The
Conjunction of Souls together with such Particular Bodies, and the Separation
of them again from one another, and so as it were the Anagrammatical
Transposition of them in the Universe. That Soul and Life that is now fled and
gone, from a lifeless Carcass, is only a loss to that particular Body or
Compages of Matter, which by means thereof is now disanimated; but it is no
loss to the whole, it being but Transposed in the Universe, and lodged
somewhere else.

XXXI. It is also further evident that this same Principle which thus led the
Ancients to hold the Souls Immortality, or its Future Permanency after Death,
must needs determine them likewise to maintain its (...), or Preexistence, and
consequently its (...), or Transmigration. For that which did preexist before
the Generation of any Animal, and was then somewhere else, must needs
Transmigrate into the Body of that Animal where now it is. But as for that
other Transmigration of Human Souls into the Bodies of Brutes, though it cannot
be denied but that many of these Ancients admitted it also, yet Timaeus Locrus,
and diverse others of the Pythagoreans, rejected it, any otherwise than as it
might be taken for an Allegorical Description of that Beastly Transformation,
that is made of Men's Souls by Vice. Aristotle tells us again, agreeably to what
was declared before, (...)^ That the Ancient Philosophers were afraid of
Nothing more, than this one thing, that any thing should be made out of Nothing
Preexistent: And therefore they must needs conclude, that the Souls of all
Animals Preexisted before their Generations. And indeed it is a thing very well
known that according to the Sense of Philosophers, these two things were
always included together, in that one opinion of the Soul's Immortality,
namely its Preexistence as well as its Postexistence. Neither was there ever
any of the Ancients before Christianity, that held the Souls future Permanency
after Death, who did not likewise assert its Preexistence; they clearly
perceiving, that if it were once granted, that the Soul was Generated, it could
never be proved but that it might be also Corrupted. And therefore the
Assertors of the Souls Immortality, commonly begun here; first, to prove its
Preexistence, proceeding thence afterward to establish its Permanency after
Death. This is the Method used in Plato, (...)^ Our Soul was somewhere, before
it came to exist in this present Humane Form, and from thence it appears to be
Immortal, and such as will subsist after Death. And the chief demonstration of
the Soul's Preexistence to the Ancients before Plato was this, because it is an
Entity Really distinct from Body or Matter and the Modifications of it; and no
real Substantial Entity can either spring of it self out of Nothing, or be made
out of any other Substance distinct from it, because Nothing can be made (...),
from nothing either inexisting or preexisting; all Natural Generations being
but the various Dispositions and Modifications of what was before existent in
the Universe. But there was Nothing of Soul and Mind, Inexisting and
Preexisting in Body before, there being Nothing of Life and Cogitation in
Magnitude, Figure, Site, and Motion. Wherefore this must needs be, not a thing
Made or Generated, as Corporeal Forms and Qualities are, but such as has a
Being in Nature Ingenerably and Incorruptibly. The Mechanism of Humane Body was
a thing Made and Generated, it being only a different Modification of what was
before existent, and having no new Entity in it distinct from the Substance:
And the Totum or Compositum of a Man or Animal may be said to be Generated and
Corrupted, in regard of the Union and Disunion, Conjunction and Separation of
those two parts, the Soul and Body. But the Soul it self, according to these
Principles, is neither a thing Generable nor Corruptible, but was as well
before the Generation, and will be after the Deaths and Corruptions of men, as
the Substance of their Body, which is supposed by all to have been from the
first Creation, and no Part of it to be annihilated or lost after Death, but
only scattered and dispersed in the Universe. Thus the Ancient Atomists
concluded, That Souls and Lives being Substantial Entities by themselves, were
all of them as old as any other Substance in the Universe, and as the whole
Mass of Matter, and every smallest Atom of it is. That is, they who maintained
the Eternity of the World, did consequently assert also Aeternitatem Animorum
(as Cicero calls it) the Eternity of Souls and Minds. But they who conceived
the World to have had a Temporary Beginning or Creation, held the Coevity of
all Souls with it, and would by no means be induced to think that every Atom of
Senseless Matter and Particle of Dust, had such a Privilege and Preeminency
over the Souls of Men and Animals, as to be Seniour to them. Synesius though a
Christian, yet having been educated in this Philosophy, could not be induced by
the hopes of a Bishopric, to stifle or dissemble this Sentiment of his Mind,
(...)^ I shall never be persuaded to think my Soul to be younger than my Body.
But such, it seems, was the temper of those times, that he was not only
dispensed withal as to this, but also as to another Heterodoxy of his,
concerning the Resurrection.

XXXII. It is already plain also, that this Doctrine of the Ancient Atomists
concerning the Immateriality and Immortality, the Prae and Post-existence of
Souls, was not confined by them to Humane Souls only, but extended universally
to all Souls and Lives whatsoever. It being a thing that was hardly ever called
into doubt or question by any, before Cartesius, whether the Souls of Brutes
had any Sense, Cogitation or Consciousness in them or no. Now all Life, Sense
and Cogitation was undoubtedly concluded by them, to be an Entity Really
distinct from the Substance of Body, and not the mere Modification, Motion or
Mechanism of it; Life and Mechanism being two distinct Idea's of the Mind,
which cannot be confounded together. Wherefore they resolved that all Lives and
Souls whatsoever, which now are in the World, ever were from the first
Beginning of it, and ever will be, that there will be no new ones produced
which are not already, and have not always been, nor any of those which now
are destroyed, any more than the Substance of any Matter will be Created or
Annihilated. So that the whole System of the Created Universe, Consisting of
Body, and particular Incorporeal Substances or Souls, in the successive
Generations and Corruptions or Deaths, of Men and other Animals, was according
to them, Really nothing else, but one and the same Thing perpetually
Anagrammatized, or but like many different Syllables and Words variously and
successively composed out of the same preexistent Elements or Letters.

XXXIII. We have now declared how the same Principle of Reason which made the
Ancient Physiologers to become Atomists, must needs induce them also to be
Incorporealists; how the same thing which persuaded them that Corporeal Forms
were no Real Entities distinct from the Substance of the Body, but only the
different Modifications and Mechanisms of it, convinced them likewise, that all
Cogitative Beings, all Souls and Lives whatsoever, were Ingenerable and
Incorruptible, and as well Preexistent before the Generations of Particular
Animals, as Postexistent after their Deaths and Corruptions. Nothing now
remains but only to show more particularly, that it was de facto thus, that the
same persons did from this Principle (that Nothing can come from Nothing and go
to Nothing) both Atomize in their Physiology, taking away all Substantial Forms
and Qualities, and also Theologize or Incorporealize, asserting Souls to be a
Substance really distinct from Matter and Immortal, as also to preexist; and
this we shall do from Empedocles, and first from that Passage of his cited
before in part. (...)
(...), (al. lect. (...))
(...)
(...).
Which I find Latin'd thus, Ast aliud dico; nihil est Mortalibus Ortus,
Est nihil Interitus, qui rebus morte paratur;
Mistio sed solum est, and Conciliatio rerum
Mistilium; haec dici solita est Mortalibus Ortus.


The full Sense whereof is plainly this, That there is no (...) or Production
of any thing which was not before; no new Substance Made, which did not really
Preexist; and therefore that in the Generations and Corruptions of Inanimate
Bodies, there is no Form or Quality really distinct from the Substance produced
and destroyed, but only a various Composition and Modification of Matter: But
in the Generations and Corruptions of Men and Animals, where the Souls are
Substances really distinct from the Matter, that there, there is Nothing but
the Conjunction and Separation of Souls and particular Bodies, existing both
before and after, not the Production of any new Soul into Being which was not
before, nor the absolute Death and Destruction of any into Nothing. Which is
further expressed in these following Verses. (...),
(...),
(...).
To this Sense; That they are Infants in Understanding, and shortsighted, who
think any thing to be Made, which was Nothing before, or any thing to Die, so
as to be Destroyed to Nothing. Upon which Plutarch glosses after this manner:
(...)^ Empedocles does not here destroy Generation, but only such as is out of
Nothing; nor Corruption, but such as is into Nothing. Which, as we have already
intimated, is to be understood differently in respect to Inanimate and Animate
things; for in things Inanimate there is Nothing Produced or Destroyed, because
the Forms and Qualities of them are no Entities really distinct from the
Substance, but only diverse Mixtures and Modifications. But in Animate things,
where the Souls are real Entities really distinct from the Substance of the
Body, there is Nothing Produced nor Destroyed neither, because those Souls do
both exist before their Generations, and after their Corruptions; which
business, as to Men and Souls, is again more fully expressed thus; (...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
That Good and Ill did First us Here attend,
And not from Time Before, the Soul Descend;
That here alone we live, and when
Hence we depart, we forthwith then,
Turn to our old Nonentity again;
Certes ought not to be believed by Wise and Learned Men.


Wherefore, according to Empedocles, this is to be accounted one of the Vulgar
Errors, That Men then only have a being and are capable of Good and Evil, when
they live here that which is called Life; But that both before they are Born,
and after they are Dead, they are perfectly Nothing.

And besides Empedocles, the same is represented by the Greek Tragedian also,
as the Sense of the ancient Philosophers. (...),
(...)
(...).
That Nothing Dies or utterly perishes; but things being variously Concreted
and Secreted, Transposed and Modified, change their Form and Shape only, and
are put into a New Dress.

Agreeably whereunto, Plato also tells us, that it was (...), an ancient
Tradition or Doctrine before his Time, (...)^ That as well the Living were made
out of the Dead, as the Dead out of the Living, and that this was the constant
Circle of Nature. Moreover the same Philosopher acquaints us, that some of
those Ancients were not without suspicion, that what is now called Death, was
to Men more properly a Nativity or Birth into Life, and what is called
Generation into Life, was comparatively rather to be accounted a sinking into
Death; the Former being the Soul's Ascent out of these Gross Terrestrial
Bodies, to a Body more Thin and Subtle, and the Latter its Descent from a purer
Body to that which is more Crass and Terrestrial. (...)^ Who knows whether that
which is called Living be not indeed rather Dying, and that which is called
Dying, Living?

Moreover, that this was the Doctrine of Pythagoras himself, that no Real
Entity perishes in Corruptions, nor is produced in Generations, but only new
Modifications and Transpositions made; is fully expressed by the Latin Poet,
both as to Inanimate, and to Animate Things. Of the first thus: Nec perit in
tanto quicquam (mihi credit) mundo,
Sed variat, faciemque novat: Nascique vocatur
Incipere esse aliud, quam quod fuit ante Morique
Desinere illud idem. Cum sint Huc forsitan Illa,
Haec Translata Illuc: Summa tamen omnia constant.
Of the Second, that the Souls of Animals are Immortal, did preexist and do
transmigrate, from the same Ground, after this manner; Omnia mutantur; Nihil
interit: Errat and illinc,
Huc venit, hinc illuc, and quoslibet occupat artus,
Spiritus, eque Feris Humana in Corpora transit,
Inque Feras Noster, nec tempore deperit ullo.
Vtque novis facilis signatur Cera figuris,
Nec manet ut fuerat, nec formas servat easdem,
Sed tamen ipsa eadem est: Animam sic semper eandem
Esse, sed in varias doceo migrare Figuras.


Wherefore though it be a thing which has not been commonly taken Notice of,
of late, yet we conceive it to be unquestionably true, that all those ancient
Philosophers, who insisted so much upon this Principle, (...)^ That no Real
Entity is either Generated or Corrupted, did therein at once drive at these two
things: First, the establishing of the Immortality of all Souls, their Prae and
Post-existence, forasmuch as being Entities Really distinct from the Body, they
could neither be Generated nor Corrupted; and Secondly, the making of Corporeal
Forms and Qualities to be no Real Entities distinct from the Body and the
Mechanism thereof, because they are things Generated and Corrupted, and have no
Prae and Post-existence. Anaxagoras in this Latter, being the only Dissenter;
who supposing those Forms and Qualities to be real Entities likewise, distinct
from the Substance of Body, therefore attributed Perpetuity of Being to them
also, Prae and Post-existence, in Similar Atoms, as well as to the Souls of
Animals.

And now we have made it sufficiently evident that the Doctrine of the
Incorporeity and Immortality of Souls, we might add also, of their Preexistence
and Transmigration, had the same Original and stood upon the same Basis with
the Atomical Pysiology; and therefore it ought not at all to be wondered at
(what we affirmed before) that the same Philosophers and Pythagoreans asserted
both those Doctrines, and that the Ancient Atomists were both Theists and
Incorporealists.

XXXIV. But now to declare our Sense freely concerning this Philosophy of the
Ancients, which seems to be so prodigiously paradoxical, in respect of that
Pre-existence and Transmigration of Souls: We conceive indeed that this
Ratiocination of theirs from that Principle, That Nothing Naturally, or of it
self, comes from Nothing, nor goes to Nothing, was not only firmly conclusive
against Substantial Forms and Qualities of Bodies, really distinct from their
Substance, but also for Substantial Incorporeal Souls, and their Ingenerability
out of the Matter; and particularly for the future Immortality or
Post-existence of all Humane Souls. For since it is plain, that they are not a
mere Modification of Body or Matter, but an Entity and Substance really
distinct from it, we have no more reason to think, that they can ever of
themselves vanish into Nothing, than that the substance of the Corporeal World
or any part thereof, can do so. For that in the Consumption of Bodies by Fire,
or Age, or the like, there is the destruction of any real Substance into
Nothing, is now generally exploded as an Idiotical conceit, and certainly it
cannot be a jot less Idiotical to suppose that the Rational Soul in Death is
utterly extinguished.

Moreover we add also, that this Ratiocination of the Ancients would be
altogether as firm and irrefragable likewise, for the Pre-existence and
Transmigration of Souls, as it is for their Post-existence and future
Immortality; did we not (as indeed we do) suppose Souls to be Created by God
immediately, and infused in Generations. For they being unquestionably, a
distinct Substance from the Body, and no Substance according to the ordinary
Course of Nature, coming out of Nothing, they must of Necessity either Preexist
in the Universe before Generations, and Transmigrate into their respective
Bodies, or else come from God immediately, who is the Fountain of all, and who
at first created all that Substance that now is in the World besides himself.
Now the latter of these was a thing which those Ancient Philosophers would by
no means admit of; they judging it altogether incongruous, to bring God upon
the Stage perpetually, and make him immediately interpose every where, in the
Generations of Men and all other Animals, by the Miraculous production of Souls
out of Nothing. Notwithstanding which, if we well consider it, we shall find
that there may be very good reason on the other side, for the successive Divine
Creation of Souls; namely, that God did not do all at first, that ever he could
or would do, and put forth all his Creative Vigor at once in a moment, ever
afterward remaining a Spectator only of the consequent Results, and permitting
Nature to do all alone, without the least Interposition of his at any time,
just as if there were no God at all in the World. For this may be, and indeed
often has been, the effect of such an Hypothesis as this, to make men think,
that there is no other God in the World but Blind and Dark Nature. God might
also for other good and wise Ends, unknown to us, reserve to himself the
continual exercise of this his Creative power, in the successive Production of
new Souls. And yet these Souls nevertheless, after they are once brought forth
into being, will notwithstanding their Juniority, continue as firmly in the
same, without vanishing of themselves into Nothing, as the Substance of
Senseless Matter that was Created many thousand years before, will do.

And thus our Vulgar Hypothesis, of the new Creation of Souls, as it is
Rational in it self, so it does sufficiently salve their Incorporeity, their
future Immortality or Post-eternity, without introducing those offensive
Absurdities of their Preexistence and Transmigration.

XXXV. But if there be any such, who rather than they would allow a future
Immortality or Post-existence to all Souls, and therefore to those of Brutes,
which consequently must have their Successive Transmigrations, would conclude
the Souls of all Brutes, as likewise the Sensitive Soul in Man, to be
Corporeal, and only allow the Rational Soul to be distinct from Matter: To
these we have only thus much to say; That they who will attribute Life, Sense,
Cogitation, Consciousness and Self-enjoyment, not without some footsteps of
Reason many times, to Blood and Brains, or mere Organized Bodies in Brutes,
will never be able clearly to defend the Incorporeity and Immortality of Humane
Souls, as most probably they do not intend any such thing. For either all
Conscious and Cogitative Beings are Incorporeal, or else nothing can be proved
to be Incorporeal. From whence it would follow also, that there is no Deity
distinct from the Corporeal World. But though there seem to be no very great
reason, why it should be thought absurd, to grant Perpetuity of Duration to the
Souls of Brutes, any more than to every Atom of Matter, or Particle of Dust
that is in the whole World; yet we shall endeavor to suggest something toward
the easing the minds of those, who are so much burdened with this difficulty;
viz. That they may, if they please, suppose the Souls of Brutes, being but so
many particular Eradiations or Effluxes from that Source of Life above,
whenever and wheresoever there is any fitly prepared Matter capable to
receive them, and to be Actuated by them; to have a sense and frution of
themselves in it, so long as it continues such, but as soon as ever those
Organized Bodies of theirs, by reason of their Indisposition, become incapable
of being further acted upon by them, then to be resumed again and retracted
back to their Original Head and Fountain. Since it cannot be doubted, but what
Creates any thing out of Nothing, or sends it forth from it self, by free and
voluntary Emanation, may be able either to Retract the same back again to its
original Source, or else to Annihilate it at pleasure.

And I find that there have not wanted some among the Gentile Philosophers
themselves, who have entertained this Opinion, whereof Porphyry is one: (...)^
Every irrational Power is resolved into the Life of the Whole.

XXXVI. Neither will this at all weaken the future Immortality or Post-eternity
of Humane Souls. For if we be indeed Theists, and do in very good Earnest
believe a Deity, according to the true Notion of it, we must then needs
acknowledge, that all created Being whatsoever, owes the Continuation and
Perpetuity of its Existence, not to any Necessity of Nature without God, and
Independently upon him, but to the Divine Will only. And therefore though we
had never so much Rational and Philosophical assurance, that our Souls are
Immaterial Substances, distinct from the Body, yet we could not for all that,
have any absolute certainty of their Post-eternity, any otherwise than as it
may be derived to us, from the Immutability and Perfection of the Divine Nature
and Will, which does always that which is Best. For the Essential Goodness and
Wisdom of the Deity is the only Stability of all things. And for ought we
Mortals know, there may be good Reason, why that Grace or Favor of future
Immortality and Post-eternity, that is indulged to Humane Souls, endued with
Reason, Morality, and Liberty of Will, (by means whereof they are capable of
Commendation and Blame, Reward and Punishment) that so they may be Objects for
Divine Justice to display it self upon after this Life, in different
Retributions; may notwithstanding be denied to those lower Lives and more
contemptible Souls of Brutes, alike devoid both of Morality and Liberty.

XXXVII. But if any for all this will still obstinately contend for that
ancient Pythagorick and Empedoclean Hypothesis, That all Lives and Souls
whatsoever are as old as the first Creation, and will continue to Eternity, or
as long as the World does, as a thing more Reasonable and Probable than our
Continual Creation of new Souls, by means whereof they become Juniors both to
the matter of the World and of their own Bodies, and whereby also (as they
pretend) the Divine creative Power is made too Cheap and Prostituted a thing,
as being Famulative always to Brutish, and many times to unlawful Lusts and
undue Conjunctions; but especially than the Continual Decreation and
Annihilation of the Souls of Brutes; we shall not be very unwilling to
acknowledge thus much to them, That indeed of the two, this Opinion is more
Reasonable and Tolerable than that other Extravagancy of those, who will either
make all Souls to be Generated and consequently to be Corporeal, or at least
the Sensitive Soul both in Men and Brutes. For besides the Monstrosity of this
latter opinion, in making two distinct Souls and Perceptive Substances in every
Man, which is a thing sufficiently confuted by Internal Sense, it leaves us
also in an absolute Impossibility, of proving the Immortality of the Rational
Soul, the Incorporeity of any Substance, and by consequence the Existence of
any Deity distinct from the Corporeal World.

And as for that Pretense of theirs, that Senseless Matter may as well become
Sensitive, and as it were kindled into Life and Cogitation, as a Body that was
devoid of Light and Heat, may be Kindled into Fire and Flame; this seems to
argue too much Ignorance of the Doctrine of Bodies, in men otherwise Learned
and Ingenious. The best Naturalists having already concluded, That Fire and
Flame is nothing but such a Motion of the Insensible Parts of a Body, as
whereby they are violently agitated, and many times dissipated and scattered
from each other, begetting in the mean time, t^^se Phancies of Light and Heat
in Animals. Now there is no difficulty at all in conceiving that the Insensible
Particles of a Body, which were before quiescent, may be put into Motion; this
being nothing but a New Modification of them, and no Entity re^lly distinct
from the Substance of Body; as Life, Sense and Cogitation are. There is nothing
in Fire and Flame, or a Kindled Body, different from other Bodies, but only the
Motion or Mechanism, and Phancie of it. And therefore it is but a crude
conceit, which the Atheists and Corporealists of former times have been always
so fond of, That Souls are nothing but Fiery or Flammeous Bodies. For though
Heat in the Bodies of Animals be a Necessary Instrument for Soul and Life to
act by in them, yet it is a thing really distinct from Life; and a Red hot Iron
has not therefore any nearer approximation to Life than it had before, nor the
Flame of a Candle than the extinguished Snuff or Tallow of it; the difference
between them being only in the Agitation of the Insensible Parts. We might also
add, that according to this Hypothesis, the Souls of Animals could not be
Numerically the same throughout the whole space of their Lives: Since that Fire
that needs a Pabulum to prey upon, does not continue always one and the same
Numerical Substance. The Soul of a new born Animal could be no more the same,
with the Soul of that Animal several years after, than the Flame of a new
lighted Candle is the same with that Flame that twinkles last in the Socket.
Which indeed are no more the same than a River or Stream is the same, at
several distances of time. Which Reason may be also extended further to prove
the Soul to be no Body at all, since the Bodies of all Animals are in a
perpetual Flux.

XXXVIII. We have now sufficiently performed our first Task which was to show
from the Origin of the Atomical Physiology, that the Doctrine of Incorporeal
Substance must needs spring up together with it. We shall in the next place
make it manifest, that the Inward Constitution of this Philosophy is also such,
that whosoever really entertains it, and rightly understands it, must of
necessity admit Incorporeal Substance likewise. First therefore, the Atomical
Hypothesis, allowing nothing to Body, but what is either included in the Idaea
of a thing Impenetrably extended, or can clearly be conceived to be a Mode of
it, as more or less Magnitude with Divisibility, Figure, Site, Motion and Rest,
together with the Results of their several Combinations; cannot possibly make
Life and Cogitation to be Qualities of Body, since they are neither contained
in those things before mentioned, nor can result from any (...) or Conjugations
of them. Wherefore it must needs be granted, that Life and Cogitation are the
Attributes of another Substance distinct from Body, or Incorporeal.

Again, since according to the Tenor of this Physiology, Body has no other
Action belonging to it but that of Local Motion, which Local Motion as such, is
Essentially Heterokinesie, that which never springs originally from the thing
it self moving, but always from the Action of some other Agent upon it: That
is, since no Body could ever move it self; it follows undeniably, that there
must be something else in the World besides Body, or else there could never
have been any Motion in it. Of which we shall speak more afterward.

Moreover, according to this Philosophy, the Corporeal Phenomenon themselves
cannot be salved by Mechanism alone without Phancie. Now Phancie is no Mode of
Body, and therefore must needs be a Mode of some other kind of Being in our
selves, that is Cogitative and Incorporeal.

Furthermore it is evident, from the Principles of this Philosophy, that Sense
it self is not a mere Corporeal Passion from Bodies without, in that it
supposes that there is nothing really in Bodies like to those Fantastic
Idaea's that we have of Sensible things, as of Hot and Cold, Red and Green,
Bitter and Sweet, and the like, which therefore must needs owe their Being to
some Activity of the Soul it self, and this is all one as to make it
Incorporeal.

Lastly, from this Philosophy, it is also manifest, that Sense is not the (...)
of Truth concerning Bodies themselves, it confidently pronouncing that those
supposed Qualities of Bodies, represented such by Sense, are merely
Fantastical things; from whence it plainly follows, that there is something in
us superior to Sense, which judges of it, detects its Phantastry, and condemns
its Imposture, and determines what really is and is not, in Bodies without us,
which must needs be a higher Self-active Vigor of the Mind, that will plainly
speak it to be Incorporeal.

XXXIX. And now this Atomical Physiology of the Ancients seems to have two
Advantages or Preeminences belonging to it, the first whereof is this; That it
renders the Corporeal World Intelligible to us; since Mechanism is a thing that
we can clearly understand, and we cannot clearly and distinctly conceive any
thing in Bodies else. To say that this or that is done by a Form or Quality, is
nothing else but to say that it is done we know not how, or, which is yet more
absurd, to make our very Ignorance of the Cause, disguised under those Terms of
Forms and Qualities, to be it self the Cause of the Effect.

Moreover, Hot and Cold, Red and Green, Bitter and Sweet, etc. formally
considered, may be clearly conceived by us as different Phancies and Vital
Passions in us, occasioned by different Motions made from the objects without,
upon our Nerves; but they can never be clearly understood as absolute Qualities
in the Bodies themselves, really distinct from their Mechanical Dispositions;
nor is there indeed any more reason why they should be thought such, than that,
when a Man is pricked with a Pin, or wounded with a Sword, the Pain which he
feels should be thought to be an Absolute Quality in the Pin or Sword. So long
as our Sensible Idaea's are taken either for Substantial Forms or Qualities in
Bodies without us, really distinct from the Substance of the Matter, so long
are they perfectly unintelligible by us. For which Cause Timaeus Locrus
Philosophizing (as it seems) after this manner, did consentaneously thereunto
determine, That Corporeal things could not be apprehended by us, otherwise than
(...), by Sense and a kind of Spurious or Bastardly Reason; that is, that we
could have no clear Conceptions of them in our Understanding. And for the same
reason Plato himhimself distinguishes betwixt such things as are (...).
Comprehensible by the Understanding with Reason, and those which are only
(...), which can only be apprehended by Opinion, together with a certain
Irrational Sense, meaning plainly, by the Latter, Corporeal and Sensible
things. And accordingly the Platonists frequently take occasion from hence, to
enlarge themselves much in the disparagement of Corporeal things, as being, by
Reason of that smallness of Entity that is in them, below the Understanding,
and not having so much (...) as (...), Essence as Generation, which indeed is
Fine Phancie. Wherefore we must either, with these Philosophers, make Sensible
things to be (...) or (...), altogether Incomprehensible and Inconceivable by
our Humane Understandings, (though they be able in the mean time clearly to
conceive many things of a higher Nature) or else we must entertain some kind of
favorable Opinion concerning that which is the Ancientest of all Physiologies,
the Atomical or Mechanical, which alone renders Sensible things Intelligible.

XL. The Second Advantage, which this Atomical Physiology seems to have, is
this, That it prepares an easy and clear way for the Demonstration of
Incorporeal Substances, by settling a Distinct Notion of Body. He that will
undertake to prove that there is something else in the World besides Body, must
first determine what Body is, for otherwise he will go about to prove that
there is something besides He-knows-not-what. But now if all Body be made to
consist of two Substantial Principles, whereof one is Matter devoid of all
Form, (and therefore of Quantity as well as Qualities) from whence these
Philosophers (...)^ Matter is Incorporeal. Plotin. p. 164.
themselves conclude that it is Incorporeal; the other, Form, which being devoid
of all Matter, must needs be Incorporeal likewise. And thus Stobaeus sets down
the joint Doctrine both of Plato and Aristotle; (...)^ That in the same manner,
as Form alone separated from Matter is Incorporeal, so neither is Matter alone,
the Form being separated from it, Body. But there is need of the joint
concurrence of both these, Matter and Form together, to make up the Substance
of Body; Moreover, if to Forms Qualities be likewise superadded, of which it is
consentaneously also resolved by the Platonists, Alcinous cap. 11.
(...), that Qualities are Incorporeal, as if they were so many Spirits
possessing Bodies; I say, in this way of Philosophizing, the Notions of Body
and Spirit, Corporeal and Incorporeal, are so confounded, that it is Impossible
to prove any thing at all concerning them. Body it self being made Incorporeal
(and therefore every thing Incorporeal) for whatsoever is wholly compounded and
made up of Incorporeals, must needs be it self also Incorporeal.

Furthermore, according to this Doctrine of Matter, Forms and Qualities in
Body; Life and Understanding may be supposed to be certain Forms or Qualities
of Body. And then the Souls of men may be nothing else but Blood or Brains,
endued with the Qualities of Sense, and Understanding; or else some other more
Subtle, Sensitive and Rational Matter, in us. And the like may be said of God
himself also; That he is nothing but a certain Rational, or Intellectual,
Subtle and Fiery Body, pervading the whole Universe; or else that he is the
Form of the whole Corporeal World, together with the Matter making up but one
Substance. Which Conceits have been formerly entertained by the best of those
Ancients, who were captivated under that dark Infirmity of mind, to think that
there could be no other Substance besides Body.

But the ancient Atomical Philosophy, settling a distinct Notion of Body, that
it is (...), a Thing Impenetrably extended, which has nothing belonging to it,
but Magnitude, Figure, Site, Rest, and Motion, without any Self-moving Power;
takes away all Confusion; shows clearly how far Body can go, where Incorporeal
Substance begins; as also that there must of necessity be such a Thing in the
World.

Again, this discovering not only that the Doctrine of Qualities had its
Original from men's mistaking their own Phancies, for Absolute Realities in
Bodies themselves; but also that the Doctrine of Matter and Form Sprung from
another Fallacy or Deception of the Mind, in taking Logical Notions, and our
Modes of Conceiving, for Modes of Being, and Real Entities in things without
us; It showing likewise, that because there is nothing else clearly
intelligible in Body, besides Magnitude, Figure, Site, and Motion, and their
various Conjugations, there can be no such Entities of Forms and Qualities
really distinct from the Substance of Body; makes it evident, that Life,
Cogitation and Understanding can be no Corporeal things, but must needs be the
Attributes of another kind of Substance distinct from Body.

XLI. We have now clearly proved these two things; First, that the Physiology
of the Ancients, before, not only Aristotle and Plato, but also Democritus and
Leucippus, was Atomical or Mechanical. Secondly, that as there is no
Inconsistency between the Atomical Physiology and Theology, but indeed a
Natural Cognation; so the Ancient Atomists before Democritus, were neither
Atheists nor Corporealists, but held the Incorporeity and Immortality of Souls,
together with a Deity distinct from the Corporeal World. Wherefore the First
and most Ancient Atomists did not make (...), they never endeavored to make up
an Entire Philosophy out of Atomology; but the Doctrine of Atoms was to them
only one Part or Member of the whole Philosophic System, they joining
thereunto the Doctrine of Incorporeal Substance, and Theology, to make it up
complete: Accordingly as Aristotle has declared in his Metaphysics, that the
Ancient Philosophy consisted of these two Parts, (...), and (...) or (...),
Physiology, and Theology or Metaphysics. Our Ancient Atomists never went
about, as the blundering Democritus afterward did, to build up a World out of
mere Passive Bulk, and Sluggish Matter, without any (...), any Active
Principles, or Incorporeal Powers; understanding well, that thus, they could
not have so much as Motion, Mechanism, or Generation in it; the Original of all
that Motion that is in Bodies springing from something that is not Body, that
is, from Incorporeal Substance. And yet if Local Motion could have been
supposed to have risen up, or sprung in upon this Dead Lump and Mass of Matter,
no body knows how, and without dependence upon any Incorporeal Being, to have
Actuated it Fortuitously; these Ancient Atomists would still have thought it
Impossible for the Corporeal World it self, to be made up, such as now it is,
by Fortuitous Mechanism, without the Guidance of any higher Principle. But they
would have concluded it, the greatest Impudence or Madness, for men to assert
that Animals also consisted of mere Mechanism; or, that Life and Sense, Reason
and Understanding, were really nothing else but Local Motion, and consequently
that themselves were but Machins and Automata. Wherefore they joined both
Active and Passive Principles together, the Corporeal and Incorporeal Nature,
Mechanism and Life, Atomology and Pneumatology, and from both these united,
they made up one entire System of Philosophy, correspondent with, and agreeable
to, the true and real World without them. And this System of Philosophy, thus
consisting of the Doctrine of Incorporeal Substance (whereof God is the Head)
together with the Atomical and Mechanical Physiology, seems to have been the
only Genuine, Perfect, and Complete.

XLII. But it did not long continue thus; for, after a while, this entire Body
of Philosophy came to be Mangled and Dismembered, some taking one Part of it
alone, and some another; some snatching away the Atomical Physiology, without
the Pneumatology and Theology; and others, on the contrary, taking the Theology
and Doctrine of Incorporeals, without the Atomical or Mechanical Physiology.
The former of these were Democritus, Leucippus, and Protagoras, who took only
the dead Carcass or Skeleton of the old Moschical Philosophy, namely the
Atomical Physiology; the latter Plato and Aristotle, who took indeed the better
Part, the Soul, Spirit, and Quintessence of it, the Theology and Doctrine of
Incorporeals, but Unbodied, and Divested of its most Proper and convenient
Vehicle, the Atomical Physiology, whereby it became exposed to sundry
Inconveniences.

XLIII. We begin with Leucippus and Democritus; Who being Atheistically
inclined, quickly perceived, that they could not in the ordinary way of
Physiologizing, sufficiently secure themselves against a Deity, nor effectually
urge Atheism upon others; forasmuch as Heraclitus and other Philosophers, who
held that all Substance was Body, as well as themselves, did notwithstanding
assert a Corporeal Deity, maintaining that the Form of the whole Corporeal
World was God, or else that he was (...), a certain kind of Body or Matter, as
(for Example) a Methodical and Rational Fire, pervading (as a Soul) the whole
Universe; the particular Souls of men and Animals being but, as it were, so
many pieces, cut and sliced out of the great Mundane Soul; so that according to
them, the whole Corporeal Universe, or Mass of Body, was one way or other a
God, a most Wise and Understanding Animal, that did frame all Particularities
within it self in the best manner possible, and providently govern the same.
Wherefore those Atheists now apprehending, upon what ticklish and uncertain
Terms their Atheistical Philosophy then stood, and how that those very Forms
and Qualities, and the Self-moving power of Body, which were commonly made a
Sanctuary for Atheism, might notwithstanding chance to prove, contrariwise, the
Latibulum and Asylum of a Deity, and that a Corporeal God (do what they could)
might lie lurking under them, assaulting men's minds with doubtful Fears and
Jealousies; Understanding moreover, that there was another kind of Physiology
set on foot, which banishing those Forms and Qualities of Body, attributed
nothing to it but Magnitude, Figure, Site, and Motion, without any Self-moving
Power; they seemed presently to apprehend some great Advantage to themselves
and Cause from it; and therefore greedily entertained this Atomical or
Mechanical Physiology, and violently cutting it off from that other part, the
Doctrine of Incorporeals, which it was Naturally and Vitally united to,
endeavored to serve their turns of it. And now joining these two things
together, the Atomical Physiology, which supposes that there is nothing in
body, but Magnitude, Figure, Site and Motion, and that Prejudice or
Prepossession of their own Minds, that there was no other Substance in the
World besides Body; between them both, they begat a certain Mongrel and
Spurious Philosophy, Atheistically-Atomical, or Atomically-Atheistical.

But though we have so well proved, that Leucippus and Democritus were not the
first Inventors, but only the Depravers and Adulterators of the Atomical
Philosophy; yet if any will notwithstanding obstinately contend, that the first
Invention thereof ought to be imputed to them, the very Principles of their
Atheism seeming to lead them naturally to this, to strip and divest Body of all
those Forms and Qualities, it being otherwise Impossible for them, surely and
safely to exclude a Corporeal Deity; yet so, as that the Wit of these Atheists
was also much to be admired, in the managing and carrying on of those
Principles in such a manner, as to make up so Entire a System of Philosophy out
of them, all whose parts should be so coherent and consistent together; We
shall only say thus much; That if those Atheists were the first Inventors of
this Philosophy, they were certainly very unhappy and unsuccessful in it,
whilst endeavoring by it to secure themselves from the Possibility and Danger
of a Corporeal God, they unawares laid a Foundation for the clear Demonstration
of an Incorporeal one, and were indeed so far from making up any such coherent
Frame as is pretended, that they were forced every where to contradict their
own Principles; so that Nonsense lies at the bottom of all, and is interwoven
throughout their whole Atheistical System. And that we ought to take notice of
the invincible power and Force of Truth, prevailing irresistibly against all
Endeavors to oppress it; and how desperate the Cause of Atheism is, when that
very Atomical Hypothesis of theirs, which they would erect and build up for a
strong Castle to garrison themselves in, proves a most Effectual Engine against
themselves, for the battering of all their Atheistical Structure down about
their Ears.

XLIV. Plato's Mutilation and Interpolation of the old Moschical Philosophy,
was a great deal more excusable, when he took the Theology and Metaphysics of
it, the whole Doctrine of Incorporeals, and abandoned the Atomical or
Mechanical way of Physiologizing. Which, in all Probability, he did, partly
because those forementioned Atheists having so much abused that Philosophy,
adopting it as it were to themselves, he thereupon began to entertain a
Jealousy and Suspicion of it; and partly, because he was not of himself so
inclinable to Physiology as Theology, to the study of Corporeal as of Divine
things; which some think to be the reason why he did not attend to the
Pythagorick System of the Corporeal World, till late in his old Age. His Genius
was such, that he was Naturally more addicted to Idaea's than to Atoms, to
Formal and Final than to Material Causes. To which may be added, that the way
of Physiologizing by Matter, Forms and Qualities, is a more Huffie and
Phanciful thing than the other; and lastly, that the Atomical Physiology is
more remote from Sense and vulgar Apprehension, and therefore not so easily
understood. For which cause many learned Greeks of later times, though they had
read Epicurus his Works, and perhaps Democritus his too, yet they were not able
to conceive how the Corporeal and Sensible Phenomenon could possibly be salved
without Real Qualities. One Instance whereof might be given in Plutarch,
writing against Colotes the Epicurean. Wherefore Plato, that was a zealous
Asserter of an Incorporeal Deity, distinct from the World, and of Immortal
Souls, seriously Physiologized only by Matter, Forms and Qualities, Generation,
Corruption and Alteration; and he did but play and toy sometimes a little with
Atoms and Mechanism. As where he would compound the Earth of Cubical, and Fire
of Pyramidal Atoms, and the like. For that he did therein imitate the Atomical
Physiology is plain from these words of his; (...)^ All these Cubical and
Pyramidal Corpuscula of the Fire and Earth are in themselves so small, that by
reason of their parvitude, none of them can be perceived singly and alone, but
only the Aggregations of many of them together.

XLV. And Aristotle here trod in Plato's footsteps, not only in the better
part, in asserting an Incorporeal Deity, and an Immovable first Mover; but
also in Physiologizing by Forms and Qualities, and rejecting that Mechanical
way by Atoms, which had been so generally received amongst the Ancients.
Wherefore though the Genius of these two Persons was very different, and
Aristotle often contradicts Plato, and really dissents from him in several
Particularities; yet, so much I think may be granted to those Reconcilers, (
Porphyry, Simplicius, and others) that the main Essentials of their two
Philosophies are the same.

Now I say the whole Aristotelical System of Philosophy is infinitely to be
preferred before the whole Democritical; though the former has been so much
disparaged, and the other cried up of late amongst us. Because, though it
cannot be denied but that the Democritick Hypothesis does much more handsomely
and intelligibly salve the Corporeal Phenomenon, yet in all those other things
which are of far the greatest moment, it is rather a Madness than a Philosophy.
But the Aristotelick System is right and sound here, as to those greater
things; it asserting Incorporeal Substance, a Deity distinct from the World,
the Naturality of Morality, and Liberty of Will. Wherefore though a late Writer
of Politics do so exceedingly disparage Aristotle's Ethics, yet we shall do
him this right here to declare, that his Ethics were truly such, and answered
their Title; but that new Modle of Ethics, which has been obtruded upon the
World with so much Fastuosity, and is indeed nothing but the old Democritick
Doctrine revived, is no Ethics at all, but a mere Cheat, the undermining and
subversion of all Morality, by substituting something like it in the Room of
it, that is a mere Counterfeit and Changeling. The Design whereof could not be
any other than to debauch the World.

We add further, that Aristotle's System of Philosophy seems to be more
consistent with Piety, than the Cartesian Hypothesis it self, which yet plainly
supposes Incorporeal Substance. For as much as this latter makes God to
contribute nothing more to the Fabric of the World, than the Turning round of
a Vortex or Whirlpool of Matter; from the fortuitous Motion of which, according
to certain General Laws of Nature, must proceed all this Frame of things that
now is, the exact Organization, and successive Generation of Animals, without
the Guidance of any Mind or Wisdom. Whereas Aristotle's Nature is no Fortuitous
Principle, but such as does Nothing in Vain, but all for Ends, and in every
thing pursues the Best; and therefore can be no other than a Subordinate
Instrument of the Divine Wisdom, and the Manuary Opificer or Executioner of it.

However, we cannot deny, but that Aristotle has been taxed by sundry of the
Ancients, Christians and others, for not so explicitly asserting these two
things, the Immortality of Humane Souls, and Providence over men, as he ought
to have done, and as his Master Plato did. Though to do him all the right we
can, we shall observe here, that in his Nicomachian Ethics, he speaks
favorably for the Latter, (...)^ If God take any Care of Humane things, as it
seems he does, then it is reasonable to think also, that he is delighted with
that which is the Best, and nearest akin to himself (which is Mind or Right
Reason) and that he rewards those who most Love and Honor it (as taking care
of such things as are most pleasing to him) in doing rightly and honestly. A
very good Sentence, were it not Ushered in with too much of Skepticism. And as
for the Point of the Soul's Immortality; It is true, that whereas other
Philosophers before Aristotle, asserted the Preexistence, Incorporeity, and
Immortality of all Souls, not only the Rational but the Sensitive also, (which
in Men they concluded to be one and the same Substance) according to that of
Plato's, (...), Every Soul is Immortal, they resolving that no Life nor
Cogitation could be Corporeal; Aristotle, on the contrary, does expressly deny
he Preexistence, that is, the Separability, Incorporeity and Immortality of all
Sensitive Souls, not in Brutes only, but also every where, tgiving his reason
for it in these words; (...)^ That all Souls cannot Preexist, is manifest from
hence, because those Principles whose Action is Corporeal, cannot possibly
exist without the Body, as the Power of Walking without the Feet: Wherefore it
is impossible that these Sensitive Souls (preexisting) should come into the
Body from without, since they can neither come alone by themselves naked and
stripped of all Body, they being inseparable from it; neither can they come in
with a Body, that is, the Seed. This is Aristotle's Argument, why all Sensitive
Souls must needs be Corporeal, because there is no Walking without Feet, nor
Seeing without Eyes. But at the same time, he declares that the Mind or
Intellect does Preexist and come in from without, that is, is Incorporeal,
Separable and Immortal, giving his Reason for it in like manner, (...)^ It
remains that the Mind or Intellect, and that alone (preexisting) enter from
without and be only Divine; since its Energy is not blended with that of the
Bodies, but it acts independently upon it. Notwithstanding which, Aristotle
elsewhere distinguishing concerning this Mind or Intellect, and making it to be
twofold, Agent, and Patient, concludes the former of them only to be Immortal,
but the latter Corruptible, (...), The Agent Intellect is only Immortal and
Eternal, but the Passive is Corruptible; where some Interpreters that would
willingly excuse Aristotle, contend that by the Passive Intellect, is not meant
the Patient, but the Fantasy only, because Aristotle should otherwise
contradict himself, who had before affirmed, the Intellect to be Separable,
Unmixed and Inorganical, which they conceive must needs be understood of the
Patient. But this Salvo can hardly take place here, where the Passive Intellect
is directly opposed to the Agent. Now what Aristotle's Agent Understanding is,
and whether it be any thing in us, any Faculty of our Humane Soul or no, seems
to be a thing very questionable, and has therefore caused much Dispute amongst
his Interpreters; it being resolved by many of them to be the Divine Intellect,
and commonly by others, a Foreign Thing. Whence it must needs be left doubtful,
whether he acknowledged any thing Incorporeal and Immortal at all in us. And
the rather because, laying down this Principle, That nothing is Incorporeal,
but what acts independently upon the Body, he somewhere plainly determines,
that there is no Intellection without Corporeal Phantasms. That which led
Aristotle to all this; positively to affirm the Corporeity of Sensitive Souls,
and to stagger so much concerning the Incorporeity of the Rational, seems to
have been his Doctrine of Forms and Qualities, whereby Corporeal and
Incorporeal Substance are confounded together, so that the Limits of each could
not be discerned by him. Wherefore we cannot applaud Aristotle for this; but
that which we commend him for, is chiefly these Four things: First, for making
a Perfect Incorporeal Intellect to be the Head of all; and Secondly, for
resolving that Nature, as an Instrument of this Intellect, does not merely act
according to the Necessity of Material Motions, but for Ends and Purposes,
though unknown to it self; Thirdly, for maintaining the Naturality of Morality;
and Lastly, for asserting the (...), Autexousie, or Liberty from Necessity.

CHAP. II.
In this Chapter are contained all the pretended Grounds of Reason for the
Atheistick Hypothesis. 1. That the Democritick Philosophy which is made up of
these two Principles, Corporealism and Atomism complicated together, is
Essentially Atheistical. 2. Though Epicurus, who was an Atomical-Corporealist,
pretended to assert a Democracy of Gods, yet he was, for all that, an Absolute
Atheist: And that Atheists commonly Equivocate and Disguise themselves. 3. That
the Democritical Philosophy is nothing else but a System of Atheology, or
Atheism swaggering under the glorious Appearance of Philosophy. And though
there be another Form of Atheism which we call Stratonical, yet the Democritick
Atheism is only considerable; all whose Dark Mysteries will be here revealed.
4. That we being to treat concerning the Deity, and to produce all that Profane
and Unhallowed Stuff of Atheists in order to a Confutation, the Divine
Assistance and Direction ought to be implored. 5. That there are Two things
here to be performed: First, to show what are the Atheist's pretended Grounds
of Reason against the Deity; and Secondly, how they endeavor either to Salve
or Confute the Contrary Phenomenon. The First of those Grounds, That no man can
have an Idaea or Conception of God, and that he is an Incomprehensible Nothing.
6. The Second Atheistick Argument, That there can be no Creation out of
Nothing, nor no Omnipotence, because Nothing can come from Nothing, and
therefore whatsoever Substantially is, was from Eternity Self-existent, and
Uncreated by any Deity. 7. The Third pretended Reason against a Deity, That the
Strictest Notion of a God implying him to be Incorporeal, there can be no such
Incorporeal Deity, because there is no other Substance but Body. 8. The
Atheists Pretense, That the Doctrine of Incorporeal Substances sprung from a
Ridiculous Mistaking of Abstract Names and Notions for Realities. They
Impudently make the Deity to be but the Chief of Specter, and an Oberon or
Prince of Fairies and Phancies. Their Fourth Argument against a Deity, That to
suppose an Incorporeal Mind to be the Original of all things, is but to make a
mere Accident and Abstract Notion to be the First Cause of all. 9. Their Fifth
Argument; a Confutation of a Corporeal Deity from the Principles of
Corporealism it self, That Matter being the only Substance, and all other
Differences of things nothing but Accidents, Generable and Corruptible; no
Living Understanding Being can be Essentially Incorruptible. The Stoical God
Incorruptible, only by Accident. 19. Their Sixth Ratiocination from a
Complication of Atomicism; That the First Principle of all things whatsoever in
the Universe, is Atoms or Corpuscula devoid of all Qualities, and consequently
of Sense and Understanding, (which spring up afterward from a certain
Composition of them) and therefore Mind or Deity was not the First Original of
all. 11. In the Seventh place they disprove the Worlds Animation, or its being
governed by a Living Understanding Animalish Nature, presiding over the Whole;
Because Sense and Understanding are a Peculiar Appendix to Flesh Blood and
Brains, and Reason is no where to be found but in Humane Form. 12. The Eighth
Atheistick Ground, That God being taken by all for a most Happy, Eternal and
Immortal Animal, (or Living Being) there can be no such thing, because all
Living Beings are Concretions of Atoms that were at first Generated, and are
liable to Death and Corruption by the Dissolution of their Compages. And that
Life is no simple Primitive Nature, but an Accidental Modification of
Compounded Bodies, which upon the Disunion of their Parts vanishes into
Nothing. 13. The Ninth pretended Atheistick Demonstration, That by God is meant
a first Cause or Mover, which was not before moved by any thing else without
it; But Nothing can move it self, and therefore there can be no Vnmoved Mover,
nor any First in the order of Causes, that is, a God. 14. Their further Proof
of this Principle, That Nothing can move it self, with an Atheistick Corollary
from thence, That no Thinking Being could be a First Cause, no Cogitation
arising of it self without a Cause; which may be reckoned a Tenth Argument. 15.
Another Mystery of Atheism, That all Knowledge, and Mental Conception, is the
Information of the things themselves known, existing without the Knower, and a
Passion from them; and therefore the World must needs be before any Knowledge
or Conception of it, and no Knowledge or Conception before the World, as its
Cause. 16. The Twelfth Argumentation, That things could not be made by a God,
because they are so Faulty and Ill made, that they were not contrived for the
Good of Man, and that the Deluge of Evils, that overflows all, shows that they
did not proceed from any Deity. 17. The Thirteenth Instance of the Atheists
against a Deity, from the Defect of Providence, That in Humane Affairs all is
Tohu and Bohu, Chaos and Confusion. 18. The Fourteenth Atheistick Ground, That
it is not possible for any one Being to Animadvert and Order all things in the
distant places of the whole World at once: But if it were possible, That such
Infinite Negotiosity would be Absolutely Inconsistent with Happiness. 19.
Several bold but slight Queries of Atheists, Why the World was not made sooner?
and What God did before? Why it was made at all, since it was so long unmade?
and, How the Architect of the World could rear up so huge a Fabric? 20. The
Atheists Pretense, That it is the great Interest of Mankind, That there should
be no God; and that it was a Noble and Heroical Exploit of the Democriticks, to
chase away that affrightful Spectre out of the World, and to free men from the
continual Fear of a Deity and Punishment after Death, imbittering all the
Pleasures of Life. 21. Another Pretense of theirs, That Theism is inconsistent
with Civil Sovereignty, it introducing a Fear greater than the Fear of the
Leviathan; And that any other Conscience allowed of besides the Civil Law
(being Private Judgment) is, ipso facto, a Dissolution of the Body Politic and
a Return to the State of Nature. 22. The Atheists Conclusion from the former
Premises, as set down in Plato and Lucretius, That all things sprung
Originally from Nature and Chance, without any Mind or God, that is, proceeded
from the Necessity of Material Motions, undirected for Ends; That Infinite
Atoms devoid of Life and Sense, moving in Infinite Space from Eternity, by
their fortuitous Rencounters and Intanglements, produced the System of the
whole Universe, and as well Animate as Inanimate things.

I. HAving in the Former Chapter given an Account of the Genuine and Primitive
Atomical Philosophy, which may be called the Moschical; we are in the next
place to consider the Democritical, that is, the Atheized and Adulterated
Atomology. Which had its Origin from nothing else but the joining of this
Heterogeneous and Contradictious Principle, to the Atomical Physiology, That
there is no other Substance in the World besides Body. Now we say, That that
Philosophy which is thus compounded and made up of these Two things, Atomicism
and Corporealism complicated together, is essentially Atheistical, though
neither of them alone be such. For the Atomical Physiology, as we have declared
already, is in its own Nature sufficiently repugnant to Atheism. And it is
possible for one who holds, That there is Nothing in the world besides Body, to
be persuaded notwithstanding of a Corporeal Deity, and that the world was at
first framed and is still governed by an Understanding Nature lodged in the
Matter. For thus some of these Corporealists have phancied, The whole Universe
it self to be a God, that is, an Understanding and Wise Animal, that ordered
all things within it self, after the Best manner possible, and providently
governed the same. Indeed it cannot be denied, but that this is a very great
Infirmity of mind, that such Persons lie under, who are not able to conceive
any other Substance besides Body, by which is understood, that which is
Impenetrably Extended, or else in Plato's Language, which has (...), that
thrusts against other Bodies and resist^ their impulse; or as others express
it, which is (...), that so fills up place, as to exclude any other Body or
Substance from Coexisting with it therein; and such must needs have not only
very imperfect, but also Spurious and false Conceptions of the Deity, so long
as they apprehend it to be thus Corporeal; but yet it does not therefore follow
that they must needs be accounted Atheists. But whosoever holds these two
Principles (before mentioned) together, That there is no other Substance
besides Body, and That Body has nothing else belonging to it but Magnitude,
Figure, Site and Motion, without Qualities, I say, whosoever is That confounded
Thing, of an Atomist and Corporealist jumbled together, he is Essentially and
Unavoidably that which is meant by an Atheist, though he should in words never
so much disclaim it, because he must needs fetch the Original of all things
from Senseless Matter, whereas to assert a God, is to maintain that all things
sprung Originally from a Knowing and Understanding Nature.

II. Epicurus, who was one of those Mongrel Things before mentioned, (an
Atomical-Corporealist or Corporeal-Atomist) did notwithstanding profess to hold
a Multifarious Rabble and Democracy of Gods, such as though they were (...), of
Humane Form, yet were so Thin and Subtle, as that Comparatively with our
Terrestrial Bodies they might be called Incorporeal; they having not so much
Carnem as Quasi-carnem, nor Sanguinem as Quasi-sanguinem, a certain kind of
Aereal or Ethereal Flesh and Blood: which Gods of his were not to be supposed
to exist any where within the World, upon this pretense, that there was no
place in it fit to receive them, Illud item non est ut possis credere Seeds
Esse Deum Sanctas, in Mundi partibus ullis.
And therefore they must be imagined to Subsist in certain Intermundane Spaces,
and Vtopian Regions without the World, the Deliciousness whereof is thus
Elegantly described by the Poet, Quas neque concutiunt Venti, neque Nubila
nimbis
Adspergunt, neque nix acri concreta pruina
Cana cadens violat, semperque innubilus Ether
Integit, and large diffuso lumine ridet.
Whereunto was added, that the chief Happiness of these Gods consisted, in
Omnium Vacatioue Munerum, in freedom from all Business and Employment, and
doing nothing at all, that so they might live a Soft and Delicate life. And
lastly, it was pretended, that though they had neither any thing to do with us,
nor we with them, yet they ought to be worshipped by us for their own Excellent
Natures sake, and Happy State.

But whosoever had the least Sagacity in him could not but perceive, that this
Theology of Epicurus was but Romantical, it being directly Contrary to his
avowed and professed Principles, to admit of any other Being then what was
Concreted of Atoms, and consequently Corruptible; and that he did this upon a
Politic Account, thereby to decline the Common Odium, and those Dangers and
Inconveniences which otherwise he might have incurred by a downright denial of
a God, to which purpose it accordingly served his turn. Thus Posidonius rightly
pronounced, Nullos esse Deos Epicuro videri; quaeque is de Diis immortalibus
dixerit, Invidiae detestandae gratia dixisse. Though he was partly Jocular in
it also, it making no small Sport to him, in this manner, to delude and mock
the credulous Vulgar. Deos Jocandi causa induxit Epicurus perlucidos and
perflabiles, and habitantes tanquam inter duos Lucos, sic inter duos Mundos
propter metum ruinarum. However if Epicurus had been never so much in Earnest
in all this, yet by Gassendus his leave, we should pronounce him to have been
not a jot the less an Atheist, so long as he maintained, that the whole World
was made (...), without the ordering and direction of any Understanding Being
that was perfectly happy and immortal, and fetched the original of all things in
the Universe, even of Soul and Mind, (...), from Senseless Atoms fortuitously
moved. He together with Democritus hereby making the World to be, in the worst
Sense, (...), an Egg of the Night, that is, not the offspring of Mind and
Understanding, but of dark Senseless Matter, of Tohu and Bohu, or Confused
Chaos; and deriving the Original of all the Perfections in the Universe, from
the most Imperfect Being and the lowest of all Entities, than which nothing can
be more Atheistical. And as for those Romantic Monogrammous Gods of Epicurus,
had they been Seriously believed by him, they could have been nothing else but
a certain kind of Aerial and Spectrous Men, living by themselves, no Body knows
where, without the World; (...), Epicurus according to Vulgar Opinion leaves a
God, but according to the Nature of things none at all.

And as Epicurus so other Atheists in like manner, have commonly had their
Vizards and Disguises; Atheism for the most part prudenly choosing to walk
abroad in Masquerade. And though some over-credulous Persons have been so far
imposed upon hereby, as to conclude that there was hardly any such thing as an
Atheist any where in the World, yet they that are Sagacious, may easily look
through these thin Veils and Disguises, and perceive these Atheists oftentimes
insinuating their Atheism even then, when they most of all profess themselves
Theists, by affirming that it is impossible to have any Idaea or Conception at
all of God, and that as he is not Finite so he cannot be Infinite, and that no
Knowledge or Understanding is to be attributed to him, which is in effect to
say, that there is no such thing. But whosoever entertains the Democritick
Principles, that is, both rejects Forms and Qualities of Body, and makes all
things to be Body, though he pretend never so much to hold a Corporeal Deity,
yet he is not at all to be believed in it, it being a thing plainly
Contradictious to those Principles.

III. Wherefore this Mongrel Philosophy, which Leucippus, Democritus and
Protagoras, were the Founders of, and which was entertained afterward by
Epicurus, that makes (as Laertius writes) (...), Senseless Atoms to be the first
Principles, not only of all Bodies (for that was a thing admitted before by
Empedocles and other Atomists that were Theists) but also of All things
whatsoever in the whole Universe, and therefore of Soul and Mind too; this, I
say, was really nothing else but a Philosophical Form of Atheology, a
Gigantical and Titanical Attempt, to dethrone the Deity, not only by Salving
all the Phenomenon of the World without a God, but also by laying down such
Principles, from whence it must needs follow, that there could be neither an
Incorporeal nor Corporeal Deity. It was Atheism openly Swaggering, under the
glorious Appearance of Wisdom and Philosophy.

There is indeed another Form of Atheism, which (insisting on the Vulgar way of
Philosophizing by Forms and Qualities) we for distinction sake shall call
Stratonical; such as being too modest and shame-faced to fetch all things from
the Fortuitous Motion of Atoms, would therefore allow to the several Parts of
Matter, a certain Kind of Natural (though not Animal) Perception, such as is
devoid of Reflexive Consciousness, together with a Plastic power, whereby they
may be able Artificially and Methodically to Form and Frame themselves to the
best advantage of their Respective Capabilities; something like to Aristotle's
Nature, but that it has no dependence at all upon any higher Mind or Deity.
And these Atheists may be also called Hylozoick (as the other Atomick) because
they derive all things in the whole Universe, not only Sensitive but also
Rational Souls, together with the Artificial Frame of Animals, from the Life of
the Matter. But this kind of Atheism seems to be but an unshapen Embryo of some
Dark and Cloudy Brains that was never yet digested into an entire System, nor
could be brought into any such tolerable Form, as to have the confidence to
show it self abroad in full and open View. But the Democritik and Atomick
Atheism, as it is the boldest and rankest of all Atheisms, it not only
undertaking to salve all Phenomenon by Matter Fortuitously moved, without a
God, but also to demonmonstrate that there cannot be so much as a Corporeal
Deity; so it is that alone which pretending to an entire and coherent System,
has publicly appeared upon the Stage, and therefore does in a manner only
deserve our Consideration.

And now we shall exhibit a full View and Prospect of it, and discover all its
Dark Mysteries and Profundities; we being much of this Persuasion, that a plain
and naked Representation of them, will be a great part of a Confutation; at
least, not doubting but it will be made to appear, that though this Monster,
big-swoln with a Puffy show of Wisdom, strutt and stalk so Gigantically, and
march with such a kind of stately Philosophic Grandeur, yet it is indeed but
like the Giant Orgoglio, in our English Poet, a mere Empty Bladder, blown up
with vain Conceit, an Empusa, Phantasm, or Spectre, the Offspring of Night and
Darkness, Nonsense and Contradiction.

And yet for all that we shall not wrong it the least in our Representation,
but give it all possible Advantages of Strength and Plausibility, that so the
Atheists may have no Cause to pretend (as they are wont to do in such Cases)
that either we did not understand their Mysteries nor apprehend the full
strength of their Cause, or else did purposely smother and conceal it. Which
indeed we have been so far from, that we must confess we were not altogether
unwilling, this business of theirs should look a little like something that
might deserve a Confutation. And whether the Atheists ought not rather to give
us Thanks for Mending and Improving their Arguments, then complain that we have
any way Empaired them, we shall leave it to the Censure of impartial Judgments.

IV. Plato tells us that even amongst those Pagans in his time, there was
generally such a Religious Humor, that (...)^ Whosoever had but the least of
Seriousness and Sobriety in them, whenever they took in hand any Enterprise,
whether great or small, they would always invoke the Deity for Assistance and
Direction. Adding moreover that himself should be very faulty, if in his
Timaeus, when he was to treat about so grand a point, concerning the whole
World, (...), whether it were made or unmade, he should not make his Entrance
thereinto by a Religious Invocation of the Deity. Wherefore certainly, it could
not be less than a piece of Impiety in a Christian, being to treat concerning
the Deity it self, and to produce all that Profane and Unhallowed stuff of
Atheists, out of their Dark Corners, in order to a Confutation, and the better
Confirmation of our Faith in the Truth of his Existence, not to implore his
Direction and Assistance. And I know no Reason but that we may well do it in
that same Litany of Plato's, (...), that we may first speak agreeably to his
own mind or becomingly of his Nature, and then consentaneously with our Selves.

V. Now there are these two things here to be performed by us, First, to
discover and produce the Chief Heads of Arguments or Grounds of Reason,
insisted on by the Atheists to disprove a Deity, evincing withal briefly the
Ineffectualness and Falsness of them. And Secondly, to show how they Endeavor
either to Confute or Salve, consistently with their own Principles, all those
Phaenomenae which are commonly urged against them, to prove a Deity and
Incorporeal Substance; manifesting likewise the Invalidity thereof.

The grounds of Reason alleged for the Atheistical Hypothesis are chiefly
these that follow. First, That we have no Idaea of God, and therefore can have
no Evidence of him; which Argument is further flourisht and descanted upon in
this manner. That Notion or Conception of a Deity, that is commonly
entertained, is nothing but a Bundle of Incomprehensibles, Unconceivables, and
Impossibles; it being only a compilement of all Imaginable Attributes of
Honor, Courtship, and Complement, which the Confounded Fear, and Astonishment
of Men's minds, made them huddle up together, without any Sense or Philosophic
Truth: This seems to be intimated by a Modern Writer in these words; The
Attributes of God signify not True nor False, nor any Opinion of our Brain,
but the Reverence and Devotion of our Hearts, and therefore they are not
sufficient Premises to infer Truth or convince Falsehood. And the same thing
again is further set out, with no small pretense to wit, after this manner;
They that venture to dispute Philosophically or reason of God's Nature from
these Attributes of Honor, losing their Understanding in the very first
attempt, fall from one Inconvenience into another without end, and without
number; In the same manner as when one ignorant of the Ceremonies of Court
coming into the presence of a greater Person than he is used to speak to, and
stumbling at his Entrance, to save himself from falling lets slip his Cloak to
recover his Cloak lets fall his Hat, and with one disorder after another
discovers his Astonishment and Rusticity. The meaning of which, and other like
passages of the same Writer, seem to be this; That the Attributes of God (by
which his Nature is supposed to be expressed) having no Philosophic Truth or
Reality in them, had their only Original from a certain Rustic Astonishment of
Mind, proceeding from excess of Fear, raising up the Phantasm of a Deity, as a
Bugbear for an Object to it self, and affrighting men into all manner of
Confounded Nonsense, and Absurdity of Expressions concerning it, such as have
no signification, nor any Conception of the Mind answering to them. This is the
First Argument, used especially by our modern Democriticks, against a Deity,
That because they can have no Fantastic Idaea of it, nor fully comprehend all
that is included in the Notion thereof, that therefore it is but an
Incomprehensible Nothing.

VI. Secondly, Another Argument much insisted on by the old Democritick
Atheists, is directed against the Divine Omnipotence and Creative Power, after
this manner. By God is always understood a Creator of something or other out
of Nothing. For however the Theists be here divided amongst themselves, Some of
them believing that there was once Nothing at all existing in this whole Space
which is now occupied by the World, besides the Deity, and that he was then a
Solitary Being, so that the Substance of the whole Corporeal Universe had a
Temporary Beginning, and Novity of Existence, and the Duration of it has now
continued but for so many years only. Others persuading themselves, that though
the Matter and Substance at least, (if not the Form also) of the Corporeal
World, did exist from Eternity, yet nevertheless, they both alike proceeded
from the Deity by way of Emanation, and do continually depend upon it, in the
same manner as Light, though coeve with the Sun, yet proceeded from the Sun,
and depends upon it, being always, as it were, Made Anew by it; Wherefore,
according to this Hypothesis, though things had no Antecedent Nonentity in
Time, yet they were as little of themselves, and owed all their Being as much
to the Deity, as if they had been once Actually Nothing, they being as it were
perpetually Created out of Nothing by it. Lastly, Others of those Theists
resolving, that the Matter of the Corporeal Universe was not only from
Eternity, but also Self-existent and Uncreated, or Independent upon any Deity
as to its Being; But yet the Forms and Qualities of all Inanimate Bodies,
together with the Souls of all Animals, in the successive Generations of them,
(being taken for Entities distinct from the Matter) were Created by the Deity
out of Nothing. We say, though there be such Difference amongst the Theists
themselves, yet they all agree in this, that God is in some Sense or other, the
Creator of some Real Entity out of Nothing, or the Cause of that which
otherwise would not have been Of it self, so that no Creation out of Nothing,
(in that enlarged sense) no Deity. Now it is utterly impossible that any
Substance or Real Entity should be Created out of Nothing, it being
Contradictious to that indubitable Axiom of Reason, De Nihilo Nihil, From
Nothing Nothing. The Argument is thus urged by Lucretius, according to the
Minds of Epicurus and Democritus.

Principium hinc cujus nobis Exordia sumet,
Nullam rem e Nihilo gigni Divinitus unquam.
Quippe ita Formido Mortales continet omnes;
Quod multa in Terris fieri Coeloque tuentur,
Quorum operum Causas nulla ratione videre
Possunt; ac fieri Divino Numine rentur:
Quas ob res, ubi viderimus Nil posse Creari
De Nihilo, tum quodsequimur, jam tutius inde
Perspiciemus, and unde queat res quaeque Creari,
Et quo quaeque modo fiant opera sine Divum.
It is true indeed that it seems to be chiefly levelled by the Poet against that
Third and last sort of Theists before mentioned, such as Heraclitus and the
Stoics, (which latter were Contemporary with Epicurus) who held the Matter of
the whole World to have been from Eternity of it self Uncreated, but yet the
Forms of Mundane things in the successive Generations of them (as Entities
distinct from the Matter) to be Created or made by the Deity out of Nothing.
But the force of the Argument must needs lie stronger against those other
Theists, who would have the very Substance and Matter it self of the World, as
well as the Forms, to have been created by the Deity out of Nothing. Since
Nothing can come out of Nothing, it follows, that not so much as the Forms and
Qualities of Bodies (conceived as Entities really distinct from the Matter)
much less the Lives and Souls of Animals, could ever have been Created by any
Deity, and therefore certainly, not the Substance and Matter it self: But all
Substance, and Real Entity, whatsoever is in the World, must needs have been
from Eternity, Uncreated and Self-existent. Nothing can be Made or Produced but
only the different Modifications of Preexistent Matter. And this is done by
Motions, Mixtures and Separations, Concretions and Secretions of Atoms, without
the Creation of any Real distinct Entity out of Nothing; so that there needs no
Deity for the Effecting of it, according to that of Epicurus, (...), No Divine
Power ought to be called in, for the salving of those Phenomenon. To Conclude
therefore, If no Substance, nor Real Entity can be made, which was not before,
but all whatsoever Is, Will be, and Can be, was from Eternity Self-existent,
then Creative Power, but especially, that Attribute of Omnipotence, can belong
to nothing, and this is all one as to say, There can be no Deity.

VII. Thirdly the Atheists argue against the stricter and higher sort of
Theists, who will have God to be the Creator of the whole Corporeal Universe
and all its Parts out of Nothing, after this manner; That which Created the
whole Mass of Matter and Body, cannot be it self Body, Wherefore this Notion of
God plainly implies him to be Incorporeal. But there can be no Incorporeal
Deity, because by that word must needs be understood, either that which has no
Magnitude nor Extension at all, or else that which is indeed extended, but
otherwise than Body. If the Word be taken in the former sense, then nothing at
all can be so Incorporeal, as to be altogether Unextended and devoid of
Geometrical Quantity, because Extension is the very Essence of all Existent
Entity, and that which is altogether unextended is perfectly Nothing. There can
neither be any Substance nor Mode or Accident of any Substance, no Nature
whatsoever Unexended. But if the Word Incorporeal be taken in the latter sense,
for that which is indeed Extended but otherwise than Body, namely so as to
penetrate Bodies and coexist with them, this is also a thing next to Nothing,
since it can neither act upon any other thing, nor be acted upon by, or
sensible of, any thing; It can neither do nor Suffer any thing. Nam facere and
fungi nisi Corpus nulla potest res. Wherefore to speak plainly, this can be
nothing else but empty Space, or Vacuum, which runs through all things, without
laying hold on any thing, or being affected from any thing. This is the only
Incorporeal thing, that is or can be in Nature, Space or Place; and therefore
to suppose an Incorporeal Deity is to make Empty Space to be the Creator of
all Things.

This Argument is thus proposed by the Epicurean Poet. -- Quodcunque erit esse
aliquid debebit id ipsum
Augmine vel grandi vel parvo --
Cui si Tactus erit, quamvis levis exiguusque,
Corporum augebit numerum Summamque sequetur:
Sin Intactile erit, nulla de part quod ullam
Rem prohibere queat per se transire meantem,
Scilicet hoc id erit Vacuum quod Inane vocamus.
Whatsoever is, is Extended or has Geometrical Quantity and Mensurability in
it; which if it be Tangible, then it is Body, and fills up a Place in the
World, being part of the whole Mass; but if it be Intangible, so that it cannot
resist the Passage of any thing thorough it, then it is nothing else but empty
Space or Vacuum. There is no Third thing besides these Two, and therefore
whatsoever is not Body, is empty Space or Nothing, -- Praeter Inane and Corpora
Tertia per se,
Nulla potest rerum in numero Natura relinqui.
Thus the Ancient Epicureans and Democriticks argued; there being nothing
Incorporeal but Space, there can be no Incorporeal Deity.

But because this seems to give Advantage to the Theists, in making Space
Something, or that which has a Real Nature or Entity without our Conception,
from whence it will follow, that it must needs be either it self a Substance,
or else a Mode of some Incorporeal Substance, the Modern Democriticks are here
more cautious, and make Space to be no Nature really existing without us, but
only the Phantasm of a Body, and as it were the Ghost of it, which has no
Reality without our Imagination. So that there are not two Natures of Body, and
Space, which must needs infer two distinct Substances, one whereof must be
Incorporeal, but only One Nature of Body. The Consequence of which will be
this, That an Incorporeal Substance is all one with an Incorporeal Body, and
therefore Nothing.

VIII. But because it is generally conceived that an Error cannot be
sufficiently confuted, without discovering (...), the Cause of the Mistake,
therefore the Atheists will in the next place undertake to show likewise, the
Original of this Doctrine of Incorporeal Substances, and from what
Misapprehension it sprung, as also take occasion from thence, further to
disprove a Deity.

Wherefore they say, that the Original of this Doctrine of Incorporeal
Substances proceeded chiefly from the Abuse of Abstract Names, both of
Substances (whereby the Essences of singular Bodies, as of a Man or an Horse,
being Abstracted from those Bodies themselves, are considered Universally) as
also of Accidents when they are considered alone without their Subjects or
Substances. The latter of which is a thing, that Men have been necessitated to,
in order to the Computation or Reckoning of the Properties of Bodies, the
Comparing of them with one another, the Adding, Subtracting, Multiplying and
Dividing of them, which could not be done, so long as they are taken
Concretely, together with their Subjects. But yet, as there is some Use of
those Abstract Names, so the Abuse of them has been also very great; Forasmuch
as, though they be really the Names of Nothing, since the Essence of this and
that Man is not any thing without the Man, nor is an Accident any thing without
its Substance, yet men have been led into a gross mistake by them, to imagine
them to be Realities existing by themselves. Which Infatuation has chiefly
proceeded from Scholasticks, who have been so intemperate in the use of these
Words, that they could not make a Rational Discourse of any thing, though never
so small, but they must stuff it with their Quiddities, Entities, Essences,
Haecceities and the like. Wherefore these are they, who being first deluded
themselves, have also deluded the World, introducing an Opinion into the Minds
of Men, that the Essence of every thing is something without that thing it
self, and also Eternal, and therefore when any thing is Made or Generated, that
there is no new Being produced, but only an antecedent and Eternal Essence
clothed (as it were) with a new Garment of Existence. As also that the mere
Accidents of Bodies may exist alone by themselves without their Substances. As
for Example, that the Life, Sense and Understanding of Animals, commonly called
by the Names of Soul and Mind, may exist without the Bodies or Substances of
them by themselves, after the Animals are dead; which plainly makes them to be
Incorporeal Substances, as it were the Separate and Abstract Essences of Men.
This has been observed by a Modern Writer in these words; Est Hominum
Abstractorum tum in omni Vita, tum in Philosophia, magnus and Vsus and Abusus.
Abusus in eo consistit, quod cum videant aliqui, Considerari posse, id est,
inferri in Rations, Accidentium Incrementa and Decrementa, sine Consideratione
Corporum, sive Subjectorum suorum, (id quod appellatur Abstrahere) loquuntur de
Accidentibus, tanquam possent ab omni Corpore Separari: Hinc enim Originem
trahunt quorundam Metaphysicorum crassi Errores, Nam ex eo, quod Considerari
potest Cogitatio, sine consideratione Corporis, infer solent non esse Opus
Corporis Cogitantis. It is a great Abuse that some Metaphysicians make of these
Abstract Names, because Cogitation can be considered alone without the
consideration of Body, therefore to conclude that it is not the Action or
Accident of that Body that thinks, but a Substance by it self. And the same
Writer elsewhere observes, That it is upon this Ground, that when a Man is dead
and buried, they say his Soul (that is, his Life) can walk, separated from his
Body, and is seen by night amongst the Graves. By which means the Vulgar are
confirmed in their Superstitious Belief, of Ghosts, Spirits, Demons, Devils,
Fayries and Hob-goblins, Invisible Powers and Agents, called by several Names,
and that by those Persons whose work it ought to be, rather to free men from
such Superstition. Which Belief at first had another Original, not altogether
unlike the former; Namely from men's mistaking their own Phancies for Things
Really existing without them. For as in the sense of Vision, men are commonly
deceived, in supposing the Image behind the Glass to be a Real thing existing
without themselves, whereas it is indeed nothing but their own Fancy; In like
manner when the Minds of Men strongly possessed with Fear, especially in the
Dark, raise up the Phantasms of Specter, Bug-bears, or Affrightful Apparitions
to them, they think them to be Objects really existing without them, and call
them Ghosts and Spirits, whilst they are indeed nothing but their own Phancies;
So the Phantasm or Fancy of a Deity (which is indeed the Chief of all
Specter) created by Fear, has upon no other Account, been taken for a Reality.
To this purpose a Modern Writer, From the Fear that proceeds from the Ignorance
it self, of what it is that has the Power to do men Good or Harm, men are
inclined to suppose and Feign to themselves, several kinds of Powers Invisible,
and to stand in awe of their own Imaginations, and in time of Distress to
invoke them, as also in the time of an expected good Success, to give them
thanks, making the Creatures of their own Fancies, their Gods. Which though it
be prudently spoken in the Plural Number, that so it might be diverted and put
off to the Heathen Gods, yet he is very simple, that does not perceive the
reason of it to be the same concerning that one Deity, which is now commonly
worshipped, and that therefore this also is but the Creature of Men's Fear and
Phancie, the Chief of all Fantastic Ghosts and Specter, as it were an Oberon
or Prince of Fayries and Phancies. This (we say) was the first Original of that
Vulgar Belief of Invisible Powers, Ghosts, and Gods; men's taking their own
Phancies for Things really Existing without them. And as for the Matter and
Substance of these Ghosts, they could not by their own natural Cogitation fall
into any other Conceit, but that it was the same, with that which appears in
a Dream to one that sleeps, or in a Looking-glass to one that is awake, Thin
Aerial Bodies, which may appear and vanish when they please. But the Opinion,
that such Spirits were Incorporeal and Immaterial, could never enter into the
minds of men by Nature, Unabused by Doctrine; but it sprung up from those
deceiving and deceived Literati, Scholasticks, Philosophers, and Theologers
enchanting men's Understandings, and making them believe, that the Abstract
Notions of Accidents and Essences could exist alone by themselves, without the
Bodies, as certain Separate and Incorporeal Substances.

To Conclude therefore, To make an Incorporeal Mind to be the Cause of all
things, is to make our own Phancie, an Imaginary Ghost of the World, to be a
Reality; and to suppose the mere Abstract Notion of an Accident, and a Separate
Essence, to be not only an Absolute thing by it self, and a Real Substance
Incorporeal, but also the first Original of all Substances, and of whatsoever
is in the Universe. And this may be reckoned for a Fourth Atheistick Ground.

IX. Fifthly, the Atheists pretend further to prove, that there is no other
Substance in the World besides Body, as also from the Principles of
Corporealism it self, to evince that there can be no Corporeal Deity, after
this manner. No man can devise any other Notion of Substance, than that it is a
thing Extended, existing without the Mind, not Imaginary but Real and Solid
Magnitude; For whatsoever is not Extended, is Nowhere and Nothing. So that Res
Extensa, is the only Substance, the solid Basis and Substratum of all. Now this
is the very self-same thing with Body; For (...), or Resistance seems to be a
necessary Consequence and Result from Extension, and they that think otherwise,
can show no reason why Bodies may not also penetrate one another, as some
Corporealists think they do; From whence it is inferred, that Body or Matter is
the only Substance of all things. And whatsoever else is in the World, that is,
all the Differences of Bodies, are nothing but several Accidents and
Modifications of this Extended Substance, Body or Matter. Which Accidents,
though they may be sometimes called by the names of Real Qualities, and Forms,
and though there be different apprehensions concerning them amongst
Philosophers, yet generally they agree in this, that there are these two
Properties belonging to them; First, that none of them can subsist alone by
themselves, without Extended Substance or Matter, as the Basis and Support of
them: And Secondly, that they may be all destroyed without the Destruction of
any Substance. Now as Blackness and Whiteness, Heat and Cold, so likewise Life,
Sense and Understanding, are such Accidents, Modifications or Qualities of
Body, that can neither exist by themselves, and may be destroyed without the
Destruction of any Substance or Matter. For if the Parts of the Body of any
Living Animal be disunited and separated from one another, or the Organical
Disposition of the Matter altered, those Accidents, Forms or Qualities, of Life
and Understanding, will presently vanish away to Nothings all the Substance of
the Matter still remaining one where or other in the Universe entire, and
Nothing of it lost. Wherefore the Substance of Matter and Body, as
distinguished from the Accidents, is the only thing in the world that is
Uncorruptible and Undestroyable. And of this it is to be understood that
Nothing can be made out of Nothing, and Destroyed to Nothing, ( i. e.) that
every entire thing that is Made or Generated, must be made of some preexistent
Matter; which Matter was from Eternity, Self-existent and Unmade, and is also
undestroyable, and can never be reduced to Nothing. It is not to be understood
of the Accidents themselves, that are all Makeable and Destroyable, Generable
and Corruptible. Whatsoever is in the World is but (...), Matter so and so
Modified or Qualified, all which Modifications and Qualifications of Matter are
in their own nature Destroyable, and the Matter it self (as the Basis of them,
not necessarily determined to this or that Accident) is the only (...), the
only Necessarily Existent. The Conclusion therefore is, that no Animal, no
Living Understanding Body, can be Absolutely and Essentially Incorruptible,
this being an Incommunicable Property of the Matter, and therefore there can
can be no Corporeal Deity, the Original of all things, Essentially
Undestroyable.

Though the Stoics imagined the whole Corporeal Universe to be an Animal or
Deity, yet this Corporeal God of theirs was only by Accident Incorruptible and
Immortal, because they supposed, that there was no other Matter, which existing
without this World, and making Inrodes upon it, could disunite the Parts of it
or disorder its Compages. Which if there were, the Life and Understanding of
this Stoical God, or great Mundane Animal, as well as that of other Animals in
like Cases, must needs vanish into nothing. Thus from the Principles of
Corporealism it self, it plainly follows that there can be no Corporeal Deity,
because the Deity is supposed to be (...), a thing that was never made, and is
Essentially Undestroyable, which are the Privileges and Properties of nothing
but Senseless Matter.

X. In the next place, the Atheists undertake more effectually to confute that
Corporeal God of the Stoics and others, from the Principles of the Atomical
Philosophy, in this manner. All Corporeal Theists who assert that an
Understanding Nature or Mind, residing in the Matter of the whole Universe, was
the first Original of the Mundane System, and did Intellectually frame it,
betray no small Ignorance of Philosophy and the Nature of Body, in supposing
Real Qualities, besides Magnitude, Figure, Site and Motion, as Simple and
Primitive things, to belong to it; and that there was such a Quality or Faculty
of Understanding in the Matter of the whole Universe, coeternal with the same,
that was an Original thing Uncompounded and Underived from any thing else. Now
to suppose such Original Qualities and Powers, which are Really Distinct from
the Substance of Extended Matter and its Modifications, of Divisibility,
Figure, Site and Motion, is Really to suppose so many Distinct Substances,
which therefore must needs be Incorporeal. So that these Philosophers fall
unawares into that very thing which they are so abhorrent from. For this
Quality or Faculty of Understanding, in the Matter of the Universe, Original
and underiv'd from any other thing, can be indeed nothing else but an
Incorporeal Substance. Epicurus suggested a Caution against this Vulgar Mistake
concerning Qualities to this purpose. Non sic cogitandae sunt Qualitates, quasi
sint quaedam per se existentes Naturae seu Substantiae, siquidem id mente
assequi non licet; sed solummodo ut varii modi sese habendi Corporis,
considerandae sunt.

Body, as such, has nothing else belonging to the Nature of it, but what is
included in the Idaea of Extended Substance, Divisibility, Figure, Site, Motion
or Rest, and the Results from the various Compositions of them, causing
different Phancies; Wherefore, as vulgar Philosophers make their first Matter
(which they cannot well tell what they mean by it) because it receives all
Qualities, to be it self devoid of all Quality; So we conclude that Atoms
(which are really the first Principles of all things) have none of those
Qualities in them which belong to compounded Bodies; they are not absolutely of
themselves Black or White, Hot or Cold, Moist or dry, Bitter or Sweet, all
these things arising up afterward, from the various Aggregations and
Contextures of them, together with different Motions. Which Lucretius confirms
by this reason, agreeable to the Tenor of the Atomical Philosophy, That if
there were any such Real Qualities in the first Principles, then in the various
Corruptions of Nature, things would at last be all reduced to Nothing:
Immutabile enim quiddam superare necesse est
Ne res ad Nihilum redigantur funditus omnes;
Proinde Color cave contingas semina rerum,
Ne tibi res redeant ad Nilum funditus omnes.
Wherefore he concludes, that it must not be thought, that White things are
made out of White Principles, nor Black things out of Black Principles, -- Ne
ex Albis Alba rearis
Principiis esse, --
Aut ea quae nigrant, nigro de semine nata:
Neve alium quemvis quaesunt induta colorem,
Propterea gerere hunc credas, quod materiai
Corpora consimuli sint ejus tincta color;
Nullus enim Color est omnino materiai
Corporibus, neque par rebus, neque denique dispar.
Adding that the same is to be resolved likewise concerning all other Sensible
Qualities as well as Colors. Sed ne forte putes solospoliata color
Corpora prima manner: etiam secreta Teporis
Sunt, ac Frigoris omnino, Calidique Vaporis:
Et sonitu sterila, and Succo jejuna feruntur,
Nec jaciunt ullum proprio de corpore Odorem.
Lastly he tells us in like manner that the same is to be understood also
concerning Life, Sense and Understanding, that there are no such simple
Qualities or Natures in the first Principles, out of which Animals are
compounded, but that these are in themselves altogether devoid of Life, Sense
and Understanding. Nunc ea, quae Sentire videmus cunque, necesse 'st
Ex Insensilibus tamen omnia confiteare
Principiis constare: neque id manifesta refutant:
Sed magis ipsa manu ducunt, and credere cogunt,
Ex insensilibus, quod dico, Animalia gigni.
Quippe videre licet, vivos existere vermes
Stercore de tetro, putrorem cum sibi nacta 'st
Intempestivis ex imbribus humida tellus.
All Sensitive and Rational Animals are made of Irrational and Senseless
Principles, which is proved by Experience, in that we see Worms are made out of
putrified Dung, moistened with immoderate Showers.

Some indeed, who are no greater Friends to a Deity than our selves, will needs
have that Sense and Understanding that is in Animals and Men, to be derived
from an Antecedent Life and Understanding in the Matter. But this cannot be,
because if Matter as such, had Life and Understanding in it, then every Atom of
Matter must needs be a Distinct Percipient, Animal, and Intelligent Person by
it self; and it would be impossible for any such Men and Animals as now are, to
be compounded out of them, because every Man would be, Variorum Animalculorum
Acervus, a Heap of Innumerable Animals and Percipients.

Wherefore as all the other Qualities of Bodies, so likewise Life, Sense, and
Understanding arise from the different Contextures of Atoms devoid of all those
Qualities, or from the Composition of those simple Elements of Magnitudes,
Figures, Sites and Motions, in the same manner as from a few Letters variously
compounded, all that Infinite Variety of Syllables and Words is made, Quin
etiam refert nostris in versibus ipsis
Cum quibus and quali Positura contineantur;
Namque eadem Coelum, Mare, Terras, Flumina, Solemn
Significant, eadem, fruges, arbusta, animantes;
Sic ipsis in rebus item jam materiai
Intervalla, viae, connexus, pondera, plagae,
Concursus, motus, ordo, Positura, Figurae,
Cum permutantur mutari res quoque debent.
From the Fortuitous Concretions of Senseless Unknowing Atoms, did rise up
afterward, in certain parts of the World called Animals, Soul, and Mind, Sense
and Understanding, Counsel and Wisdom. But to think that there was any
Animalish Nature before all these Animals, or that there was an antecedent Mind
and Understanding, Counsel and Wisdom, by which all Animals themselves,
together with the whole World, were made and contrived, is either to run round
in a Senseless Circle, making Animals and Animality to be before one another
infinitely; or else to suppose an impossible Beginning of an Original
Understanding Quality in the Matter. Atoms in their first Coalitions together,
when the World was a making, were not then directed by any previous Counsel or
preventive Understanding, which were things as yet Unborn and Unmade, Nam certe
neque consilio Primordia rerum
Ordine se quaeque atque sagaci mente locarunt,
Nec quos quaeque darent motus, pepigere profecto.
Mind and Understanding, Counsel and Wisdom did not lay the Foundations of the
Universe, they are no Archical things, that is, they have not the Nature of a
Principle in them, they are not Simple, Original, Primitive and Primordial, but
as all other Qualities of Bodies, Secundary, Compounded and Derivative, and
therefore they could not be Architectonical of the World. Mind and
Understanding is no God, but the Creature of Matter and Motion.

The sense of this whole Argument is briefly this; The first Principle of all
things in the whole Universe is Matter, or Atoms devoid of all Qualities, and
consequently of all Life, Sense and Understanding, and therefore the Original
of things is no Understanding, Nature, or Deity.

XI. Seventhly, The Democritick Atheists argue further after this manner: They
who assert a Deity, suppose (...), the whole World to be Animated, that is, to
have a Living, Rational and Understanding Nature presiding over it. Now it is
already evident from some of the premised Arguments, that the World cannot be
Animated, in the sense of Platonists, that is, with an Incorporeal Soul, which
is in order of Nature before Body, it being proved already that there can be no
Substance Incorporeal; as likewise that it cannot be Animated neither in the
Stoical sense, so as to have an Original Quality of Understanding or Mind in
the Matter; But yet nevertheless, some may possibly imagine, that as in our
selves and other Animals, though compounded of Senseless Atoms, there is a Soul
and Mind, resulting from the Contexture of them, which being once made,
domineers over the Body, governing and ordering it at pleasure; so there may be
likewise such a Living Soul and Mind, not only in the Stars, which many have
supposed to be lesser Deities, and in the Sun, which has been reputed a
principal Deity; but also in the whole Mundane System, made up of Earth, Seas,
Air, Either, Sun, Moon, and Stars all together; one General Soul and Mind,
which though resulting at first from the Fortuitous Motion of Matter, yet being
once produced, may rule, govern and sway the Whole, Understandingly, and in a
more perfect manner than our Souls do our Bodies, and so long as it continues,
exercise a Principality and Dominion over it. Which although it will not amount
to the full Notion of a God, according to the strict sense of Theists, yet it
will approach very near unto it, and endanger the bringing in of all the same
Inconveniences along with it. Wherefore they will now prove that there is no
such Soul or Mind as this, (resulting from the Contexture of Atoms) that
presides over the Corporeal Universe, that so there may not be so much as the
Shadow of a Deity left.

It was observed before, that Life, Sense, Reason and Understanding are but
Qualities of Concreted Bodies, like those other Qualities of Heat, and Cold,
etc. arising from certain particular Textures of Atoms; Now as those first
Principles of Bodies, namely single Atoms, have none of those Qualities in
them, so neither has the whole Universe any (that it can be denominated from)
but, only the Parts of it. The whole World is neither Black nor White, Hot nor
Cold, Pellucid nor Opake, it containing all those Qualities in its several
Parts: In like manner, the whole has no Life, Sense, nor Understanding in it,
but only the parts of it, which are called Animals. That is, Life and Sense are
qualities that arise, only from such a Texture of Atoms as produces soft
Flesh, Blood, and Brains, in Bodies organized, with Head, Heart, Bowels,
Nerves, Muscles, Veins, Arteries and the like; -- Sensus jungitur omnis
Visceribus, Nervis, Venis, quaecunque videmus,
Mollia mortali consistere Corpore creta;
And Reason and Understanding, properly so called, are peculiar Appendices to
humane Shape; Ratio nusquam esse potest nisi in hominis figura. From whence it
is concluded that there is no Life, Soul nor Understanding acting the whole
World, because the World has no Blood nor Brains, nor any Animalish or Humane
Form. Qui Mundum ipsum Animantem sapientemque esse dixerunt, nullo modo
viderunt Animi Naturam, in quam Figuram cadere posset. Therefore the Epicurean
Poet concludes upon this Ground, that there is no Divine Sense in the whole
World, Dispositum videtur ubi esse and crescere possit
Seorsim Anima atque Animus; tanto magis inficiandum,
Totum posse extra Corpus Formamque Animalem,
Putribus in glebis terrarum, aut Solis in Igni,
Aut in Aqua durare, aut altis Aetheris oris.
Haud igitur constant Divino praedita Sensu,
Quandoquidem nequeunt vitaliter esse Animata.


Now if there be no Life nor Understanding above us, nor round about us, nor
any where else in the World, but only in our selves and Fellow-Animals, and we
be the highest of all Beings; if neither the whole Corporeal System be
Animated, nor those greater parts of it, Sun, Moon nor Stars, then there can be
no danger of any Deity.

XII. Eighthly, the Democritick Atheists dispute further against a Deity in
this manner: The Deity is generally supposed to be (...), a Perfectly Happy
Animal, Incorruptible and Immortal. Now there is no Living Being Incorruptible
and Immortal, and therefore none perfectly Happy neither. For according to that
Democritick Hypothesis of Atoms in Vacuity; the only Incorruptible things will
be These three: First of all, Vacuum or Empty Space, which must needs be such,
because it cannot suffer from any thing, since it is plagarum expers, Et manet
intactum, nec ab ictu fungitur hilum. Secondly, the Single Atoms, because by
reason of their Parvitude and Solidity, they are Indivisible; And lastly, the
Summa Summarum of all things, that is the Comprehension of all Atoms dispersed
every where throughout Infinite Space.

-- Quia nulla loci stat copia certum
Quo quasi res possint discedere dissoluique.
But according to that other Hypothesis of some modern Atomists (which also was
entertained of old by Empedocles) that supposes a Plenity, there is nothing at
all Incorruptible, but the Substance of Matter it self. All Systems and
Compages of it, all (...) and (...), all Concretions and Coagmentations, of
Matter divided by Motion, together with the Qualities resulting from them, are
Corruptible and Destroyable: Quae est Coagmentatio rerum non dissolubilis?
Death destroys not the Substance of any Matter; For as no Matter came from
Nothing but was Self-eternal, so none of it can ever vanish into Nothing; but
it dissolves all the Aggregations of it.

Non sic interimit Mors res ut Materiai
Corpora conficiat, sed coetum dissupat ollis.
Life is no Substantial thing, nor any Primitive or Simple Nature; it is only
an Accident or Quality arising from the Aggregation and Contexture of Atoms or
Corpuscula, which when the Compages of them is disunited and dissolved, though
all the Substance still remain scattered and dispersed, yet the Life utterly
perishes and vanishes into Nothing. No Life is Immortal; there is no Immortal
Soul; nor Immortal Animal, or Deity. Though this whole Mundane System were it
self an Animal, yet being but an Aggregation of Matter, it would be both
Corruptible and Mortal. Wherefore since no living Being can possibly have any
security of its future Permanency; there is none that can be perfectly Happy.
And it was rightly determined by our Fellow-Atheists, the Hedonicks and
Cyrenaicks, (...), Perfect Happiness is a mere Notion, a Romantic Fiction, a
thing which can have no Existence any where. This is recorded to have been one
of Democritus his chief Arguments against a Deity, because there can be no
Living Being Immortal, and consequently none perfectly Happy. Cum Democritus,
quia nihil semper suo statu maneat, neget, esse quicquam sempiternum, nonne
Deum ita tollit omnino, ut nullam Opinionem ejus reliquam faciat?

XIII. A Ninth pretended Demonstration of the Democritick Atheists is as
follows. By God is understood a First Cause or Mover, which being not before
acted upon by any thing else, but acting Originally from it self, was the
Beginning of all things. Now it is an indubitable Axiom, and generally received
amongst Philosophers, that Nothing can move it self, but Quicquid movetur ab
alio movetur, Whatsoever is moved is moved by something else; nothing can act
otherwise than it is made to act, by something without it, acting upon it. The
necessary Consequence whereof is this, That there can be no such thing as any
First Mover, or First Cause, that is, no God. This Argument is thus urged by a
Modern Writer, agreeably to the Sense of the Ancient Democriticks; Ex eo quod
nihil potest movere seipsum, non inferetur, id quod inferri solet, nempe
Aeternum Immobile, sed contra Aeternum Motum, siquidem ut verum est, nihil
moveri a seipso, ita etiam verum est nihil moveri nisi a Moto. From hence, that
Nothing can move it self, it cannot be rightly inferred, as commonly it is,
that there is an Eternal Immovable Mover (that is, a God) but only an Eternal
Moved Mover; or that one thing was moved by another from Eternity, without any
first Mover. Because as it is true that nothing can be Moved, but from it self;
so it is likewise true, that nothing can be moved but from that which was it
self also moved by something else before; and so the progress upwards must
needs be infinite, without any Beginning or first Mover. The plain Drift and
Scope of this Ratiocination, is no other then this, to show that the Argument
commonly taken from Motion, to prove a God, (that is, a First Mover or Cause)
is not only Ineffectual and Inconclusive; but also that on the contrary, it may
be demonstrated from that very Topic of Motion; that there can be no
Absolutely First Mover, No First in the order of Causes, that is, no God.

XIV. Tenthly, because the Theists conceive that though no Body can move it
self, yet a perfect Cogitative, and Thinking Being might be the Beginning of
all, and the first Cause of Motion; the Atheists will endeavor to evince the
contrary, in this manner. No man can conceive how any Cogitation which was not
before, should rise up at any time, but that there was some cause for it,
without the Thinker. For else there can be no reason given, why this Thought
rather than that, and at this time rather than another, should start up.
Wherefore this is universally true, of all Motion and Action whatsoever, as it
was rightly urged by the Stoics, that there can be no (...), no Motion without
a Cause, i. e. no Motion which has not some Cause without the Subject of it.
Or, as the same thing is expressed by a modern Writer, Nothing takes Beginning
from it self, but from the Action of some other Immediate Agent without it.
Wherefore no Thinking Being could be a First Cause, any more than an Automaton
or Machin could. To this, it is further argued, that these two Notions, the one
of a Knowing Understanding Being, the other of a Perfectly Happy Being, are
Contradictious, because all Knowledge Essentially implies Dependence upon
something else, as its Cause; Scientia and Intellectus signum est Potentiae ab
alio Dependentis, id quod non est Beatissimum. They conclude that Cogitation
and all Action whatsoever, is really nothing else but Local Motion, which is
Essentially Heterokinesie, that which can never rise of it self, but is caused
by some other Agent without its Subject.

XV. In the Eleventh place, the Democritick Atheists reason thus: If the World
were made by any Antecedent Mind or Understanding, that is, by a Deity; then
there must needs be an Idaea, Platform and Exemplar of the whole World before
it was made; and consequently Actual Knowledge, both in order of Time and
Nature, before Things. But all Knowledge is the Information of the things
themselves known, all Conception of the Mind is a Passion from the things
Conceived, and their Activity upon it; and is therefore Juniour to them.
Wherefore the World and Things, were before Knowledge and the Conception of any
Mind, and no Knowledge, Mind or Deity before the World as its Cause. This
Argument is thus proposed by the Atheistick Poet; Exemplum porro gignundis
rebus, and ipsa
Notities hominum Divis unde insita primum,
Quid vellent facere ut seirent, animoque viderent?
Quove modo est unquam Vis cognita Principiorum,
Quidnam inter sese permutato Ordine possent,
Si non ipsa dedit specimen Natura creandi?
How could the supposed Deity have a Pattern or Platform in his Mind, to frame
the World by, and whence should he receive it? How could he have any Knowledge
of Men before they were made, as also what himself should will to do when there
was nothing? How could he understand the Force and Possibility of the
Principles, what they would produce when variously combined together, before
Nature and Things themselves, by Creating, had given a Specimen?

XVI. A Twelfth Argumentation of the Democritick and Epicurean Atheists against
a Deity, is to this purpose: That things could not be made by a Deity that is
supposed to be a Being every way Perfect; because they are so Faulty, and so
Ill made: The Argument is thus propounded by Lucretius; Quod si jam rerum
ignorem primordia quae sint,
Hoc tamen ex ipsis Coeli Rationibus ausim
Confirmare, aliisque ex rebus reddere multis,
Nequaquam nobis Divinitus esse paratam
Naturam rerum, tanta stat praedita Culpa.


This Argument, a Coeli Rationibus, from Astronomy, or the Constitution of the
Heavens, is this: That the Mundane Sphere is so framed, in respect of the
Disposition of the Equator and Ecliptic, as renders the greatest part of the
Earth uninhabitable to Men and most other Animals; partly by reason of that
excess of Heat in the Torrid Zone (containing all between the Tropicks) and
partly from the Extremity of Cold in both the Frigid Zones, toward either
Pole. Again, whereas the Stoical Theists Contemporary with Epicurus concluded,
that the whole World was made by a Deity, only for the sake of Men, -- Horum
omnia causa
Constituisse Deum fingunt --
It is urged on the contrary, that a great part of the Habitable Earth is taken
up by Seas, Lakes and Rocks, barren Heaths and Sands, and thereby made useless
for Mankind; and that the remainder of it yields no fruit to them, unless
expugned by obstinate Labor, after all which, men are often disappointed of
the Fruits of those Labors, by unseasonable Weather, Storms and Tempests.
Again, that Nature has not only produced many noxious and poisonous Herbs, but
also Destructive and Devouring Animals, whose Strength surpasses that of Men's;
and that the Condition of Mankind is so much Inferior to that of Brutes, that
Nature seems to have been but a Stepmother to the former, whilst she has been
an Indulgent Mother to the latter. And to this purpose, the manner of men's
coming into the World is thus aggravated by the Poet: Tum porro puer, ut saevis
projectus ab undis
Navita, nudus humi jacet, infans, indigus omni
Vitai auxilio, cum primum in luminis oras
Nixibus ex alvo matris natura profudit:
Vagituque locum lugubri complet, ut aequum 'st,
Quoi tantum in vita restet transire malorum.
But on the contrary, the Comparative Advantages of Brutes and their
Privileges, which they have above men, are described after this manner: At
variae crescunt pecudes, armenta, feraequ^:
Nec crepitacula eis opu' sunt, nec quoiquam adhibenda 'st
Almae nutricis Blanda atque Infracta loquela;
Nec varias quaerunt vestes pro tempore coeli.
Denique non armis opus est, non moenibus altis,
Queis sua tutentur, quando omnibus omnia large
Tellus ipsa parit, naturaque Daedala rerum.


And Lastly, The Topic of Evils in General, is insisted upon by them, not
those which are are called Culpae, Evils of Fault (for that is a Thing which
the Democritick Atheists utterly explode in the Genuine Sense of it) but the
Evils of Pain and Trouble; which they dispute concerning, after this manner.
The Supposed Deity and Maker of the World, was either Willing to abolish all
Evils, but not Able, or he was Able but not Willing; or Thirdly, he was neither
Willing nor Able; or else Lastly, he was both Able and Willing. This Latter is
the only thing that answers fully to the Notion of a God. Now that the supposed
Creator of all things was not thus both Able and Willing to abolish all Evils,
is plain, because then there would have been no Evils at all left. Wherefore
since there is such a Deluge of Evils overflowing all, it must needs be, that
either he was Willing and not Able to remove them, and then he was Impotent, or
else he was Able and not Willing, and then he was Envious, or Lastly he was
neither Able nor Willing, and then he was both Impotent and Envious.

XVII. In the Twelfth Place, the Atheists further dispute in this manner. If
the World were made by any Deity, then it would be governed by a Providence,
and if there were any Providence, it must appear in Humane Affairs. But here it
is plain, that all is Tohu and Bohu, Chaos and Confusion: Things happening
alike to all, to the Wise and Foolish, Religious and Impious, Virtuous and
Vicious. (For these Names the Atheist cannot choose but make use of, though by
taking away Natural Morality, they really destroy the Things.) From whence it
is concluded, that all things float up and down, as they are agitated and
driven by the Tumbling Billows of Careless Fortune and Chance. The Impieties of
Dionysius, his scoffing Abuses of Religion, and whatsoever was then Sacred, or
worshipped under the Notion of a God, were most notorious; and yet it is
observed, that he fared never a jot the worse for it. Hunc nec Olympius Jupiter
fulmine percussit, nec Aesculapius misero diuturnoque morbo tabescentem
interemit, verum in suo lectulo mortuus, in Tympanidis rogum illatus est,
eamque potestatem quam ipse per scelus nactus erat, quasi justam and legitimam,
haereditatis loco tradidit: Neither did Jupiter Olympius strike him with a
Thunderbolt, nor Aesculapius inflict any languishing Disease upon him, but he
died in his bed, and was honorably interred, and that Power which he had
wickedly acquired, he transmitted, as a Just and Lawful Inheritance, to his
Posterity. And Diogenes the Cynick, though much a Theist, could not but
acknowledge, that Harpalus a fa^ous Robber or Pirate in those times, who
committing many Villainous actions, notwithstanding lived prosperously, did
thereby Testimonium dicere contra Deos, bear testimony against the Gods. Though
it has been objected by the Theists, and thought to be a strong argument for
Providence, that there were so many Tables hung up in Temples, the Monuments of
such as having prayed to the Gods in Storms and Tempests, had escaped
Shipwreck; yet as Diagoras observed, Nusquam picti sunt qui Naufragium
fecerunt, there are no Tables extant of those of them who were Shipwrackt.
Wherefore it was not considered by these Theists, how many of them that prayed
as well to the Gods, did notwithstanding suffer Shipwreck; as also how many of
those, which never made any Devotional Addresses at all, to any Deity, escaped
equal Dangers of Storms and Tempests.

Moreover, it is consentaneous to the opinion of a God, to think that Thunder
rattling in the Clouds with Thunderbolts, should be the immediate
Significations of his wrath and displeasure: whereas it is plain, that these
are flung at random, and that the Fury of them often lights upon the Innocent,
whilst the notoriously guilty escape untouched, and therefore we understand not,
how this can be answered by any Theists.

Cur, quibus incautum Scelus aversabile cumque est,
Non faciunt, icti flammas ut fulguris halent,
Pectore perfixo; documen Mortalibus acre?
Et potius nullae sibi turpis Conscius reii,
Volvitur in flammis innoxius, inque peditur,
Turbine coelesti, subito correptus, and igni?
Now the force of this Argument appears to be very powerful, because it has
not only staggered and confounded Theists in all Ages, but also has
effectually transformed many of them into Atheists. For Diagoras Melius himself
was once a Superstitious Religionist, in so much that being a Dithyrambick
Poet, he began one of his Poems with these words, (...), All things are done by
God and Fortune. But being injured afterward by a Perjured Person, that
suffered no Evil nor Disaster thereupon, he therefore took up this contrary
Persuasion, that there was no Deity. And there have been innumerable others,
who have been so far wrought upon by this Consideration, as if not absolutely
to disclaim and discard a Deity, yet utterly to deny Providence, and all Care
of Humane Affairs by any Invisible Powers. Amongst whom the Poet was one, who
thus expressed his Sense.

Sed cum res hominum tanta caligine volvi
Aspicerem, laetosque diu florere nocentes,
Vexarique pios, rursus labefact a cadebat
Relligio, causaeque viam non sponte sequebar
Alterius, vacuo quae currere Semina motu
Affirmat, magnumque novas per Inane Fig^^as,
Fortuna non Art regi; quae Numina sensu
Ambiguo vel Nulla putat, vel Nescia nostri.
XVIII. A thirteenth Argumentation of the Democritick and Epicurean Atheists is
to this purpose; That whereas the Deity is supposed to be such a being, as both
Knows all that is done every where in the most distant Places of the World at
once, and does himself immediately Order all things; this is, First, impossible
for any one Being, thus to animadvert and order all things in the whole
Universe, Quis regere immensi Summam, quis habere profundi
Indu manu validas potis est moderanter habenas?
Quis pariter coelos omneis convertere? and omneis
Ignibus aetheriis terras suffire feraceis?
Omnibus inque locis esse omni tempore praesto
Nubibus ut tenebras faciat, coelique serena
Concutiat sonitu? etc.
And Secondly, if it were supposed to be possible, yet such infinite
Negotiosity would be absolutely inconsistent with a Happy State; Nor could such
a Deity ever have any quiet Enjoyment of himself, being Perpetually filled with
Tumult and Hurliburly, (...)^ Distraction of Business and Sollicitous Cares,
Displeasures and Favors, do not at all agree with Happiness, but they proceed
from Imbecility, Indigency and Fear: (...)^ That which is Happy and
Incorruptible, would neither have it self any Business to do, nor create any to
others, it would neither have Displeasure nor Favor, toward any other
Persons, to engage it in Action; all this proceeding from Indigency. That is,
Favor and Benevolence, as well as Anger and Displeasure, arise only from
Imbecility. That which is perfectly happy and wants nothing, (...), being
wholly possessed and taken up in the Enjoyment of its own Happiness, would be
regardless of the Concernments of any others; and mind nothing besides it self,
either to do it Good or Harm. Wherefore, this Curiosus and plenus Negotii Deus,
This Busy, Restless, and Pragmatical Deity, that must needs intermeddle and
have to do with every thing in the whole World, is a Contradictious Notion,
since it cannot but be the most Unhappy of all things.

XIX. In the Next Place, the Atheists dispute further by propounding Several
bold Quaeries, which they conceive unanswerable, after this manner. If the
World were made by a Deity, why was it not made by him sooner? or since it was
so long unmade, why did he make it at all? Cur mundi Aedificator repent
extiterit, innumerabili ante saecula dormierit? How came this Builder and
Architect of the World, to start up upon a sudden, after he had slept for
infinite Ages, and bethink himself of making a World? For, certainly, if he had
been awake all that while, he would either have made it sooner, or not at all;
because there was either something wanting to his Happiness, before, or
nothing; if there had been any thing wanting before, then the World could not
have been so long unmade; but if he were completely Happy in himself without
it, then (...), wanting nothing, he vainly went about to make superfluous
things. All desire of Change and Novelty, argues a Fastidious Satiety,
proceeding from Defect and Indigency; Quidve novi potuit tanto post, ante
quietos
Inlicere, ut cuperent vitam mutare priorem?
Nam gaudere novis rebus debere videtur
Quoi veteres obsunt; sed quoi nil accidit aegri
Tempore in anteacto, cum pulchre degeret aevum,
Quid potuit novitatis amorem accendere tali?
Did this Deity, therefore light up the Stars, as so many Lamps or Torches, in
that vast Abyss of infinite Darkness, that himself might thereby have a more
comfortable and cheerful Habitation? Why would he then content himself from
Eternity, to dwell in such a Melancholic, Horrid, and Forlorn Dungeon? An
Credo in tenebris vita and moerore jacebat,
Donec diluxit rerum Genitalis Origo?
Was Company and that Variety of Things, by which Heaven and Earth are
distinguished, desirable to him? Why then would he continue Solitary so long,
wanting the pleasure of such a Spectacle? Did he make the World and men in it
to this end, that himself might be worshipped and adored, feared and honored
by them? But what could he be the better for that, who was sufficiently happy
alone in himself before? Or did he do it for the Sake of Men, to gratify and
oblige them? -- At quid immortalibus atque beatis
Gratia nostra queat largirier emolumenti,
Vt nostra quicquam causa gerere aggrediantur?


Again, if this were done for the sake of Men, then it must be either for Wise
Men or for Fools; If for Wise men only, then all that Pains was taken but for a
very few; but if for Fools, what reason could there be, why the Deity should
seek to deserve so well at their hands? Besides this, what hurt would it have
been to any of us, (whether Wise or Foolish) never to have been made? Quidve
mali fuerat nobis non esse creatis?
Natus enim debet quicunque est, velle manner
In vita, donec retinebit blanda voluptas:
Qui nunquam vero vitae gustavit amorem,
Nec fuit in numero, quid obest non esse creatum?


Lastly, if this Deity must needs go about moliminously to make a World, (...),
like an Artificer and Carpenter, what Tools and Instruments could he have to
work withal? what Ministers and Subservient Opificers? what Engines and Machins
for the rearing up of so huge a Fabric? How could he make the Matter to
understand his meaning, and obey his beck? how could he move it and turn it up
and down? For if Incorporeal, he could neither touch nor be touched, but would
run through all things, without fastening upon any thing: but if Corporeal,
then the same thing was both Materials and Architect, both Timber and
Carpenter, and the Stones must hew themselves, and bring themselves together,
with discretion, into a Structure.

XX. In the last Place, the Atheists argue from Interest (which proves many
times the most effectual of all Arguments) against a Deity; endeavoring to
persuade, that it is, First, the Interest of Private Persons, and of all
Mankind in General; and Secondly, the Particular Interest of Civil Sovereigns,
and Commonwealths; that there should neither be a God, nor the Belief of any
such thing entertained by the minds of Men; that is, no Religion. First, they
say therefore, that it is the Interesse of Mankind in General; Because so long
as men are persuaded, that there is an Understanding Being infinitely Powerful,
having no Law but his own Will, (because he has no Superior) that may do
whatever he pleases at any Time to them, they can never Securely enjoy
themselves or any thing, nor be ever free from disquieting Fear and Solicitude.
What the Poets Fable of Tantalus in Hell, being always in fear of a huge stone
hanging over his Head, and ready every Moment to tumble down upon him, is
nothing to that true fear which men have of a Deity, and Religion, here in this
Life, which indeed was the very thing mythologized in it. Nec miser impendens
magnum timet aere Saxum
Tantalus, (ut fama est) cassa formidine torpens:
Sed magis in vita, Divum Metus urget inanis
Mortales, casumque timent, quemcumque ferat Fors.
For besides men's Insecurity, from all manner of present Evils, upon the
Supposition of a God, the Immortality of Souls can hardly be kept out, but it
will crowd in after it, and then the fear of Eternal Punishments after Death
will unavoidably follow thereupon, perpetually embittering all the Solaces of
Life, and never suffering men to have the least sincere Enjoyment. -- si certam
finem esse viderent
Aerumnarum homines, aliqua ratione valerent,
Relligionibus, atque minis obsistere Vatum.
Nunc ratio nulla est restandi, nulla facultas:
Aeternas quoniam Poenas in morte timendum.
Ignoratur enim quae sit natura Animai,
Nata sit, an contra nascentibus insinuetu^;
Et simul intereat nobiscum morte dirempta,
An Tenebras Orci visat vastasque Lacunas.
Wherefore it is plain, that they who first introduced the Belief of a Deity
and Religion, whatever they might aim at in it, deserved very ill of all
Mankind, because they did thereby infinitely debase and depress men's Spirits
under a Servile Fear, Efficient animos humiles, formidine Divum,
Depressosque premunt ad Terram:
As also cause the greatest Griefs and Calamities that now disturb Humane Life,
Quantos tum gemitus ipsi sibi, quantaque nobis
Volnera, quas lachrymas peperere Minoribu' nostris?
There can be no comfortable and happy Living, without banishing from our Mind,
the belief of these two things, of a Deity and the Souls Immortality, Et metus
ille for as praeceps Acheruntis agendus
Funditus, humanam qui vitam turbat ab imo,
Omnia suffundens Mortis Nigrore, neque ullam
Esse voluptatem Liquidam, Furamque relinquit.


It was therefore a Noble and Heroical Exploit of Democritus and Epicurus,
those two good-natured Men, who seeing the World thus oppressed under the
grievous Yoke of Religion, the Fear of a Deity and Punishment after death, and
taking pity of this sad Condition of Mankind, did manfully encounter that
affrightful Spectre or Empusa, of a Providential Deity; and by clear
Philosophic Reasons, chase it away, and banish it quite out of the World;
laying down such Principles, as would salve all the Phenomenon of Nature
without a God; Quae been cognita si teneas, Natura videtur
Libera continuo, Dominis privata Superbis,
Ipsa sua per se sponte, Omnia Dis agere expers.
So that Lucretius does not without just Cause, erect a Triumphal Arch or
Monument to Epicurus, for this Conquest or Victory of his, obtained over the
Deity and Religion, in this manner; Humana ante oculos foede quum vita jaceret,
In terris oppressa gravi sub Relligione,
Quae caput a Coeli regionibus ostendebat,
Horribili super aspectu mortalibus instans;
Primum Graius homo mortales tendere contra
Est oculos ausus, primusque obsistere contra;
Quem nec fama Deum nec fulmina, nec minitanti
Murmr compressit coelum, etc.


XXI. That it is also the Interess of Civil Sovereigns and of all
Commonwealths, that there should neither be Deity nor Religion, the
Democritick Atheists would persuade in this manner; A Body Politic or
Commonwealth is made up of parts, that are all naturally Dissociated from one
another, by reason of that Principle of private Self-love, who therefore can be
no otherwise held together than by Fear; Now if there be any greater Fear than
the Fear of the Leviathan, and Civil Representative, the whole Structure and
Machin of this great Coloss must needs fall a-pieces, and tumble down. The
Civil Sovereign reigns only in Fear, wherefore unlese his Fear be the King and
Sovereign of all Fears, his Empire and Dominion ceases. But as the Rod of Moses
devoured the Rods of the Magicians, so certainly will the fear of an omnipotent
Deity, that can punish with eternal Torments after Death, quite swallow up and
devour that comparatively Petty Fear of Civil Sovereigns, and consequently
destroy the Being of Commonwealths, which have no Foundation in Nature, but are
mere Artificial Things, made by the Enchantment and Magical Art of Policy.
Wherefore it is well observed by a Modern Writer, That men ought not to suffer
themselves to be abused, by the Doctrine of Separated Essences and Incorporeal
Substances, (such as God and the Soul) built upon the vain Philosophy of
Aristotle, that would fright men from obeying the Laws of their Country, with
Empty Names, (as of Hell, Damnation, Fire and Brimstone) as men fright Birds
from the Corn, with an empty Hat, Dublet, and a crooked Stick. And again; If
the fear of Spirits (the chief of which is the Deity) were taken away, men
would be much more fitted than they are for Civil Obedience.

Moreover, the Power of Civil Sovereigns is perfectly Indivisible; it is either
All or Nothing, it must be Absolute and Infinite, or else it is none at all; now
it cannot be so, if there be any other Power equal to it, to share with it,
much less if there be any Superior (as that of the Deity) to check it and
control it. Wherefore the Deity must of Necessity be removed and displaced, to
make room for the Leviathan to spread himself in.

Lastly, It Is perfectly inconsistent with the Nature of a Body Politic, that
there should be any Private Judgment of Good or Evil, Lawful or Unlawful, Just
or Unjust allowed; but Conscience (which Theism and Religion introduces) is
Private Judgment concerning Good and Evil; and therefore the Allowance of it,
is contradictious to Civil Sovereignty and a Commonwealth. There ought to be no
other Conscience (in a Kingdom or Commonwealth) besides the Law of the
Country; the allowance of Private Conscience being, ipso facto, a Dissolution
of the Body Politic, and a Return to the State of Nature. Upon all these
accounts it must needs be acknowledged, that those Philosophers who undermine
and weaken Theism and Religion, do highly deserve of all Civil Sovereigns and
Commonwealths.

XXII. Now from all the premised Considerations, the Democriticks confidently
conclude against a Deity; That the System and Compages of the Universe, had not
its Original from any Understanding Nature, but that Mind and Understanding it
self, as well as all things else in the World, sprung up from Senseless Nature
and Chance, or from the unguided and undirected Motion of Matter. Which is
therefore called by the Name of Nature, because whatsoever moves is moved by
Nature and Necessity, and the mutual Occursions and Rencounters of Atoms, their
Plagae, their Strokes and Dashings against one another, their Reflections and
Repercussions, their Cohesions, Implexions, and Entanglements, as also their
Scattered Dispersions and Divulsions, are all Natural and Necessary; but it is
called also by the name of Chance and Fortune, because it is all unguided by
any Mind, Counsel or Design.

Wherefore Infinite Atoms of different sizes and figures, devoid of all Life
and Sense, moving Fortuitously from Eternity in infinite Space, and making
successively several Encounters, and consequently various Implexions and
Entanglements with one another; produced first a confused Chaos of these
Omnifarious Particles, jumbling together with infinite variety of Motions,
which afterward by the tugging of their different and contrary forces, whereby
they all hindered and abated each other, came, as it were by joint Conspiracy,
to be Conglomerated into a Vortex or Vortices; where after many Convolutions
and Evolutions, Molitions and Essays (in which all manner of Tricks were tried,
and all Forms imaginable experimented) they chanced in length of time here to
settle, into this Form and System of things, which now is, of Earth, Water, Air
and Fire; Sun, Moon and Stars; Plants, Animals and Men; So that Senseless Atoms,
fortuitously moved, and Material Chaos, were the first Original of all things.

This Account of the Cosmopoeia, and first Original of the Mundane System, is
represented by Lucretius according to the mind of Epicurus, though without any
mention of those Vortices, which yet were an essential part of the old
Democritick Hypothesis.

Sed quibus ille modis conjectus material
Fundarit coelum, ac terram, pontique profunda,
Solis, lunai cursus, ex ordine ponam.
Nam certe neque consilio primordia rerum,
Ordine se quaeque atque sagaci mente locarunt:
Nec, quos quaeque darent motus, pepigere profecto:
Sed quia multa modis multis primordia rerum,
Ex infinito jam tempore percita plagis,
Ponderibusque suis consuerunt concita ferri,
Omni'modisque coire, atque omnia pertentare,
Quaecunque inter se possent congressa creare:
Propterea fit, uti magnum volgata per aevum,
Omnigenos coetus, and motus experiundo,
Tandem ea conveniant, quae ut convenere, repent
Magnarum rerum fiant exordia saepe,
Terrai, Maris, and Coeli, generisque Animantum.
But because some seem to think that Epicurus was the first Founder and
Inventor of this Doctrine, we shall here observe, that this same Atheistick
Hypothesis was long before described by Plato, when Epicurus was, as yet
unborn; and therefore doubtless according to the Doctrine of Leucippus,
Democritus and Protagoras; though that Philosopher, in a kind of disdain (as it
seems) refused to mention either of their Names, (...). (...), etc. (...), etc.
The Atheists say that Fire, Water, Air and Earth (i. e. the four Elements) were
all made by Nature and Chance; and none of them by Art or Mind (that is, they
were made by the fortuitous Motion of Atoms, and not by any Deity) And that
those other Bodies, of the Terrestrial Globe, of the Sun, the Moon, and the
Stars (which by all, except these Atheists, were, in those times, generally
supposed to be Animated, and a kind of Inferior Deities) were afterward made
out of the foresaid Elements, being altogether Inanimate. For they being moved
fortuitously or as it happened, and so making various commixtures together, did
by that means, at length produce the whole Heavens and all things in them, as
likewise Plants and Animals here upon earth, all which were not made by Mind,
nor by Art, nor by any God; but, as we said before, by Nature and Chance. Art
and Mind it self, rising up afterward from the same Senseless Principles in
Animals.

CHAP. III.
An Introduction to the Confutation of the Atheistick Grounds, in which is
contained a particular Account of all the several Forms of Atheism. 1. That the
Grounds of the Hylozoick Atheism could not be insisted on in the former
Chapter, together with those of the Atomick, they being directly contrary each
to other; with a further Account of this Hylozoick Atheism. 2. A Suggestion, by
way of Caution, for the preventing of all mistakes, That every Hylozoist must
not therefore be condemned for an Atheist, or a mere Counterfeit Histrionical
Theist. 3. That nevertheless, such Hylozoists as are also Corporealists, can by
no means be excused from the Imputation of Atheism, for Two Reasons. 4. That
Strato Lampsacenus, commonly called Physicus, seems to have been the first
Asserter of the Hylozoick Atheism, he holding no other God but the Life of
Nature in Matter. 5. Further proved, that Strato was an Atheist, and that of a
different Form from Democritus, he attributing an Energetick Nature, but
without Sense and Animality, to all Matter 6. That Strato not deriving all
things from a mere Fortuitous Principle, as the Democritick Atheists did, nor
yet acknowledging any one Plastic Nature to preside over the Whole, but
deducing the Original of things from a Mixture of Chance and Plastic Nature
both together, in the several parts of Matter, must therefore needs be an
Hylozoick Atheist. 7. That the famous Hippocrates was neither an Hylozoick nor
Democritick Atheist, but rather an Heraclitick Corporeal Theist. 8. That Plato
took no Notice of the Hylozoick Atheism, nor of any other, then what derives
the Original of all things from a mere Fortuitous Nature; and therefore either
the Democritical, or the Anaximandrian Atheism, which latter will be next
declared. 9. That it is hardly imaginable, there should have been no
Philosophic Atheists in the World before Democritus and Leucippus, there being
in all Ages, as Plato observes, some or other sick of the Atheistick Disease.
That Aristotle affirms many of the first Philosophers, to have assigned only a
Material Cause of the Mundane System, without either Efficient or Intending
Cause; They supposing Matter to be the only Substance, and all things else
nothing but the Passions and Accidents of it, Generable and Corruptible. 10.
That the Doctrine of these Materialists will be more fully understood from the
Exceptions which Aristotle ma^es against them; His first Exception, That they
assigned no Cause of Motion, but introduced it into the World unaccomptibly.
11. Aristotle's second Exception, That these Materialists did assign no Cause
(...), of Well and Fit, and give no account of the Orderly Regularity of
things. That Anaxagoras was the first Ionick Philosopher who made Mind and Good
a Principle of the Universe. 12. Concluded, That Aristotle's Materialists were
downright Atheists, not merely because they held all Substance to be Body,
since Heraclitus and Zeno did the like, and yet are not therefore accounted
Atheists, (they supposing their Fiery Matter to be Originally Intellectual, and
the whole World to be an Animal) but because these made Stupid Matter, devoid
of all Understanding, and Life, to be the only Principle: 13. As also, because
they supposed every thing besides the Substance of Matter, Life and
Understanding, and all Particular Beings, to be Generable and Corruptible, and
consequently that there could be no other God, then such as was Native and
Mortal. That those ancient Theologers, who were Theogonists, and Generated all
the Gods out of Night and Chaos, were only Verbal Theists but Real Atheists:
Senseless Matter being to them the highest Numen. 14. The great difference
observed betwixt Aristotle's Atheistical Materialists, and the Italick
Philosophers; the former determining all things, besides the Substance of
Matter, to be Made or Generated, the latter that no Real Entity was either
Generated or Corrupted; thereupon both destroying Qualities and Forms of Body,
and asserting the Ingenerability and Incorporeity of Souls. 15. How Aristotle's
Atheistick Materialists endeavored to baffle and elude that Axiom of the
Italick Philosophers, That Nothing can come from Nothing nor go to Nothing, And
that Anaxagoras was the first amongst the Ionicks who yielded so far to that
Principle, as from thence to assert Incorporeal Substance, and the
Pre-existence of Qualities and Forms in Similar Atoms, forasmuch as he
conceived them to be things, really distinct from the Substance of Matter. 16.
The Error of some Writers, who because Aristotle affirms, that the Ancient
Philosophers did generally conclude the World to have been Made, from thence
infer, that they were all Theists, and that Aristotle contradicts himself in
representing many of them as Atheists. That the Ancient Atheists did generally
(...), assert the World to have been Made, or have had a Beginning; as also
some Theists did maintain its Eternity, but in a way of Dependency upon the
Deity. That we ought here to distinguish betwixt the System of the World, and
the Substance of the Matter, all Atheists asserting the Matter to have been,
not only Eternal, but also such Independently upon any other Being. 17. That
Plato and others concluded this Materialism or Hylopathian Atheism, to have
been at least as old as Homer, who made the Ocean (or fluid Matter) the Father
of all the Gods. And that this was indeed the Ancientest of all Atheisms, which
verbally acknowledging Gods, yet derived the Original of them all from Night
and Chaos. The description of this Atheistick Hypothesis in Aristophanes, That
Night and Chaos first laid an Egg, out of which sprung forth Love, which
afterward mingling with Chaos begat Heaven and Earth, Animals and all the
Gods. 18. That notwithstanding this, in Aristotle's judgment, Parmenides,
Hesiod, with (...) others, who made Love in like manner, Senior to all the
Gods, were to be exempted out of the number of Atheists; they understanding
this Love to be an Active Principle, or Cause of Motion in the Universe, which
therefore could be no Egg of the Night, nor Offspring of Chaos, but something
in Order of Nature before Matter. Simmias Rhodius his Wings, a Poem in honor
of this Heavenly Love. This not that Love which was the Offspring of Penia and
Porus in Plato. In what rectified sense it may pass for true Theology, that
Love is the Supreme Deity and Original of all things. 19. That though
Democritus and Leucippus be elsewhere taxed by Aristotle, for this very thing,
that they assigned only a Material Cause of the Universe; yet they were not the
Persons intended by him in the forecited Accusation, but certain Ancienter
Philosophers, who also were not Atomists but Hylopathians. 20. That Aristotle's
Atheistick Materialists were all the first Ionick Philosophers before
Anaxagoras, Thales being the Head of them. But that Thales is acquitted from
this Imputation of Atheism by several good Authors (with an Account how he came
to be thus differently represented) and therefore that his next Successor
Anaximander is rather to be accounted the Prince of this Atheistick Philosophy.
21. A Passage out of Aristotle objected which, at first sight, seems to make
Anaximander a Divine Philosopher, and therefore has led both Modern and
Ancient Writers into that mistake. That this Place well considered, proves the
contrary, That Anaximander was the Chief of the old Atheistick Philosophers.
22. That it is no wonder, if Anaximander called Senseless Matter the (...), or
God, since to all Atheists, that must needs be the the highest Numen; Also how
this is said to be Immortal, and to Govern all; with the concurrent Judgment of
the Greek Scholiasts upon this Place. 23. A further Account of the
Anaximandrian Philosophy, manifesting it to have been purely Atheistical. 24.
What ill Judges the Vulgar have been of Theists and Atheists; as also that
learned men have commonly supposed fewer Atheists than indeed there were.
Anaximander and Democritus Atheists both alike, though Philosophising different
ways. That some Passages in Plato respect the Anaximandrian Form of Atheism,
rather than the Democritical. 25. Why Democritus and Leucippus new modeled
Atheism into the Atomick Form. 26. That besides the Three Forms of Atheism
already mentioned, we sometimes meet with a Fourth, which supposes the Universe
though not to be an Animal, yet a kind of Plant or Vegetable, having one
Plastic Nature in it, devoid of Understanding and Sense, which disposes and
orders the Whole. 27. That this Form of Atheism which makes one Plastic Life
to preside over the Whole, is different from the Hylozoick, in that it takes
away all Fortuitousness, and subjects all to the Fate of one Plastic
Methodical Nature. 28. Though it be possible that some in all ages might have
entertained this Atheistical Conceit, That things are dispensed by one Regular
and Methodical but Unknowing Senseless Nature; yet it seems to have been chiefly
asserted by certain Spurious Heracliticks and Stoics. And therefore this Form
of Atheism, which supposes one Cosmoplastick Nature, may be called
Pseudo-zenonian. 29. That, besides the Philosophic Atheists, there have been
always Enthusiastic and Fanatical Atheists, though in some sense all Atheists
may be said also to be both Enthusiasts and Fanatics, they being led by an
(...), or Irrational Impetus. 30. That there cannot easily be any other Form of
Atheism, besides those Four already mentioned, because all Atheists are
Corporealists, and yet all Corporealists not Atheists, but only such as make
the first Principle of all things, not to be Intellectual. 31. A Distribution
of Atheisms, producing the former Quaternio, and showing the Difference between
them. 32. That they are but Bunglers at Atheism, who talk of Sensitive and
Rational Matter; and that the Canting Astrological Atheists are not at all
considerable, because not understanding themselves. 33. Another Distribution of
Atheisms; That they either derive the Original of things from a Merely
Fortuitous Principle, the Unguided Motion of Matter, or else from a Plastic
and Methodical, but Senseless Nature. What Atheists denied the Eternity of the
World, and what asserted it. 34. That of these Four Forms of Atheism, the
Atomick or Democritical, and the Hylozoick or Stratonical are the chief, and
that these Two being once confuted, all Atheism will be confuted. 35. These Two
Forms of Atheism, being contrary to one another, how we ought in all reason to
insist rather upon the Atomick; but that afterward we shall confute the
Hylozoick also, and prove against all Corporealists, that no Cogitation nor
Life belongs to Matter. 36. That in the mean time, we shall not neglect any
Form of Atheism, but confute them all together, as agreeing in one Principle;
as also show, how the old Atomick Atheists did sufficiently overthrow the
Foundation of the Hylozoists. 37. Observed here, that the Hylozoists are not
condemned merely for asserting a Plastic Life, distinct from the Animal,
(which with most other Philosophers we judge highly probable, if taken in a
Right Sense) but for grossly misunderstanding it, and attributing the same to
Matter. (...) The Plastic Life of Nature largely explained. 38. That though
the Confutation of the Atheistick grounds, according to the Laws of Method,
ought to have been reserved for the last part of this Discourse, yet we having
reasons to violate those Laws, crave the Readers Pardon for this
Preposterousness. A considerable Observation of Plato's, that it is not only
Moral Vitiosity which inclines men to Atheize, but also an Affectation of
seeming wiser than the Generality of Mankind; As likewise that the Atheists,
making such pretense to Wit, it is a Seasonable undertaking to evince that they
fumble in all their Ratiocinations. That we hope to make it appear, that the
Atheists are no Conjurers; and that all Forms of Atheism are Nonsense and
Impossibility.

I. WE have now represented the Grand Mysteries of Atheism, which may be also
called the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Darkness; though indeed some of them are
but briefly hinted here, they being again more fully to be insisted on
afterward, where we are to give an account of the Atheists Endeavors to Salve
the Phenomenon of Cogitation. We have represented the chief Grounds of Atheism
in General, as also of that most Notorious Form of Atheism in particular, that
is called Atomical: but whereas there has been already mentioned, another Form
of Atheism, called by us Hylozoical; the Principles hereof could not possibly
be insisted on in this place, where we were to make the most Plausible Plea for
Atheism; they being directly contrary to those of the Atomical, so that they
would have mutually destroyed each other. For, whereas the Atomick Atheism
supposes, the Notion or Idea of Body to be nothing but Extended Resisting Bulk,
and consequently to include no manner of Life and Cogitation in it; Hylozoism
on the contrary makes all Body, as such, and therefore every smallest Atom of
it, to have Life Essentially belonging to it (Natural Perception, and Appetite)
though without any Animal Sense or Reflexive Knowledge, as if Life, and Matter
or Extended Bulk, were but two Incomplete and Inadequate Conceptions, of one
and the same Substance, called Body. By reason of which Life (not Animal but
only Plastical) all parts of Matter being supposed able, to form themselves
Artificially and Methodically (though without any Deliberation or Attentive
Consideration) to the greatest advantage of their present respective
Capabilities, and therefore also sometimes, by Organization to improve
themselves further, into Sense and Self-enjoyment in all Animals, as also to
Universal Reason and Reflexive Knowledge in Men; it is plain that there is no
Necessity at all left, either of any Incorporeal Soul in Men to make them
Rational, or of any Deity in the whole Universe to salve the Regularity
thereof. One main difference betwixt these two Forms of Atheism is this, that
the Atomical supposes all Life whatsoever to be Accidental, Generable and
Corruptible: But the Hylozoick admits of a certain Natural or Plastic Life,
Essential and Substantial, Ingenerable and Incorruptible, though attributing
the same only to Matter, as supposing no other Substance in the World besides
it.

II. Now to prevent all Mistakes, we think fit here by way of Caution to
suggest; That as every Atomist is not therefore necessarily an Atheist, so
neither must every Hylozoist needs be accounted such. For who ever so holds the
Life of Matter, as notwithstanding to assert another kind of Substance also,
that is Immaterial and Incorporeal, is no way obnoxious to that soul
Imputation. However we ought not to dissemble, but that there is a great
Difference here betwixt these two, Atomism and Hylozoism, in this regard; That
the former of them, namely Atomism (as has been already declared) has in it
self a Natural Cognation and Conjunction with Incorporeism, though violently
cut off from it by the Democritick Atheists; whereas the latter of them,
Hylozoism, seems to have altogether as close and intimate a Correspondence with
Corporealism; Because, as has been already signified, if all Matter, as such,
have not only such a Life, Perception and Self-active Power in it, as whereby
it can Form it self to the best advantage, making this a Sun and that an Earth
or Planet, and fabricating the Bodies of Animals most Artificially; but also
can improve it self into Sense and Self-enjoyment; it may as well be thought
able to advance it self higher, into all the Acts of Reason and Understanding
in Men: so that there will be no need either of an Incorporeal Immortal Soul in
Men, or a Deity in the Universe. Nor indeed is it easily conceivable, how any
should be induced to admit such a Monstrous Paradox as this is, That every Atom
of Dust or other Senseless Matter, is Wiser than the greatest Politician and the
most acute Philosopher that ever was; as having an Infallible Omniscience of
all its own Capabilities and Congruities; were it not by reason of some strong
Prepossession, against Incorporeal Substance and a Deity, there being nothing
so Extravagant and Outragiously Wild, which a Mind once infected with
Atheistical Sottishness and Disbelief, will not rather greedily swallow down,
than admit a Deity, which to such is the highest of all Paradoxes imaginable,
and the most affrightful Bugbear. Notwithstanding all which, it may not be
denied, but that it is possible for one, who really entertains the belief of a
Deity and a Rational Soul Immortal, to be persuaded, first, that the Sensitive
Soul, in men as well as Brutes, is merely Corporeal; and then that there is a
Material Plastic Life in the Seeds of all Plants and Animals, whereby they do
Artificially form themselves; and from thence afterward to descend also
further, to Hylozoism, that all matter, as such, has a kind of Natural, though
not Animal Life in it; in consideration whereof, we ought not to Censure every
Hylozoist, professing to hold a Deity and a Rational Soul Immortal, for a mere
Disguised Atheist, or Counterfeit Histrionical Theist.

III. But though every Hylozoist be not therefore necessarily an Atheist, yet
whosoever is an Hylozoist and Corporealist both together, he that both holds
the Life of Matter in the Sense before declared, and also that there is no
other Substance in the World besides Body and Matter, cannot be excused from
the Imputation of Atheism, for Two Reasons. First, because though he derive the
Original of all Things, not from what is perfectly Dead and Stupid, as the
Atomick Atheist does, but from that which has a kind of Life or Perception in
it, nay an Infallible Omniscience, of whatsoever it self can Do or Suffer, or
of all its own Capabilities and Congruities, which seems to bear some Semblance
of a Deity; yet all this being only in the way of Natural and not Animal
Perception, is indeed nothing but a Dull and Drowsy, Plastic and Spermatick
Life, devoid of all Consciousness and Self-enjoyment. The Hylozoists Nature, is
a piece of very Mysterious Nonsense, a thing perfectly Wise, without any
Knowledge or Consciousness of it self; Whereas a Deity, according to the true
Notion of it, is such a Perfect Understanding Being, as with full Consciousness
and Self-enjoyment, is completely Happy. Secondly, because the Hylozoick
Corporealist, supposing all Matter, as such, to have Life in it, must needs
make Infinite of those Lives, (forasmuch as every Atom of Matter has a Life of
its own) Coordinate and Independent on one another, and consequently, as many
Independent first Principles, no one Common Life or Mind ruling over the Whole.
Whereas, to assert a God, is to derive all things (...), from some one
Principle, or to suppose one Perfect Living and Understanding Being, to be the
Original of all things, and the Architect of the whole Universe.

Thus we see that the Hylozoick Corporealist is really an Atheist, though
carrying more the Semblance and Disguise of a Theist, than other Atheists, in
that he attributes a kind of Life to Matter. For indeed every Atheist must of
necessity cast some of the Incommunicable Properties of the Deity, more or
less, upon that which is not God, namely Matter: and they who do not attribute
Life to it, yet must needs bestow upon it Necessary Self-existence, and make it
the First Principle of all things, which are the Peculiarities of the Deity.
The Numen which the Hylozoick Corporealist pays all his Devotions to, is a
certain blind Shee-god or Goddess, called Nature or the Life of Matter; which
is a very great Mystery, a thing that is Perfectly Wise, and Infallibly
Omniscient, without any Knowledge or Consciousness at all. Something like to
that (...) (in De Rep. l. 5.
Plato) (...), that vulgar Enigm or Riddle of Boys, concerning an Eunuch
striking a Bat; A Man and not a Man, Seeing and not Seeing, did Strike and not
Strike, with a Stone and not a Stone, a Bird and not a Bird, etc. The
Difference being only this; that this was a thing Intelligible, but humoursomly
expressed, whereas the other seems to be perfect Nonsense, being nothing but a
misunderstanding of the Plastic Power, as shall be showed afterward.

IV. Now the First and Chief Assertour of this Hylozoick Atheism was, as we
conceive, Strato Lampsacenus, commonly called also Physicus, that had been once
an Auditor of Theophrastus and a famous Peripatetick, but afterward
degenerated from a Genuine Peripatetick, into a new-formed kind of Atheist. For
Velleius, an Epicurean Atheist in Cicero, reckoning up all the several sorts of
Theists, which had been in former times, gives such a Character of this Strato,
as whereby he makes him to be a strange kind of Atheistical Theist, or Divine
Atheist, if we may use such a contradictious Expression; his words are these,
De Not. De. l. 1.
Nec audiendus Strato, qui Physicus appellatur, qui omnem Vim Divinam in Natura
sitam esse censet, quae Causas gignendi, augendi minuendive habeat, sed careat
omni sensu; Neither is Strato, commonly called the Naturalist or Physiologist,
to be heard, who places all Divinity in Nature, as having within it self the
Causes of all Generations, Corruptions and Augmentations, but without any
manner of Sense. Strato's Deity therefore was a certain Living and Active, but
Senseless Nature. He did not fetch the Original of all things, as the
Democritick and Epicurean Atheists, from a mere Fortuitous Motion of Atoms, by
means whereof he bore some slight Semblance of a Theist, but yet he was a
downright Atheist for all that, his God being no other than such a Life of
Nature in Matter, as was both devoid of Sense and Consciousness, and also
multiplied together with the several parts of it. He is also in like manner
described by Seneca in St. Augustine De Civ. Dei l. 6. c. 10.
, as a kind of Mongrel thing, betwixt an Atheist and a Theist; Ego feram aut
Platonem, aut Peripateticum Stratonem, quorum alter Deum sine Corpore fecit,
alter sine Animo? Shall I endure either Plato, or the Peripatetick Strato,
whereof the one made God to be without a Body, the other without a Mind? In
which words Seneca taxes these two Philosophers, as guilty of two contrary
Extremes; Plato, because he made God to be a pure Mind or a perfectly
Incorporeal Being; and Strato, because he made him to be a Body without a Mind,
he acknowledging no other Deity than a certain Stupid and Plastic Life, in all
the several parts of Matter, without Sense. Wherefore this seems to be the only
reason, why Strato was thus sometimes reckoned amongst the Theists, though he
were indeed an Atheist, because he dissented from that only form of Atheism,
then so vulgarly received, the Democritick and Epicurean, attributing a kind of
Life to Nature and Matter.

V. And that Strato was thus an Atheist, but of a different kind from
Democritus, may further appear from this Passage of Cicero's Acad. Quast. l. 4.
, Strato Lampsacenus negat opera Deorum se uti ad fabricandum Mundum,
quaecunque sint docet omnia esse Effecta Natura, nec ut ille, qui asperis, and
laevibus, and hamatis uncinatisque Corporibus Concreta haec esse dicat,
interjecto Inani; Somnia censet haec esse Democriti, non docentis sed optantis:
Strato denies that he makes any use of a God, for the fabricating of the World,
or the salving the Phenomenon thereof; teaching all things to have been made by
Nature; but yet not in such a manner as he who affirmed them to be all
Concreted out of certain rough and smooth, hookey and crooked Atoms, he judging
these things to be nothing but the mere Dreams and Dotages of Democritus, not
teaching but wishing. Here we see that Strato denied the World to be made by a
Deity or perfect Understanding Nature, as well as Democritus, and yet that he
dissented from Democritus notwithstanding, holding another kind of Nature, as
the Original of things, than he did, who gave no account of any Active
Principle and Cause of Motion, nor of the Regularity that is in Things.
Democritus his Nature was nothing but the Fortuitous Motion of Matter, but
Strato's Nature was an Inward Plastic Life in the several Parts of Matter,
whereby they could Artificially frame themselves to the best advantage,
according to their several Capabilities, without any Conscious or Reflexive
Knowledge. Quicquid aut sit aut fiat, (says the same Author) Naturalibus fieri,
aut factum esse docet ponderibus and motibus: Strato teaches whatsoever is, or
is made, to be made by certain inward Natural Forces and Activities.

VI. Furthermore it is to be observed, that though Strato thus attributed a
certain kind of Life to Matter, yet he did by no means allow of any one Common
Life, whether Sentient and Rational, or Plastic and Spermatick only, as Ruling
over the whole mass of Matter and Corporeal Universe; which is a thing in part
affirmed by Plutarch Advers. Colotem.
, and may in part be gathered from these words of his; (...)^ Strato affirms
that the World is no Animal (or God) but that what is Natural in every thing,
follows something Fortuitous antecedent, Chance first beginning, and Nature
acting consequently thereupon. The full sense whereof seems to be this, that
though Strato did not derive the Original of all Mundane things from mere
Fortuitous Mechanism, as Democritus before him had done, but supposed a Life
and Natural Perception in the Matter, that was directive of it, yet not
acknowledging any one Common Life, whether Animal or Plastic, as governing and
swaying the whole, but only supposing the several Parts of Matter, to have so
many several Plastic Lives of their own, he must needs attribute something to
Fortune, and make the Mundane System to depend upon a certain Mixture of Chance
and Plastic or Orderly Nature both together, and consequently must be an
Hylozoist. Thus we see, that these are two Schemes of Atheism, very different
from one another; that which fetches the Original of all things from the mere
Fortuitous and Unguided Motion of Matter, without any Vital or Directive
Principle; and that which derives it from a certain Mixture of Chance and the
Life of Matter both together, it supposing a Plastic Life, not in the whole
Universe, as one thing, but in all the several Parts of Matter by themselves;
the first of which is the Atomick and Democritick Atheism, the second the
Hylozoick and Stratonick.

VII. It may perhaps be suspected by some, that the famous Hippocrates, who
lived long before Strato, VI. Epidem. Sect. 5.
was an Assertour of the Hylozoick Atheism, because of such Passages in him as
these, (...) Al. lect. (...).
(...)^ Nature is Unlearned or Untaught, but it learneth from it self what
things it ought to do: And again, (...)^ Nature finds out ways to it self,
not by Ratiocination. But there is nothing more affirmed here concerning Nature
by Hippocrates, than what might be affirmed likewise of the Aristotelick and
Platonic Nature, which is supposed to act for Ends, though without
Consultation and Ratiocination. And I must confess, it seems to me no way
mis-becoming of a Theist, to acknowledge such a Nature or Principle in the
Universe, as may act according to Rule and Method for the Sake of Ends, and in
order to the Best, though it self do not understand the reason of what it does;
this being still supposed to act dependently upon a higher Intellectual
Principle, and to have been first set a work and employed by it, it being
otherwise Nonsense. But to assert any such Plastic Nature, as is Independent
upon any higher Intellectual Principle, and so it self the first and highest
Principle of Activity in the Universe, this indeed must needs be, either that
Hylozoick Atheism, already spoken of, or else another different Form of
Atheism, which shall afterward be described. But though Hippocrates were a
Corporealist, yet we conceive he ought not, to lie under the suspicion of
either of those two Atheisms; forasmuch as himself plainly asserts a higher
Intellectual Principle, than such a Plastic Nature, in the Universe, namely an
Heraclitick Corporeal God, or Understanding Fire, Immortal, pervading the whole
World, in these words; De Princip. aut Carnibu^. Sect. 1.
(...)^ It seems to me, that that which is called Heat or Fire, is Immortal,
and Omniscient, and that it sees, hears, and knows all things, not only such as
are present, but also future. Wherefore we conclude, that Hippocrates was
neither an Hylozoick nor Democritick Atheist, but an Heraclitick Corporeal
Theist.

VIII. Possibly it may be thought also, that Plato in his Sophist intends this
Hylozoick Atheism, where he declares it as the Opinion of many, (...)^ That
Nature generates all Things from a certain Spontaneous Principle, without any
Reason and Understanding. But here the word (...) may be as well rendered
Fortuitous, as Spontaneous; however there is no necessity, that this should be
understood of an Artificial or Methodical Unknowing Nature. It is true indeed
that Plato himself seems to acknowledge a certain Plastic or Methodical Nature
in the Universe, Subordinate to the Deity, or that perfect Mind which is the
supreme Governor of all things; as may be gathered from these words of his, In
Sophist.
(...)^ That Nature does rationally (or orderly) together with Reason and Mind,
govern the whole Universe. Where he supposes a certain Regular Nature to be a
Partial and Subordinate Cause of things under the Divine Intellect. And it is
very probable that Aristotle derived that whole Doctrine of his concerning a
Regular and Artificial Nature which acts for Ends, from the Platonic School.
But as for any such Form of Atheism, as should suppose a Plastic or Regular,
but Senseless Nature either in the whole World, or the several parts of Matter
by themselves, to be the highest Principle of all things, we do not conceive
that there is any Intimation of it to be found any where in Plato. For in his
De Legibus, where he professedly disputes against Atheism, he states the
Doctrine of it after this manner, Lib. 10.
(...)^ That Nature and Chance produced all the first, greatest and most
excellent things, but that the smaller things were produced by Humane Art. The
plain meaning whereof is this, that the First Original of things, and the frame
of the whole Universe, proceeded from a mere Fortuitous Nature, or the Motion
of Matter unguided by any Art or Method. And thus it is further explained in
the following words, (...), etc. That the first Elements, Fire, water, Air and
Earth, were all made by Nature and Chance, without any Art or Method, and then,
that the bodies of the Sun, Moon and Stars, and the whole Heavens, were
afterward made out of those Elements, as devoid of all manner of Life, and only
fortuitously moved and mingled together; and lastly, that the whole Mundane
System, together with the orderly Seasons of the year, as also Plants, Animals
and Men did arise after the same manner, from the mere Fortuitous Motion of
senseless and stupid Matter. In the very same manner does Plato state this
Controversy again, p. 28. Ed. Ser.
betwixt Theists and Atheists, in his Philebus, (...); Whether shall we say, O
Protarchus, that this whole Universe is dispensed and ordered, by a mere
Irrational, Temerarious and Fortuitous Principle, and so as it happens; or
contrariwise, (as our forefathers have instructed us) that Mind, and a certain
Wonderful Wisdom, did at first frame, and does still govern all things?

Wherefore we conclude that Plato took no notice of any other Form of Atheism,
as then set on foot, than such as derives all things from a mere Fortuitous
Principle, from Nature and Chance, that is the unguided Motion of Matter,
without any Plastic Artificialness or Methodicalness, either in the whole
Universe, or the parts of it. But because this kind of Atheism, which derives
all things from a mere Fortuitous Nature, had been managed two manner of ways;
by Democritus in the way of Atoms, and by Anaximander and others in the way of
Forms and Qualities; (of which we are to speak in the next place) therefore the
Atheism which Plato opposes, was either the Democritick or the Anaximandrian
Atheism; or else (which is most probable) both of them together.

IX. It is hardly imaginable that there should be no Philosophic Atheists in
the world before Democritus and Leucippus. Plato long since concluded, that
there have been Atheists, more or less, in every Age, when he bespeaks his
young Atheist after this manner, p. 888. Ed. Sec.
(...)^ The full sense whereof seems to be this; Neither you (my Son) nor your
friends (Democritus, Leucippus and Protagoras) are the first who have
entertained this Opinion concerning the Gods, but there have been always some
more or less, sick of this Atheistick Disease. Wherefore we shall now make a
diligent search and enquiry, to see if we can find any other Philosophers who
Atheized before Democritus and Leucippus, as also what Form of Atheism they
entertained.

Aristotle in his Metaphysics, speaking of the Quaternio of Causes, affirms
that many of those who first Philosophized, assigned only a Material Cause of
the whole Mundane System, without either Intending or Efficient Cause. The
reason whereof he intimates to have been this, because they asserted Matter to
be the only Substance, and that whatsoever else was in the World, besides the
substance or bulk of Matter, were all nothing else but (...), different
Passions and Affections, Accidents and Qualities of Matter that were all
Generated out of it, and Corruptible again into it, the Substance of Matter
always remaining the same, neither Generated nor Corrupted, but from Eternity
unmade; Aristotle's words are Lib. 1. c. 3.
these: (...)^ Most of those who first philosophized, took notice of no other
Principle of things in the Universe, than what is to be referred to the
Material Cause; for that out of which all things are, and out of which they are
first made, and into which they are all at last corrupted and resolved, the
Substance always remaining the same, and being changed only in its Passions and
Qualities; This they concluded to be the first Original and Principle of all
things.

X. But the meaning of these old Material Philosophers will be better
understood, by those Exceptions which Aristotle makes against them, which are
Two: First, that because they acknowledged no other Substance besides Matter,
that might be an Active Principle in the Universe, Arist. Met. l. 1. c. 3.
it was not possible for them to give any account of the Original of Motion and
Action. (...)^ Though all Generation be made never so much out of something as
the Matter, yet the question still is, by what means this comes to pass, and
what is the Active Cause which produces it? because the Subject Matter cannot
change it self; As for example, neither Timber, nor Brass, is the cause that
either of them are changed; for Timber alone does not make a Bed, nor Brass a
Statue, but there must be something else as the Cause of the Change; and to
enquire after this is to enquire after another Principle, besides Matter, which
we would call that from whence Motion springs. In which words Aristotle
intimates that these old Material Philosopers shuffled in, Motion and Action
into the World unaccountably, or without a Cause; forasmuch as they
acknowledged no other Principle of Things besides Passive Matter, which could
never move, change or alter it self.

XI. And Aristotle's second Exception against these old Material Philosophers
is this; that since there could be no Intending Causality in Senseless and
Stupid Matter, which they made to be the only Principle of all things, they
were not able to assign (...), any Cause of Well and Fit, and so could give no
account of the Regular and Orderly Frame of this Mundane System; (...)^ Met. l.
1. c. 3.
That things partly are so well in the World, and partly are made so well,
cannot be imputed either to Earth or Water, or any other senseless Body; much
less is it reasonable to attribute so noble and Excellent an Effect as this, to
mere Chance or Fortune. Where Aristotle again intimates, that as these Material
Philosophers shuffled in Motion into the world without a Cause, so likewise
they must needs suppose this Motion to be altogether Fortuitous and Unguided
and thereby in a manner make Fortune, which is nothing but the absence or
defect of an Intending Cause, to supply the room both of the Active and
Intending Cause, that is, Efficient and Final. Whereupon Aristotle subjoyns a
Commendation of Anaxagoras, as the first of the Ionick Philosophers, who
introduced Mind or Intellect for a Principle in the Universe; that in this
respect, he alone seemed to be sober and in his wits, comparatively with those
others that went before him, who talked so idly and Atheistically. For
Anaxagoras his Principle was such, says Aristotle, as was (...), at once a
cause of Motion and also of Well and Fit; of all the Regularity, Aptitude,
Pulchritude and Order that is in the whole Universe. And thus it seems
Anaxagoras himself had determined: (...), Arist. de An. Lib. 1. c. 2.
Anaxagoras says that Mind is the only Cause of Right and Well; this being
proper to Mind to aim at Ends and Good, and to order one thing Fitly for the
sake of another. Whence it was that Anaxagoras concluded Good also, as well as
Mind, to have been a Principle of the Universe, Arist. M^t. l. 14. c. 10.
(...)^ Anaxagoras makes Good a Principle, as that which moves; For though Mind
move Matter, yet it moves it for the sake of something, and being it self, as
it were, first moved by Good: So that Good is also a Principle. And we note
this the rather, to show how well these three Philosophers, Aristotle, Plato
and Anaxagoras, agreed all together, in this excellent Truth, That Mind and
Good are the First Principle of all things in the Universe.

XII. And now we think it is sufficiently evident, that these old Materialists
in Aristotle, whoever they were, were downright Atheists; not so much, because
they made all Substance to be Body or Matter, for Heraclitus first, and after
him Zeno, did the like, deriving the Original of all things from Fire, as well
as Anaximenes did from Air, and Thales is supposed by Aristotle to have done
from Water, and that with some little more seeming plausibility, since Fire
being a more Subtle and Moveable Body than any other, was therefore thought by
some of those Ancients to be (...), the most Incorporeal of all Bodies, as
Earth was for that cause rejected by all those Corporeal Philosophers, from
being a Principle, by reason of the grossness of its parts. But Heraclitus and
Zeno, notwithstanding this, are not accounted Atheists, because they supposed
their Fiery Matter, to have not only Life, but also a perfect Understanding
Originally belonging to it, as also the whole World to be an Animal: Whereas
those Materialists of Aristotle, made Senseless and Stupid Matter, devoid of all
Understanding and Life, to be the first Principle and Root of all things. For
when they supposed, Life and Understanding, as well as all other Differences of
Things, to be nothing but mere Passions and Accidents of Matter, Generable out
of it, and Corruptible again into it, and indeed to be produced, but in a
Secundary way, from the Fortuitous Commixture of those first Elementary
Qualities, Heat and Cold, Moist and Dry, Thick and Thin, they plainly implied
the substance of Matter in it self to be devoid of all Life and Understanding.
Now if this be not Atheism, to derive the Original of all things, even of Life
and Mind it self, from Dead and Stupid Matter, Fortuitously Moved, then there
can be no such thing at all.

XIII. Moreover, Aristotle's Materialists concluded every thing besides the
Substance of Matter, (which is in it self indifferent to al things,) and
consequently all particular and determinate Beings, to be Generable and
Corruptible. Which is a thing that Plato takes notice of as an Atheistick
Principle, expressing it in these words; (...), that Nothing ever is, In Thea^.
but every thing is Made and Generated. Forasmuch as it plainly follows from
hence, that not only all Animals and the Souls of men, but also if there were
any Gods, which some of those Materialists would not stick, at least verbally,
to acknowledge, (meaning thereby certain Understanding Beings superior to men)
these likewise must needs have been all Generated, and consequently be
Corruptible. Now to say that there is no other God, than such as was Made and
Generated, and which may be again Unmade, Corrupted and Die, or that there was
once no God at all till he was made out of the Matter, and that there may be
none again, this is all one as to deny the thing it self. For a Native and
Mortal God is a pure Contradiction. Therefore whereas Aristotle in his
Metaphysics, Lib. 14. c. 6.
tells us of certain Theologers, (...), such as did Generate all things (even
the Gods themselves) out of Night and Chaos, we must needs pronounce of such
Theologers as these, who were Theogonists, and Generated all the Gods (without
exception) out of Senseless and Stupid Matter, that they were but a kind of
Atheistical Theologers or Theological Atheists. For though they did admit of
certain Beings, to which they attributed the Name of Gods, yet according to the
true Notion of God, they really acknowledged none at all, ( i. e. no
Understanding Nature as the Original of things) but Night and Chaos, Senseless
and Stupid Matter, Fortuitously Moved, was to them the highest of all Numens.
So that this Theology of theirs, was a thing wholly founded in Atheistical
Nonsense.

XIV. And now we think it seasonable, here to observe, how vast a difference
there was betwixt these old Materialists in Aristotle, and those other
Philosophers, mentioned before in the first Chapter, who determined, (...)^
That no Real Entity at all was Generated or Corrupted, for this reason, because
Nothing could be made out of Nothing. These were chiefly the Philosophers of
the Italick or Pythagorick Succession, and their design in it was not, as
Aristotle was pleased somewhere to affirm, (...), to contradict common sense
and experience, in denying all Natural Generations and Alterations; but only to
interpret Nature rightly in them, and that in way of opposition to those
Atheistick Materialists, after this manner; That in all the Mutations of
Nature, Generations and Alterations, there was neither any new Substance Made,
which was not before, nor any Entity really distinct from the Preexisting
Substances, but only that Substance which was before, diversely Modified; and so
Nothing Produced in Generations, but new Modifications, Mixtures, and
Separations of preexistent Substances.

Now this Doctrine of theirs drove at these Two things; First, the taking away
of such Qualities and Forms of Body, as were vulgarly conceived to be things
really distinct from the Substance of extended Bulk, and all its Modifications
of more or less Magnitude, Figure, Site, Motion or Rest. Because, if there were
any such things as these, produced in the Natural Generations and Alterations
of Bodies, there would then be some Real Entity Made (...) (...), out of
Nothing Inexistent or Preexistent. Wherefore they concluded, that these
supposed Forms and Qualities of Bodies were really nothing else, but only the
different Modifications of Preexistent Matter, in respect of Magnitude, Figure,
Site and Motion or Rest, or different Concretions and Secretions, which are no
Entities really distinct from the Substance, but only cause different Phasmata,
Phancies and Apparitions in us.

The Second thing which this Doctrine aimed at, was the establishing the
Incorporiety and Ingenerability of all Souls. For since Life, Cogitation, Sense
and Understanding, could not be resolved into those Modifications of Matter,
Magnitude, Figure, Site and Motion, or into Mechanism and Phancie, but must
needs be Entities really distinct from Extended Bulk, or Dead and Stupid
Matter; they concluded, that therefore Souls could not be Generated out of
Matter, because this would be the Production of some Real Entity out of Nothing
Inexisting or Preexisting; but that they must needs be another kind of
Substance Incorporeal, which could no more be Generated or Corrupted, than the
Substance of Matter it self; and therefore must either Preexist in Nature,
before Generations, or else be divinely Created and Infused, in them.

It has been already proved in the First Chapter, that the Upshot of that
Pythagorick Doctrine, That Nothing could be Generated out of Nothing
preexisting, amounted to those Two things mentioned, viz. the Asserting of the
Incorporiety and Ingenerability of Souls, and the Rejecting of those
Fantastic Entities of Forms and Real Qualities of Bodies, and resolving all
Corporeal Phenomenon, into Figures or Atoms, and the different Apparitions or
Phancies caused by them; but the latter of these, may be further confirmed from
this passage of Aristotle's, where after he had declared that Democritus and
Leucippus made the Soul and Fire, to consist of round Atoms or Figures, like
those (...), those Ramenta that appear in the Air when the Sunbeams are
transmitted through Cranies; Not. Ausc. l. 1. c. 2.
he adds (...)^ And that which is said amongst the Pythagoreans, seems to have
the same sense, for some of them affirm, that the Soul is those very (...),
Ramenta or Atoms; but others of them, that it is That which Moves them; which
latter doubtless were the genuine Pythagoreans. However, it is plain from
hence, that the old Pythagoreans Physiologized by (...), as well as Democritus;
that is, Figures and Atoms, and not Qualities and Forms.

But Aristotle's Materialists, on the contrary, taking it for granted that
Matter or Extended Bulk is the only Substance, and that the Qualities and Forms
of Bodies, are Entities really distinct from those Modifications of Magnitude,
Figure, Site, Motion or Rest; and finding also by experience, that these were
continually Generated and Corrupted, as likewise that Life, Sense and
Understanding were produced in the Bodies of such Animals, where it had not
been before, and again extinguished at the Death or Corruption of them,
concluded, that the Souls of all Animals, as well as those other Qualities and
Forms of Bodies, were Generated out of the Matter, and Corrupted again into it,
and consequently that every thing that is in the whole World, besides the
Substance of Matter, was Made or Generated, and might be again Corrupted.

L. 3. c. 1.
Of this Atheistick Doctrine, Aristotle speaks elsewhere, as in his Book de
Coelo. (...)^ There are some who affirm, that Nothing is Ingenerable, but that
all things are Made; as Hesiod especially, and also among the rest they, who
First Physiologized, whose meaning was, that all other things are Made (or
Generated) and did Flow, none of them having any Stability; only that there was
one thing (namely Matter) which always remained, out of which all those other
things were transformed and Metamorphiz'd. Though as to Hesiod, Aristotle
afterward speaks differently. So likewise in his Physics, after he had
declared that some of the Ancients made Air, some Water, and some other Matter,
the Principle of all things; he adds, L. 2. c. 1.
(...)^ This they affirmed to be all the Substance or Essence that was; but all
other things, the Passions, Affections and Dispositions of it; and that this
therefore was Eternal, as being capable of no Change, but all other things,
Infinitely Generated and Corrupted.

XV. But these Materialists being sometimes assaulted by the other Italick
Philosophers, in the manner before declared, That no Real Entities, distinct
from the Modifications of any Substance, could be Generated or Corrupted,
because Nothing could come from Nothing nor go to Nothing; they would not seem
plainly to Contradict that Theorem, but only endeavored to interpret it into a
compliance with their own Hypothesis, and distinguish concerning the Sense of
it in this manner; That it ought to be understood, only of the Substance of
Matter and Nothing else, viz. That no Matter could be Made or Corrupted, but
that all other things whatsoever, not only Forms and Qualities of Bodies, but
also Souls; Life, Sense and Understanding, though really different from
Magnitude, Figure, Site and Motion, yet ought to be accounted only the (...),
the Passions and Accidents of this Matter, and therefore might be generated out
of it and Corrupted again into it, and that without the Production or
Destruction of any real Entity, Matter being the only thing that is accounted
such. All this we learn from these words of Aristotle, Metaph. l. 1. c. 3.
(...)^ The sense whereof is this; And therefore as to that Axiom of some
Philosophers, That Nothing is either Generated or Destroyed, these Materialists
admit it to be true in respect of the Substance of matter only, which is always
preserved the same, As, say they, We do not say that Socrates is simply or
absolutely Made, when he is made either Handsome or Musical, or that he is
Destroyed, when he loses those Dispositions, because the Subject Socrates
still remains the same; so neither are we to say that any thing else is
absolutely either Generated or Corrupted, because the Substance or Matter of
every thing always Continues. For there must needs be some certain Nature, from
which all other things are Generated, that still remaining one and the same.

We have noted this Passage of Aristotle's the rather, because this is just the
very Doctrine of Atheists at this day. That the Substance of Matter or Extended
Bulk is the only Real Entity, and therefore the only Unmade thing, that is
neither Generable nor Creatable, but Necessarily Existent from Eternity; But
whatever else is in the World, as Life and Animality, Soul and Mind, being all
but Accidents and Affections of this Matter (as if therefore they had no Real
Entity at all in them) are Generable out of Nothing and Corruptible into
Nothing, so long as the Matter in which they are, still remains the same. The
Result of which is no less than this, That there can be no other Gods or God,
than such as was at first Made or Generated out of Senseless Matter, and may be
Corrupted again into it. And here indeed lies the Grand Mystery of Atheism,
that every thing besides the Substance of Matter is Made or Generated, and may
be again Unmade or Corrupted.

However Anaxagoras, though an Ionick Philosopher, and therefore, as shall be
declared afterward, Successor to those Atheistick Materialists, was at length
so far Convinced by that Pythagorick Doctrine, That no Entity could be
naturally Generated out of Nothing, as that he departed from his Predecessors
herein, and did for this reason acknowledge Mind and Soul, that is, all
Cogitative Being to be a Substance really distinct from Matter, neither
Generable out of it nor Corruptible into it; as also that the Forms and
Qualities of Bodies (which he could not yet otherwise conceive of than as
things really distinct from those Modifications of Magnitude, Figure, Site and
Motion) must for the same cause pre-exist before Generations in certain Similar
Atoms, and remain after Corruptions, being only Secreted and Concreted in them.
By means whereof he introduced a certain Spurious Atomism of his own; For
whereas the Genuine Atomists before his time had supposed (...), Dissimilar
Atoms devoid of all Forms and Qualities to be the Principles of all Bodies,
Anaxagoras substituted in the room of them his (...), his Similar Atoms, endued
from Eternity with all Manner of Forms and Qualities Incorruptibly.

XVI. We have made it manifest that those Material Philosophers, described by
Aristotle, were absolute Atheists, not merely because they made Body to be the
only Substance, though that be a thing which Aristotle himself justly
reprehends them for also in these words of his, Metaph. l. 1. c. 7.
(...)^ They who suppose the World to be one uniform thing, and acknowledge
only one nature as the matter, and this Corporeal or endued with Magnitude, it
is evident that they err many ways, and particularly in this, that they set
down only the Elements of Bodies, and not of Incorporeal things, though there
be also things Incorporeal. I say, we have not concluded them Atheists, merely
for this reason, because they denied Incorporeal Substance, but because they
deduced all things whatsoever from Dead and Stupid Matter, and made every thing
in the World, besides the bare Substance of Matter, devoid of all Quality,
Generable and Corruptible.

Now we shall take notice of an Objection, made by some late Writers, against
this Aristotelick Accusation of the old Philosophers, founded upon a passage of
Aristotle's own, who elsewhere in his Book De Coelo, L. 1. c. 10.
speaking of the Heaven or World, plainly affirms, (...), that all the
Philosophers before himself, did assert the World to have been Made, or have
had a Beginning. From whence these Writers infer, that therefore they must
needs be all Theists, and hold the Divine Creation of the World, and
consequently, that Aristotle contradicts himself, in representing many of them
as Atheists, acknowledging only one Material Principle of the whole Universe,
without any Intending or Efficient Cause. But we cannot but pronounce this to
be a great Error in these Writers, to conclude all those who held the World to
have been Made, therefore to have been Theists, whereas it is certain on the
contrary, that all the First and most Ancient Atheists did (in Aristotle's
language) (...), Make or Generate the World, that is, suppose it not to have
been from Eternity, but to have had a Temporary Beginning; as likewise that it
was Corruptible, and would sometime or other, have an End again. The sense of
which Atheistick Philosophers is represented by Lucretius in this manner: Et
quoniam docui, Mundi Mortalia Templa
Esse, and Nativo consistere Corpore Coelum,
Et quaecunque in eo siunt, fientque, necess^
Esse ea Dissolvi.
And there seems to be indeed a Necessity, in reason, that they who derive all
things from a Fortuitous Principle, and hold every thing besides the Substance
of Matter to have been Generated, should suppose the World to have been
Generated likewise, as also to be Corruptible. Wherefore it may well be
reckoned for one of the Vulgar Errors; That all Atheists held the Eternity of
the World.

Moreover, when Aristotle subjoins immediately after, (...), that though the
Ancient Philosophers all held the World to have been Made, yet notwithstanding,
they were divided in this, that some of them supposed for all that, that it
would continue to Eternity such as it is, others, that it would be Corrupted
again; the former of these, who conceived the World to be (...), but (...),
Made, but Eternal, were none of them Atheists, but all Theists. Such as Plato,
whom Aristotle seems particularly to perstringe for this, who in his Timaeus
introduces the Supreme Deity bespeaking those Inferior Gods, the Sun, Moon
and Stars (supposed by that Philosopher to be Animated) after this manner;
Timae. p. ^. ^. Ser,
(...)^ Those things which are made by me are Indissoluble by my will, and
though every thing which is compacted, be in its own nature dissolvable, yet it
is not the part of one that is good, to will the dissolution or destruction of
any thing, that was once well made. Wherefore though you are not absolutely
Immortal, nor altogether Indissolvable, yet notwithstanding, you shall not be
dissolved, nor ever die. My will being a stronger Band to hold you together,
than any thing else can be to loosen you. Philo and other Theists followed
Plato in this, asserting that though the world was Made, yet it would never be
Corrupted, but have a Post-eternity. Whereas all the Ancient Atheists, namely
those who derived the Original of things from Nature and Fortune, did at once
deny both Eternities to the World; Past and Future. Though we cannot say that
none but Atheists did this, for Empedocles and Heraclitus, and afterward the
Stoics, did not only suppose the World likewise Generated, and to be again
Corrupted, but also that this had been, and would be done over and over again,
in Infinite vicissitudes.

Furthermore, as the World's Eternity was generally opposed by all the Ancient
Atheists, so it was maintained also by some Theists, and that not only
Aristotle, but also before him, by Ocellus Lucanus at least, though Aristotle
thought not fit to take any notice of him; as likewise the latter Platonists
universally went that way, yet so, as that they always supposed the World to
have as much depended upon the Deity, as if it had been once Created out of
Nothing by it.

To conclude therefore; neither they who asserted the world's Generation and
Temporary Beginning, were all Theists; nor they who maintained its Eternity,
all Atheists; but before Aristotle's time, the Atheists universally, and most
of the Theists, did both alike conclude the World to have been Made; the
difference between them lying in this, that the one affirmed the World to have
been Made by God, the other by the Fortuitous Motion of Matter.

Wherefore if we would put another difference betwixt the Theists and Atheists
here, as to this particular, we must distinguish betwixt the System of the
World and the Substance of the Matter: For the Ancient Atheists, though they
generally denied the Eternity of the World, yet they supposed the Substance of
the Matter, not only to have been Eternal, but also Self-existent and
Independent upon any other Being; they making it the first Principle and
Original of all things, and consequently the only Numen. Whereas the Genuine
Theists, though many of them maintained the Worlds Eternity, yet they all
concluded, both the Form and Substance of it, to have always depended upon the
Deity, as the Light does upon the Sun. The Stoics with some others being here
excepted.

XVII. Aristotle tells us, some were of opinion, that this Atheistick
Philosophy, which derives all things from senseless and stupid Matter, in the
way of Forms and Qualities, was of great Antiquity, and as old as any Records
of Time amongst the Greeks; and not only so, but also that the Ancient
Theologers themselves entertained it; (...)^ Met. l. 1. c. 3.
There are some who conceive that even the most ancient of all, and the most
remote from this present Generation; and they also who first Theologized, did
Physiologize after this manner; forasmuch as they made the Ocean and Tethys to
have been the Original of Generation; and for this cause the Oath of the Gods
is said to be by water (called by the Poets Styx) as being that from which they
all derived their Original. For an Oath ought to be by that which is most
Honorable; and that which is most Ancient, is most Honorable. In which words
it is very probable that Aristotle aimed at Plato; however it is certain that
Plato in his Theaetetus, affirms this Atheistick Doctrine to have been very
ancient, (...), that all things were the offspring of Flux and Motion, that
is, that all things were Made and Generated out of Matter; and that he charge
Homer with it, in deriving the Original of the Gods themselves in like manner,
from the Ocean, (or Floating Matter) in this Verse of his, (...). The Father of
all Gods, the Ocean is,
Tethys their Mother.


Wherefore these indeed seem to have been the ancientest of all Atheists, who
though they acknowledged certain Beings superior to men, which they called by
the Name of Gods, did notwithstanding really deny a God, according to the true
Notion of him, deriving the Original of all things whatsoever in the Universe,
from the Ocean, that is, Fluid Matter, or, which is all one, from Night and
Chaos; and supposing all their Gods to have been Made and Generated, and
consequently to be Mortal and Corruptible. Of which Atheistick Theology,
Aristophanes gives us the description, in his P. 573.
Aves, after this manner: That at first was Nothing but Night and Chaos, which
laying an Egg, from thence was produced Love, that mingling again with Chaos,
begot Heaven, and Earth, and Animals, and all the Gods.

(...).
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...),
(...),
(...)
First all was Chaos, one confused Heap,
Darkness enwrapt the disagreeing Deep,
In a mixed crowd, the Jumbled Elements were,
Nor Earth, nor Air, nor Heaven did appear;
Till on this horrid vast Abyss of things,
Teeming Night spreading over her cole-black Wings,
Laid the first Egg; whence, after times due course,
Issued forth Love (the World's Prolifick Source)
Glistering with golden Wings; which fluttering over
Dark Chaos, gendred all the numerous store
Of Animals and Gods, etc.
And whereas the Poet there makes the Birds to have been begotten between Love
and Chaos before all the Gods; though one might think this to have been done
Jocularly by him, merely to humor his Plot; yet Salmasius conceives, and not
without some reason, that it was really a piece of the old Atheistick Cabala,
which therefore seems to have run thus. That Chaos or Matter confusedly moved,
being the first Original of all; Things did from thence rise up gradually, from
lesser to greater Perfection. First Inanimate things as the Elements, Heaven,
Earth and Seas, then Brute-animals, afterward Men, and last of all the Gods.
As if not only the Substance of Matter, and those Inanimate Bodies of the
Elements, Fire, Water, Air and Earth, were, as Aristotle somewhere speaks,
according to the sense of those Atheistick Theologers, De Genesis and Cor. Lib. 2.
c. 6.
(...), First in order of Nature before God, as being themselves also Gods, but
also Brute-animals at least, if not men too. And this is the Atheistick
Creation of the World, Gods and all, out of Senseless and Stupid Matter, or Dark
Chaos, as the only Original Numen; the perfectly Inverted order of the Universe.

XVIII. But though this Hypothesis be purely Atheistical, that makes Love,
which is supposed to be the Original Deity, to have it self sprung at first
from an Egg of the Night; and consequently that all Deity was the Creature or
Offspring of Matter and Chaos, or Dark Fortuitous Nature; yet Aristotle
somewhere conceives that not only Parmenides, but also Hesiod, and some others,
who did in like manner make Love the Supreme Deity, and derive all things from
Love and Chaos, were to be exempted out of the number of those Atheistick
Materialists before described; forasmuch as they seemed to understand by Love,
an Active Principle, and Cause of Motion in the Universe; which therefore could
not spring from an Egg of the Night, nor be the Creature of Matter, but must
needs be something Independent on it, and in order of Nature before it, (...)
(...). (...), (...)
(...), --
(...).
(...)^ One would suspect that Hesiod, and if there be any other who made Love
or Desire, a Principle of things in the Universe, aimed at this very thing,
(namely, the settling of another Active Principle besides Matter:) For
Parmenides, describing the Generation of the Universe, makes Love to be the
Senior of all the Gods, and Hesiod, after he had mentioned Chaos, introduced
Love, as the Supreme Deity. As intimating herein, that besides Matter, there
ought to be another Cause or Principle, that should be the Original of Motion
and Activity, and also hold and conjoyn all things together. But how these two
Principles are to be ordered, and which of them was to be placed first, whether
Love or Chaos, may be judged of afterward. In which latter words Aristotle
seems to intimate, that Love, as taken for an Active Principle, was not to be
supposed to spring from Chaos, but rather to be in order of Nature before it;
and therefore by this Love of theirs must needs be meant the Deity. And indeed
Simmias Rhodius in his Wings, a Hymn made in Honor of this Love, that is
Senior to all the Gods, and a Principle in the Universe, tells us plainly, that
it is not Cupid, Venuses soft and effeminate Son, but another kind of Love
(...)^
(...).
(...).
(...).
(...).
I Am not that Wanton Boy,
The Sea-froath Goddess's only Joy.
Pure Heavenly Love I hight, and my
Soft Magic Charms, not Iron Bands, fast tie
Heaven, Earth and Seas. The Gods themselves do readily
Stoop to my Laws. The whole World daunces to my Harmony.


Moreover, this cannot be that Love neither, which is described in Plato's
Symposium (as some learned men have conceived) that was begotten between Penia
and Porus, this being not a Divine but Demoniack thing (as the Philosopher
there declares) no God but a Demon only, or of a Middle Nature. For it is
nothing but (...), or the Love of Pulchritude, as such, which though rightly
used, may perhaps Wing and Inspire the Mind, to Noble and Generous Attempts,
and beget a scornful disdeign in it, of Mean, Dirty, and Sordid things; yet it
is capable of being abused also, and then it will strike downward into
Brutishness and Sensuality. But at best it is an Affection, belonging only to
Imperfect and Parturient Beings; and therefore could not be the First Principle
of all things. Wherefore we see no very great reason, but that in a Rectified
and Qualified sense, this may pass for true Theology; That Love is the Supreme
Deity and Original of all things; namely, if by it be meant, Eternal,
Self-originated, Intellectual Love, or Essential and Substantial Goodness, that
having an Infinite overflowing Fullness and Fecundity, dispenses it self
Uninvidiously, according to the best Wisdom, Sweetly Governs all, without any
Force or Violence (all things being Naturally subject to its Authority, and
readily obeying its Laws) and reconciles the whole World into Harmony. For the
Scripture telling us, that God is Love, seems to warrant thus much to us, that
Love in some rightly Qualified sense, is God.

XIX. But we are to omit the Fabulous Age, and to descend to the Philosophical,
to enquire there, who they were among the professed Philosophers, who Atheized
in that manner, before described. It is true indeed, that Aristotle in other
Places, accuses Democritus and Leucippus of the very same thing, that is, of
assigning only a Material Cause of the Universe, and giving no account of the
Original of Motion; but yet it is certain that these were not the Persons
intended by him here; Those which he speaks of, being (...), some of the first
and most ancient Philosophers of all. Moreover it appears by his Description of
them, that they were such as did not Philosophize in the way of Atoms, but
resolved all things whatsoever in the Universe, into (...), and (...), Matter,
and the Passions or Affections, Qualities and Forms of Matter; so that they
were not Atomical, but Hylopathian Philosophers. These two, the old
Materialists and the Democriticks, did both alike derive all things from Dead
and Stupid Matter, fortuitously Moved; and the Difference between them was only
this, that the Democriticks managed this business in the way of Atoms, the
other in that more vulgar way of Qualities and Forms: So that indeed, this is
really but one and the same Atheistick Hypothesis, in two several Schemes. And
as one of them is called the Atomick Atheism, so the other, for Distinctions
sake, may be called the Hylopathian.

XX. Now Aristotle tells us plainly, that these Hylopathian Atheists of his,
were all the first Philosophers of the Ionick Order and Succession, before
Anaxagoras.. Whereof Thales being the Head, he is consentaneously thereunto by
Aristotle, made to be (...), the Prince and Leader of this kind of Atheistical
Philosophy, he deriving all things whatsoever, as Homer had done before him,
from Water, and acknowledging no other Principle but the Fluid Matter.

Notwithstanding which Accusation of Aristotle's, Thales is far otherwise
represented by good Authors; Cicero telling us, that besides Water, which he
made to be the Original of all Corporeal things, he asserted also Mind for
another Principle, which formed all things out of the Water; and Laertius and
Plutarch recording, that he was thought to be the first of all Philosophers who
determined Souls to be Immortal; He is said also to have affirmed, that God was
(...), the oldest of all things, and that the World was (...), the Workmanship
of God; Clemens likewise tells us that being asked (...); Whether any of a man's
Actions could be concealed from the Deity? he replied, not so much as any
Thought. Moreover Laertius further writes of him, that he held (...), That the
World was animated, De An. l. 1. c. 8.
and full of Demons. Lastly Aristotle himself elsewhere speaks of him as a
Theist, (...). Some think (says he) that Soul and Life is mingled with the
whole Universe, and thence perhaps was that of Thales, that all things are full
of Gods. Wherefore we conceive that there is very good reason, why Thales
should be acquitted from this Accusation of Atheism. Only we shall observe the
occasion of his being thus differently represented, which seems to have been
this; Because as Laertius and Themistius intimate, he left no Philosophic
Writings or Monuments of his own behind him, ( Anaximander being the first of
all the Philosophic Writers:) Whence probably it came to pass, that in after
times some did interpret his Philosopy one way, some another, and that he is
sometimes represented as a Theist, and sometime again as a downright Atheist.

But though Thales be thus by good Authority acquitted, yet his next Successor
Anaximander can by no means be excused from this Imputation, and therefore we
think it more reasonable to fasten that Title upon him, which Aristotle bestows
on Thales, that he was (...), the Prince and Founder of this Atheistick
Philosophy; who derived all things from Matter, in the way of Forms and
Qualities; he supposing a certain Infinite Materia Prima, which was neither Air
nor Water nor Fire, but indifferent to every thing, or a mixture of all, to be
the only Principle of the Universe, and leading a Train of many other Atheists
after him, such as Hippo surnamed (...), by Simplicius and others, Anaximines,
and Diogenes Apolloniates, and many more; who though they had some petty
Differences amongst themselves, yet all agreed in this one thing, that Matter
devoid of Understanding and Life, was the first Principle of all things; till
at length Anaxagoras stopped this Atheistick Current, amongst these Ionick
Philosophers; introducing Mind as a Principle of the Universe.

XXI. But there is a Passage in Aristotle's Physics, which seems at first
sight, to contradict this again; and to make Anaximander also, not to have been
an Atheist, but a Divine Philosopher. Where having declared that several of the
Ancient Physiologers, made (...) or Infinite to be the Principle of all things,
he subjoyus these words, Lib. 3. c. 4.
(...)^ Therefore there seems to be no Principle of this Infinite, but this to
be the Principle of other things, and to Contain all things and Govern all
things, as they all say who do not make besides Infinite, any other Causes,
such as Mind, or Friendship, and that this is the only real Numen or God in the
World, it it being Immortal and Incorruptible, as Anaximander affirms, and most
of the Physiologers. From which Place some Late Writers have confidently
concluded, that Anaximander, with those other Physiologers, there mentioned,
did by Infinite, understand God, according to the True Notion of him, or an
Infinite Mind, the Efficient Cause of the Universe, and not Senseless and Stupid
Matter; since this could not be said to be Immortal and to Govern all things;
and consequently, that Aristotle grossly contradicts himself, in making all
those Ionick Philosophers before Anaxagoras, to have been Mere Materialists or
Atheists. And it is possible, that Clemens Alexandrinus also, might from this
very Passage of Aristotle's, not sufficiently considered, have been induced to
rank Anaximander, amongst the Divine Philosophers, as he does in his
Protreptick to the Greeks; where after he had condemned certain of the old
Philosophers, as Atheistick Corporealists, he subjoyns these words Clem. Pro^*
p. 43.
(...)^ But of the other Philosophers, who transcending all the Elements,
searched after some higher and more excellent thing, some of them praised
Infinite, amongst which was Anaximander the Milesian, Anaxagoras the
Clazomenian, and the Athenian Archelaus. As if these Three had all alike
acknowledged an Incorporeal Deity, and made an Infinite Mind, distinct from
Matter, the First Original of all things.

But that forecited Passage of Aristotle's alone, well considered, will it self
afford a sufficient Confutation of this Opinion; where Anaximander, with those
other Physiologers, is plainly opposed to Anaxagoras, who besides Infinite
Senseless Matter, or Similar Atoms, made Mind to be a Principle of the Universe,
as also to Empedocles, who made a Plastic Life and Nature, called Friendship,
another Principle of the Corporeal World; from whence it plainly follows, that
Anaximander and the rest, supposed not Infinite Mind, but Infinite Matter,
without either Mind or Plastic Nature, to have been the only Original of all
things, and therefore the Only Deity or Numen.

Moreover, Democritus being linked in the Context with Anaximander, as making
both of them alike, (...), or Infinite, to be the First Principle of all; it
might as well be inferred from this Place, that Democritus was a Genuine
Theist, as Anaximander. But as Democritus his only Principle, was Infinite
Atoms, without any thing of Mind or Plastic Nature; so likewise was
Anaximander's, an Infinity of Senseless and Stupid Matter; and therefore they
were both of them Atheists alike, though Anaximander, in the cited words, had
the Honor (if it may be so called) to be only named, as being the most ancient
of all those Atheistical Physiologers, and the Ringleader of them.

XXII. Neither ought it at all to seem strange, that Anaximander, and those
other Atheistical Materialists should call Infinite Matter, devoid of all
Understanding and Life, the (...), the Deity or Numen, since to all those who
deny a God, (according to the true Notion of him) whatsoever else they
substitute in his room, by making it the First Principle of all things, though
it be Senseless and Stupid Matter, yet this must needs be accounted the Only
Numen, and Divinest thing of all.

Nor is it to be wondered at neither, that this Infinite, being understood of
Matter, should be said to be, not only Incorruptible, but also Immortal, these
two being often used as Synonymous, and Equivalent Expressions. For thus in
Lucretius, the Corruption of all Inanimate Bodies is called Death, -- Mors ejus
quod fuit ante; And again, Quando aliud ex alio reficit Natura, nec ullam
Rem Gigni patitur, nisi Morte adjutam aliena.
In like manner Mortal is used by him for Corruptible, Nam siquid Mortale a
cunctis partibus esset,
Ex oculis res quaeque repent erepta periret.
And this kind of Language was very familiar with Heraclitus, as appears from
these Passages of his, (...)^ The Death of Fire, is Generation to Air; and the
Death of Air, is Generation to Water, that is, the Corruption of them. And
again, (...)^ It is Death to Vapor or Air, to be made Water; and Death to
Water, to be made Earth. In which Heraclitus did but imitate Orpheus, as
appears from this Verse of his, cited by Clemens Alexand. (...). Besides which,
there are many Examples of this use of the word (...), in other Greek Writers,
and some in Aristotle himself, who speaking of the Heavens, attributes (...)
and (...) to them, as one and the same thing: as also affirms, that the
Ancients therefore made Heaven to be the Seat of the Deity, (...), as being
only Immortal, that is Incorruptible.

Indeed that other Expression, at first sight, would stagger one more, where it
is said of this (...), or Infinite, that it does not only Contein, but also
Govern all things; but Simplicius tells us, that this is to be understood
likewise of Matter, and that no more was meant by it, than that all things were
derived from it, and depended on it, as the First Principle; (...)^ These
Philosophers spoke only of natural Principles, and not of Supernatural; and
though they say, that this Infinite of theirs, does both Contein and Govern all
things, yet this is not at all to be wondered at; forasmuch as Containing
belongs to the Material Cause, as that which goes through all things, and
likewise Governing, as that from which all things, according to a certain
aptitude of it, are made. Philoponus (who was a Christian) represents
Aristotle's sense in this whole place more fully, after this manner. Those of
the ancient Physiologers who had no respect to any Active Efficient Cause, as
Anaxagoras had to Mind, and Empedocles to Friendship and Contention, supposed
Matter to be the only Cause of all things, and that it was Infinite in
Magnitude, Ingenerable and Incorruptible, esteeming it to be a certain Divine
thing, which did Govern all, or preside over the Compages of the Universe, and
to be Immortal, that is, Vndestroyable. This Anaximenes said to be Air, Thales
to be Water, but Anaximander, a certain Middle thing; some one thing, and some
another. (...)^ And Aristotle in this Passage, tells us, that it is no wonder,
if they who did not attend to the Active Cause, that presides over the
Universe, did look upon some one of the Elements (that which each of them
thought to be the Cause of all other things) as God. But as they considering
only the Material Principle, conceived that to be the Cause of all things; so
Anaxagoras supposed Mind to be the Principle of all things, and Empedocles
Friendship and Contention.

XXIII. But to make it further appear, that Anaximander's Philosophy was purely
Atheistical; we think it convenient to show what account is given of it by
other Writers. Plutarch in his Placita Philosophorum, does at once briefly
represent the Anaximandrian Philosophy, and Censure it after this manner.
(...)^ Lib. 1. c. 3.
Anaximander the Milesian affirms, Infinite to be the First Principle. And that
all things are Generated out of it, and Corrupted again into it, and therefore
that Infinite Worlds, are successively thus Generated and Corrupted. And he
gives the reason why it is Infinite, that so there might be never any Fail of
Generations. But he erreth in this, that assigning only a Material Cause, he
takes away the Active Principle of things. For Anaximander 's Infinite, is
nothing else but matter; but Matter can produce nothing, unless there be also
an Active Cause. Where he shows also, how Anaximenes followed Anaximander
herein, in assigning only a Material Cause of the Universe, without any
Efficient; though he differed from him, in making the First Matter to be Air,
and deriving all things from thence, by Rarefaction and Condensation. Thus, we
see, it is plain, that Anaximander's Infinite, was no Infinite Mind, which is
the true Deity, but only Infinite Matter, devoid of any Life or Active Power.
Ev. Praep. Lib. 1. p. 15. Ed. Steph.
Eusebius is more particular in giving an account of Anaximander's Cosmopoeia.
(...)^ Anaximander affirms, Infinite (Matter) to be the only Cause of the
Generation and Corruption of all things. And that the Heavens, and Infinite
Worlds, were made out of it, by way of Secretion or Segregation. Also that
those Generative Principles of Heat and Cold, that were contained in it from
Eternity, being Segregated, when this World was made, a certain Sphere of Flame
or Fire, did first arise and incompass the Air, which surrounds this Earth, (a
sa Bark does a Tree) which being afterward broken, and divided into smaller
Spherical Bodies, constituted the Sun and Moon and all the Stars. Which
Anaximandrian Cosmopoeia, Phys. L. 1. c. 6.4.
was briefly hinted by Aristotle in these words, (...)^ Some Philosophers
Generate the World, by the Secretion and Segregation of inexistent
Contrarieties, as Anaximander speaks. And elsewere in his Metaphysics, L. 14.
c. 4.
he takes notice of (...), Anaximander 's Mixture of things. Whence we
conclude, that Anaximander's Infinite, was nothing else but an Infinite Chaos
of Matter, in which were either Actually, or Potentially, contained all manner
of Qualities; by the Fortuitous Secretion and Segregation of which, he supposed
Infinite Worlds to be successively Generated and Corrupted. So that we may now
easily guess, whence Leucippus and Democritus had their Infinite Worlds, and
perceive how near a kin, these two Atheistick Hypotheses were. But it will not
be amiss to take notice also of that Particular Conceit, which Anaximander had,
Pla. Ph. l. 5. c. 19
concerning the First Original of Brute Animals, and Mankind. Of the Former
Plutarch gives us this account; (...)^ That the First Animals were generated in
Moisture, and encompassed about with certain Thorny Barks, by which they were
guarded and defended, which after further growth, coming to be more Dry and
Cracking, they issued forth, but lived only a short time after. And as for the
first Original of Men, Eusebius represents his Sense, thus: (...)^ E. P. l. 1.
Men were at first generated in the Bellies of other Animals, forasmuch as all
other Animals, after they are brought forth, are quickly able to feed and
nourish themselves, but Man alone needs to be nursed up a long time; and
therefore could not be preserved at first, in any other way. But Plutarch
expresses this something more particularly. Symp. lib. 8. Q. 8.
(...). Anaximander concludes that Men were at first Generated in the Bellies
of Fishes, and being there nourished, till they grew strong, and were able to
shift for themselves, they were afterward cast out upon Dry Land. Lastly,
Anaximander's Theology, is thus both represented to us, and censured, by
Velleius the Epicurean Philosopher in Cicero. De Not. D^ Lib. 1.
Anaximandri opinio est Nativos esse Deos, longis Intervallis Orientes
Occidentesque, cosque innumerabiles esse Mundos, sed nos Deum nisi Sempiternum
intelligere qui possumus? Anaximander 's Opinion is, that the Gods are Native,
rising and vanishing again, in long Periods of times; and that these Gods are
Innumerable Worlds; but how can we conceive that to be a God, which is not
Eternal? We learn from hence, that Anaximander did indeed so far comply with
Vulgar Opinion, as that he retained the Name of Gods, but however that he
really denied the Existence of the thing it self, even according to the
judgment of this Epicurean Philosopher. Forasmuch as all his Gods were Native
and Mortal, and indeed nothing else, but those Innumerable Worlds, which he
supposed in certain Periods of Time, to be successively Generated and
Destroyed. Wherefore it is plain, that Anaximander's only Real Numen, that is,
his First Principle, that was Ingenerable and Incorruptible, was nothing but
Infinite Matter, devoid of all Understanding and Life, by the Fortuitous
Secretion of whose inexistent Qualities and Parts, he supposed, First, the
Elements of Earth, Water, Air and Fire, and then, the Bodies of the Sun, Moon
and Stars, and both Bodies and Souls of men and other Animals, and lastly,
Innumerable or Infinite such Worlds as these, as so many Secundary and Native
Gods, (that were also Mortal) to have been Generated, according to that
Atheistical Hypothesis described in Plato.

XXIV. It is certain that the Vulgar in all Ages have been very ill Judges of
Theists and Atheists, they having condemned many hearty Theists, as guilty of
Atheism, merely because they dissented from them, in some of their
Superstitious Rites and Opinions. As for example; Anaxagoras the Clazomenian,
though he was the first of all the Ionick Philosophers, (unless Thales ought to
be excepted) who made an Infinite Mind to be a Principle, that is, asserted a
Deity, according to the true Notion of it, yet he was notwithstanding,
generally cried down for an Atheist, merely because he affirmed the Sun to be
(...), a Mass of Fire, or a Fiery Globe, Pl^. Apol* Socr.
and the Moon to be an Earth, that is, because he denied them to be Animated
and endued with Understanding Souls, and consequently to be Gods. So likewise
Socrates was both accused, and condemned, for Atheistical Impiety, as denying
all Gods, though nothing was pretended to be proved against him, Plat. Apol.
but only this, that he did (...), Teach that those were not true Gods which
the City worshipped, and in the room thereof introduce other new Gods. And
lastly, the Christians in the Primitive times, for the same reason, were
vulgarly traduced for Atheists, by the Pagans, as Justin Martyr declares in his
Apology, (...), We are called Atheists, and we confess our selves such, in
respect of those Gods which they worship, but not of the true God. And as the
Vulgar have unjustly condemned many Theists for Atheists, so have they also
acquitted many Rank Atheists from the Guilt of that Crime, merely because they
externally complied with them, in their Religious Worship, and Forms of Speech.
Neither is it only the Vulgar that have been imposed upon herein, but also the
Generality of Learned men, who have been commonly so superficial in this
business, as that they have hardly taken notice of above three or four Atheists
that ever were in former times, as namely, Diagoras, Theodorus, Euemerus, and
Protagoras; whereas Democritus and Anaximander, were as rank Atheists, as any
of them all, though they had the wit to carry themselves externally, with more
Cautiousness. And indeed it was really one and the self-same Form of Atheism,
which both these entertained, they deriving all things alike, from Dead and
Stupid Matter Fortuitously Moved, the Difference between them being only this,
that they managed it two different ways; Anaximander in the way of Qualities
and Forms, which is the more Vulgar and Obvious kind of Atheism; but Democritus
in the way of Atoms and Figures, which seems to be a more learned kind of
Atheism.

And though we do not doubt at all, but that Plato, in his Tenth De Legibus,
where he attacques Atheism, did intend the Confutation as well of the
Democritick as the Anaximandrian Atheism; yet whether it were, because he had
no mind to take any notice at all of Democritus, who is not so much as once
mentioned by him any where, or else because he was not so perfectly acquainted
with that Atomick way of Physiologizing, certain it is, that he there describes
the Atheistick Hypothesis more according to the Anaximandrian than the
Democritick Form. For when he represents the Atheistick Generation of Heaven
and Earth, and all things in them, as resulting from the Fortuitous Commixture
of Hot and Cold, Hard and Soft, Moist and Dry Corpuscula; this is clearly more
agreeable with the Anaximandrian Generation of the World, by the Secretion of
Inexistent Contrarieties in the Matter, than the Democritick Cosmopoeia, by the
Fortuitous Concourse of Atoms, devoid of all manner of Qualities and Forms.

Some indeed seem to call that Scheme of Atheism, that deduces all things from
Matter, in the way of Qualities and Forms, by the name of Peripatetick or
Aristotelick Atheism; we suppose for this reason, because Aristotle
Physiologized in that way of Forms and Qualities, educing them out of the Power
of the Matter. But since Aristotle himself cannot be justly Taxed for an
Atheist, this Form of Atheism ought rather, as we conceive, to be denominated
from Anaximander, and called the Anaximandrian Atheism.

XXV. Now the Reasons why Democritus and Leucippus New-modelled Atheism, from
the Anaximandrian and Hylopathian, into the Atomick Form, seem to have been
chiefly these; First, because, they being well instructed in that Atomick way
of Physiologizing, were really convinced, that it was not only more Ingenious,
but also more agreeable to Truth; the other by Real Qualities and Forms,
seeming a thing Unintelligible. Secondly, because they foresaw, as Lucretius
intimates, that the Production of Forms and Qualities out of Nothing, and the
Corruption of them again into Nothing, would prepare an Easy way, for men's
Belief of a Divine Creation and Annihilation. And lastly, because, as we have
already suggested, they plainly perceived, that these Forms and Qualities of
Matter were of a doubtful Nature, and therefore, as they were sometimes made a
shelter for Atheism, so they might also prove, on the contrary, an Asylum for
Corporeal Theism; in that it might possibly be supposed, that either the Matter
of the whole World, or else the more Subtle and Fiery Part of it, was
Originally endued with an Understanding Form or Quality, and consequently the
Whole an Animal or God. Wherefore they took another more Effectual Course, to
secure their Atheism, and exclude all Possibility of a Corporeal God, by
deriving the Original of all things from Atoms, devoid of all Forms and
Qualities, and having nothing in them, but Magnitude, Figure, Site and Motion,
as the First Principles; it following unavoidably from thence, that Life and
Understanding, as well as those other Qualities, could be only Accidental and
Secundary Results from certain Fortuitous Concretions and Contextures of Atoms;
so that the World could be made by no Previous Counsel or Understanding, and
therefore by no Deity.

XXVI. We have here represented, Three several Forms of Atheism, the
Anaximandrian, the Democritical and the Stratonical. But there is yet another
Form of Atheism, different from them all, to be taken notice of, which is such,
as supposes one kind of Plastic and Spermatick, Methodical and Artificial
Nature, but without any Sense or Conscious Understanding, to preside over the
whole World, and dispose and conserve all things, in that Regular Frame in
which they are. Such a Form of Atheism as this, is hinted to us in that
doubtful Passage of Seneca's; Sive Animal est Mundus, Not Quaest. l. 3. Sect.
29.
(for so it ought to be read, and not Anima) sive Corpus Natura Gubernante, ut
Arbores, ut Sata; Whether the whole World be an Animal (i. e. endued with one
Sentient and Rational Life) or whether it be only a Body Governed, by (a
certain Plastic and Methodical, but Senseless) Nature, as Trees, and other
Plants or Vegetables. In which words are two several Hypotheses, of the Mundane
System, Sceptically proposed, by one who was a Corporealist, and took it for
granted that all was Body. First, that the whole World, though having nothing
but Body in it, yet was notwithstanding an Animal, as our Humane Bodies are,
endued with one Sentient, or Rational Life and Nature, one Soul or Mind,
governing and ordering the Whole. Which Corporeal Cosmo-zoism we do not reckon
amongst the Forms of Atheism, but rather account it for a kind of Spurious
Theism, or Theism disguized in a Paganick Dress, and not without a Complication
of many false apprehensions, concerning the Deity, in it. The Second is, that
the whole World is no Animal, but as it were, one Huge Plant or Vegetable, a
Body endued with one Plastic or Spermatick Nature, branching out the whole,
Orderly and Methodically, but without any Understanding or Sense. And this must
needs be accounted a Form of Atheism, because it does not derive the Original
of things in the Universe, from any clearly Intellectual Principle or Conscious
Nature.

XXVII. Now this Form of Atheism which supposes the Whole World (there being
nothing but Body in it) not to be an Animal, but only a Great Plant or
Vegetable, having one Spermatick Form, or Plastic Nature, which without any
Conscious Reason or Understanding, orders the whole, though it have some nearer
Correspondence with that Hylozoick Form of Atheism before described, in that it
does not suppose Nature to be a mere Fortuitous, but a kind of Artificial
thing; yet it differs from it in this, that the Hylozoick supposing all Matter,
as such, to have Life, Essentially belonging to it, must therefore needs to
attribute to every part of Matter (or at least every Particular Totum, that is
one by Continuity) a Distinct Plastic Life of its own, but acknowledge no one
Common Life, as ruling over the whole Corporeal Universe, and consequently
impute the Original of all things (as has been already observed) to a certain
Mixture of Chance, and Plastic or Methodical Nature, both together. Whereas
the Cosmo-plastick Atheism, quite excludes Fortune or Chance, subjecting all
things to the Regular and Orderly Fate, of one Plastic or Plantal Nature,
ruling over the Whole. Thus that Philosopher before mentioned concludes, that
whether the World were an Animal (in the Stoical sense) or whether it were a
mere Plant or Vegetable, Not. Q. l. 3. c. 29.
Ab initio ejus usque ad exitum, quicquid facere, quicquid pati debeat,
inclusum est. Vt in Semine, omnis futuri ratio hominis comprehensa est. Et
Legem Barbae and Canorum, nondum natus Infans habet. Totius enim Corporis, and
sequentis, aetatis, in parvo occultoque, Lineament a sunt. Sic Origo Mundi, non
magis Solemn and Lunam, and Vices Syderum, and Animalium Ortus, quam quibus
mutarentur Terrena, continuit. In his fuit Inundatio, quae non secus quam
Hyems, quam Aestas, Lege Mundi venit. Whatsoever, from the beginning to the end
of it, it can either Do or Suffer, it was all at first included in the Nature
of the whole; As in the Seed is contained the Whole Delineation of the Future
man, and the Embryo or Unborn infant, has already in it, the Law of a Beard
and Gray Hairs. The Lineaments of the whole Body, and of its following age,
being there described as it were in a little and obscure Compendium. In like
manner, the Original and First Rudiments of the World, contained in them, not
only the Sun and Moon, the Courses of the Stars, and the Generations of
Animals, but also the Vicissitudes of all Terrestrial things. And every Deluge
or Inundation of Water, comes to pass no less, by the Law of the World (its
Spermatick or Plastic Nature) than Winter and Summer does.

XXVIII. We do not deny it to be possible, but that some in all Ages might have
entertained such an Atheistical Conceit as this, That the Original of this
whole Mundane System was from one Artificial, Orderly and Methodical, but
Senseless Nature lodge in the Matter; but we cannot trace the footsteps of this
Doctrine any where so much as among the Stoics, to which Sect Seneca, who
speaks so waveringly and uncertainly in this point, (Whether the World were an
Animal or a Plant) belonged. And indeed diverse learned men have suspected,
that even the Zenonian and Heraclitick Deity it self, was no other than such a
Plastic Nature or Spermatick Principle in the Universe, as in the Seeds of
Vegetables and Animals, does frame their respective Bodies, Orderly and
Artificially. Nor can it be denied, but that there has been just cause given
for such a suspicion; forasmuch as the best of the Stoics, sometimes
confounding God with Nature, seemed to make him nothing but an Artificial Fire,
Orderly and Methodically proceeding to Generation. And it was Familiar with
them, as Laertius tells us, to call God (...), the Spermatick Reason or Form of
the World. Nevertheless, because Zeno and others of the chief Stoical Doctors,
did also many times assert, that there was (...), a Rational and Intellectual
Nature (and therefore not a Plastic Principle only) in the Matter of the
Universe; as likewise that the whole World was an Animal, and not a mere Plant:
Therefore we incline rather, to excuse the generality of the first and most
ancient Stoics from the imputation of Atheism, and to account this Form of
Atheism which we now speak of, to be but a certain Degeneracy from the right
Heraclitick and Zenonian Cabala, which seemed to contain these two things in
it; First, that there was an Animalish, Sentient and Intellectual Nature, or a
Conscious Soul and Mind, that presided over the whole World, though lodged
immediately in the Fiery Matter of it: Secondly, that this Sentient and
Intellectual Nature, or Corporeal Soul and Mind of the Universe, did contain
also under it, or within it, as the inferior part of it, a certain Plastic
Nature or Spermatick Principle which was properly the Fate of all things. For
thus Heraclitus defined Fate (...), A certain Reason passing through the
Substance of the whole World, or an Ethereal Body, that was the Seed of the
Generation of the Universe. And Zeno's first Principle, as it is said to be an
Intellectual Nature, so it is also said, to have contained in it (...), All the
Spermatick Reasons and forms, by which every thing is done according to Fate.
However, though this seem to have been the genuine Doctrine, both of Heraclitus
and Zeno; yet others of their Followers afterward, divided these two things
from one another, and taking only the latter of them, made the Plastic or
Spermatick Nature, devoid of all Animality or Conscious Intellectuality, to be
the highest Principle in the Universe. Thus Laertius tells us, that Boethus, an
eminent and famous Stoical Doctor did plainly deny the World to be an Animal,
that is, to have any Sentient, Conscious or Intellectual Nature presiding over
it, and consequently must needs make it to be but Corpus Natura gubernante, ut
Arbores, ut Sata, A Body governed by a Plastic or Vegetative Nature, as Trees,
Plants and Herbs. And as it is possible that other Stoics and Heracliticks,
might have done the like before Boethus, so it is very probable that he had
after him many Followers; amongst which, as Plinius Secundus may be reckoned
for one, so Seneca himself was not without a doubtful Tincture of this Atheism,
as has been already showed. Wherefore this Form of Atheism, which supposes one
Plastic or Spermatick Nature, one Plantal or Vegetative Life in the whole
World, as the Highest Principle, may, for distinction sake, be called the
Pseudo-Stoical or Stoical Atheism.

XXIX. Besides these Philosophic Atheists, whose several Forms we have now
described, it cannot be doubted, but that there have been in all Ages many
other Atheists that have not at all Philosophized, nor pretended to maintain
any particular Atheistick System or Hypothesis, in a way of Reason, but were
only led by a certain dull and sottish, though confident, Disbelief of
whatsoever they could not either See or Feel: Which kind of Atheists may
therefore well be accounted Enthusiastical or Fanatical Atheists. Though it be
true in the mean time, that even all manner of Atheists whatsoever, and those
of them who most of all pretend to Reason and Philosophy, may in some sense be
justly styled also both Enthusiasts and Fanatics. Forasmuch as they are not
led or carried on, into this way of Atheizing, by any clear Dictates of their
Reason or Understanding, but only by an (...), a certain Blind and Irrational
Impetus, they being as it were Inspired to it, by that lower Earthly Life and
Nature, which is called in the Scripture-oracles (...), the Spirit of the
World, or a Mundane Spirit, and is opposed to the (...), the Spirit that is of
God. For when the Apostle speaks after this manner, We have not received the
Spirit of the World, but the Spirit that is of God, he seems to intimate thus
much unto us; That as some men were Led and Inspired by a Divine Spirit, so
others again are Inspired by a Mundane Spirit, by which is meant the Earthly
Life. Now the former of these Two, are not to be accounted Enthusiasts, as the
word is now commonly taken in a Bad Sense, because the Spirit of God is no
Irrational thing, but either the very self same thing with Reason, or else such
a thing as Aristotle (as it were Vaticinating concerning it) somewhere calls
(...), a certain Better and Diviner thing than Reason, and Plotinus (...), the
Root of Reason. But on the contrary, the Mundane Spirit, or Earthly Life, is
Irrational Sottishness; and they who are Atheistically Inspired by it (how
abhorrent soever they may otherwise seem to be from Enthusiasm and Revelations)
are notwithstanding really no better, than a kind of Bewitched Enthusiasts and
Blind Spiritati, that are wholly ridden and acted by a dark, narrow and
captivated Principle of Life, and, to use their own Language, In-blown by it,
and by it bereft, even in Speculative things, of all Free Reason and
Understanding. Nay they are Fanatics too, however that word seem to have a
more peculiar respect to something of a Deity: All Atheists being that Blind
Goddess, Natures Fanatics.

XXX. We have described four several Forms of Atheism; First, the Hylopathian
or Anaximandrian, that derives all things from Dead and Stupid Matter in the
way of Qualities and Forms, Generable and Corruptible: Secondly, the Atomical
or Democritical, which does the same thing in the way of Atoms and Figures:
Thirdly, the Cosmoplastick or Stoical Atheism, which supposes one Plastic and
Methodical but Senseless Nature, to preside over the whole Corporeal Universe:
And lastly, the Hylozoick or Stratonical, that attributes to all Matter, as
such, a certain Living and Energetick Nature, but devoid of all Animality,
Sense and Consciousness. And as we do not meet with any other Forms or Schemes
of Atheism, besides these Four, so we conceive that there cannot easily be any
other excogitated or devised: and that upon these two following Considerations.
First, because all Atheists are mere Corporealists, that is, acknowledge no
other Substance besides Body or Matter. For as there was never any yet known,
who asserting Incorporeal Substance, did deny a Deity; so neither can there be
any reason, why he that admits the former should exclude the later. Again, the
same Dull and Earthly Disbelief or confounded Sottishness of Mind, which makes
men deny a God, must needs incline them to deny all Incorporeal Substance also.
Wherefore as the Physicians speak of a certain Disease or Madness, called
Hydrophobia, the Symptom of those that have been bitten by a mad Dog, which
makes them have a monstrous Antipathy to Water; so all Atheists are possessed
with a certain kind of Madness, that may be called Pneumatophobia, that makes
them have an irrational but desperate Abhorrence from Spirits or Incorporeal
Substances, they being acted also, at the same time, with an Hylomania, whereby
they Madly dote upon Matter, and Devoutly worship it, as the only Numen.

The Second Consideration is this, because as there are no Atheists but such as
are mere Corporealists, so all Corporealists are not to be accounted Atheists
neither: Those of them, who notwithstanding they make all things to be Matter,
yet suppose an Intellectual Nature in that Matter, to preside over the
Corporeal Universe, being in Reason and Charity to be exempted out of that
number. And there have been always some, who though so strongly captivated
under the power of gross Imagination, as that an Incorporeal God seemed to
them, to be nothing but a God of Words (as some of them call it) a mere Empty
Sound or Contradictious Expression, Something and Nothing put together; yet
notwithstanding, they have been possessed with a firm belief and persuasion of
a Deity, or that the System of the Universe depends upon one Perfect
Understanding Being as the Head of it; and thereupon have concluded that (...),
a certain kind of Body or Matter, is God. The grossest and most sottish of all
which Corporeal Theists, seem to be those, who contend that God is only one
particular Piece of Organized Matter, of Humane Form and Bigness, which endued
with Perfect Reason and Understanding, exercises an Universal Dominion over
all the rest. Which Hypothesis, however it has been entertained by some of the
Christian Profession, both in former and later times, yet it has seemed very
ridiculous, even to many of those Heathen Philosophers themselves, who were
mere Corporealists, such as the Stoics, who exploded it with a kind of
Indignation, contending earnestly (...), That God (though Corporeal) yet must
not be conceived to be of any Humane Shape. And Xenophanes, an Ancient
Philosophic Poet, expresses the Childishness of this Conceit after this
manner; (...),
(...),
(...)
(...).
If Oxen, Lions, Horses and Asses, had all of them a Sense of a Deity, and were
able to Limn and Paint, there is no question to be made, but that each of these
several Animals would paint God according to their respective Form and
Likeness, and contend that he was of that shape and no other. But that other
Corporeal Theism, seems to be of the two, rather more Generous and Gentile,
which supposes the whole World to be one Animal, and God to be a certain Subtle
and Etherial, but Intellectual Matter, pervading it as a Soul; which was the
Doctrine of others before the Stoics, (...), Hippasus of Metapontus and
Heraclitus the Ephesian supposed the Fiery and Etherial Matter of the World to
be God. However, neither these Heracliticks and Stoics, nor yet the other
Anthropomorphites, are by us condemned for downright Atheists, but rather
looked upon as a sort of Ignorant, Childish and Unskillful Theists.

Wherefore we see that Atheists are now reduced into a narrow Compass, since
none are concluded to be Atheists, but such as are mere Corporealists, and all
Corporealists must not be condemned for Atheists neither, but only those of
them who assert, that there is no Conscious Intellectual Nature, presiding over
the whole Universe. For this is that which the Adepti in Atheism, of what Form
soever, all agree in, That the first Principle of the Universe, is no
Animalish, Sentient and Conscious Nature, but that all Animality, Sense and
Consciousness, is a Secondary, Derivative and Accidental thing, Generable and
Corruptible, arising out of particular Concretions of Matter organized and
dissolved together with them.

XXXI. Now if the First Principle and Original of all things in the Universe,
be thus supposed to be Body or Matter, devoid of all Animality, Sense and
Consciousness, then it must of necessity be either perfectly Dead and Stupid,
and without all manner of Life, or else endued with such a kind of Life only,
as is by some called Plastic, Spermatical and Vegetative, by others the Life
of Nature, or Natural Perception. And those Atheists who derive all things from
Dead and Stupid Matter, must also needs do this, either in the way of Qualities
and Forms, and these are the Anaximandrian Atheists; or else in the way of
Atoms and Figures, which are the Democritical. But those who make Matter endued
with a Plastic Life, to be the first Original of all things, must needs
suppose either One such Plastic and Spermatick Life only, in the whole Mass of
Matter or Corporeal Universe, which are the Stoical Atheists; or else all
Matter as such to have Life and an Energetick Nature belonging to it (though
without any Animal Sense or Self-perception) and consequently all the
Particular Parts of Matter, and every Totum by Continuity, to have a distinct
Plastic Life of its own, which are the Stratonick Atheists. Wherefore there
does not seem to be any room now left, for any other Form of Atheism, besides
these Four, to thrust in.

And we think fit here again to inculcate, what has been already intimated,
That one Grand Difference amongst these several Forms of Atheism is this, That
some of them attributing no Life at all to Matter, as such, nor indeed
acknowledging any Plastic Life of Nature, distinct from the Animal, and
supposing every thing whatsoever is in the world, besides (...), the bare
Substance of Matter considered as devoid of all Qualities, (that is, mere
extended Bulk) to be Generated and Corrupted, consequently resolve, that all
manner of Life whatsoever is Generable and Corruptible, or educible out of
Nothing and reducible to Nothing again, and these are the Anaximandrian and
Democritick Atheisms. But the other, which are the Stoical and Stratonical, do
on the contrary suppose some Life to be Fundamental and Original, Essential and
Substantial, Ingenerable and Incorruptible, as being a First Principle of
things. Nevertheless, this not to be any Animal, Conscious and Self-perceptive
Life, but a Plastic Life of Nature only; all Atheists still agreeing in those
Two forementioned Things; First, that there is no other Substance in the World
besides Body; Secondly, that all Animal Life, Sense and Self-perception,
Conscious Understanding and Personality are Generated and Corrupted,
successively Educed out of Nothing and Reduced into Nothing again.

XXXII. Indeed we are not ignorant, that some, who seem to be Well-wishers to
Atheism, have talked sometimes of Sensitive and Rational Matter, as having a
mind to suppose, Three several sorts of Matter in the Universe, Specifically
different from one another, that were Originally such, and Self-existent from
Eternity; namely Senseless, Sensitive and Rational: As if the Mundane System
might be conceived to arise, from a certain Jumble of these Three several sorts
of Matter, as it were scuffling together in the Dark, without a God, and so
producing Brute Animals and Men. But as this is a mere Precarious Hypothesis,
there being no imaginable account to be given, how there should come to be such
an Essential Difference betwixt Matters, or why this Piece of Matter should be
Sensitive, and that Rational, when another is altogether Senseless; so the
Suggestors of it are but mere Novices in Atheism, and a kind of Bungling
Well-wishers to it. First, because, according to this Hypothesis, no Life would
be Produced or Destroyed in the successive Generations and Corruptions of
Animals, but only Concreted and Secreted in them; and consequently all humane
Personalities must be Eternal and Incorruptible: Which is all one, as to assert
the Prae and Post-existence of all Souls, from Eternity to Eternity, a thing
that all Genuine and Thorow-pac'd Atheists are in a manner as abhorrent from,
as they are from the Deity it self. And Secondly, because there can be no
imaginable Reason given by them, Why there might not be as well, a certain
Divine Matter perfectly Intellectual and Self-existent from Eternity, as a
Sensitive and Rational Matter. And therefore such an Hypothesis as this, can
never serve the turn of Atheists. But all those that are Masters of the Craft
of Atheism, and thoroughly Catechized or Initiated in the Dark Mysteries thereof,
(as has been already inculcated) do perfectly agree in this, That all Animal,
Sentient and Conscious Life, all Souls and Minds, and consequently all humane
Personalities, are Generated out of Matter, and Corrupted again into it, or
rather Educed out of Nothing and Reduced into Nothing again.

We understand also that there are certain Canting Astrological Atheists, who
would deduce all things from the Occult Qualities and Influences of the Stars,
according to their different Conjunctions, Oppositions and Aspects, in a
certain blind and unaccomptable manner. But these being Persons devoid of all
manner of Sense, who neither so much as pretend to give an Account of these
Stars, whether they be Animals or not, as also whence they derive their
Original, (which if they did undertake to do Atheistically, they must needs
resolve themselves at length into one or other of those Hypotheses already
proposed) therefore, as we conceive, they deserve not the least Consideration.
But we think fit here to observe, that such Devotoes to the heavenly Bodies, as
look upon all the other Stars as petty Deities, but the Sun as the Supreme
Deity and Monarch of the Universe, in the mean time conceiving it also to be
Perfectly Intellectual, (which is in a manner the same with the Cleanthean
Hypothesis) are not so much to be accounted Atheists, as Spurious, Paganical
and Idolatrous Theists. And upon all these Considerations we conclude again,
that there is no other Philosophic Form of Atheism, that can easily be
devised, besides these Four mentioned, the Anaximandrian, the Democritical, the
Stoical and the Stratonical.

XXXIII. Amongst which Forms of Atheism, there is yet another Difference to be
observed, and accordingly another Distribution to be made of them. It being
first premised, that all these forementioned Sorts of Atheists (if they will
speak consistently and agreeably to their own Principles) must needs suppose
all things to be one way or other Necessary. For though Epicurus introduced
Contingent Liberty, yet it is well known, that he therein plainly contradicted
his own Principles. And this indeed, was the First and Principal thing intended
by us, in this whole Undertaking, to confute that False Hypothesis of the
Mundane System, which makes all Actions and Events Necessary upon Atheistick
Grounds, but especially in the Mechanic way. Wherefore in the next place we
must observe, that though the Principles of all Atheists introduce Necessity,
yet the Necessity of these Atheists is not one and the same, but of two
different kinds; some of them supposing a Necessity of Dead and Stupid Matter,
which is that which is commonly meant by (...), or Material Necessity, and is
also called by Aristotle, an Absolute Necessity of things: Others the Necessity
of a Plastic Life, which the same Aristotle calls an Hypothetical Necessity.
For the Anaximandrian and Democritick Atheists do both of them assert a
Material and Absolute Necessity of all things; one in the way of Qualities, and
the other of Motion and Mechanism: But the Stoical and Stratonical Atheists
assert a Plastical and Hypothetical Necessity of things only.

Now one grand Difference betwixt these two Sorts of Atheisms and their
Necessities lies in this, That the Former, though they make all things
Necessary, yet they suppose them also to be Fortuitous; there being no
Inconsistency between these Two. And the Sense of both the Anaximandrian and
Democritick Atheisms seems to be thus described by Plato, (...), All things
were mingled together by Necessity according to Fortune. For that Nature from
whence these Atheists derived all things, is at once both Necessary and
Fortuitous. But the Plastic Atheisms suppose such a Necessary Nature, for the
First Principle of things, as is not merely Fortuitous, but Regular, Orderly
and Methodical; the Stoical excluding all Chance and Fortune universally,
because they subject all things to One Plastic Nature ruling over the whole
Universe, but the Stratonical doing it in part only, because they derive
things, from a Mixture of Chance and Plastic Nature both together.

And thus we see that there is a Double Notion of Nature amongst Atheists, as
well as Theists; De Not. De^ l. 2.
which we cannot better express than in the words of Balbus the Stoic,
personated by Cicero: Alii Naturam censent esse Vim quandam sine Ratione,
cientem motus in corporibus necessarios; Alii autem Vim participem Ordinis,
tanquam Via progredientem. Cujus Solertiam, nulla Ars, nulla Manus, nemo
Opifex, consequi potest imitando; Seminis enim Vim esse tantam, ut id quanquam
perexiguum, nactumque sit Materiam, qua ali augerique possit, ita fingat and
efficiat, in suo quidque genere, partim ut per stirpes alantur suas, partim ut
movere etiam possint, and ex se similia sui generare. Some by Nature mean a
certain Force without Reason and Order, exciting Necessary Motions in Bodies;
but others understand by it, such a Force as participating of Order, proceeds
as it were Methodically. Whose exquisiteness, no Art, no Hand, no Opificer can
reach to by Imitation. For the Force of Seed is such, that though the Bulk of
it be very small, yet if it get convenient Matter for its nourishment and
increase, it so Forms and Frames things in their several kinds, as that they
can partly through their Stocks and Trunks be nourished, and partly Move
themselves also, and Generate their like. And again; Sunt qui omnia Naturae
Nomine appellent, ut Epicurus; Sed nos, cum dicimus Natura constare
administrarique Mundum, non ita dicimus, ut Glebam, aut Fragmentum Lapidis, aut
aliquid ejusmodi, nulla cohaerendi Natura; Sed ut Arborem, ut Animalia, in
quibus nulla Temeritas, sed Ordo apparet and Artis quaedam Similitudo. There
are some who call all things by the name of Nature, as Epicurus: But we, when
we say that the World is administered by Nature, do not mean such a Nature as is
in Clods of Earth and Pieces of Stone; but such as is in a Tree or Animal, in
whose Constitution there is no Temerity, but Order and Similitude of Art. Now
according to these Two different Notions of Nature, the Four forementioned
Forms of Atheism may be again Dichotomized after this manner; into such as
derive all things from a mere Fortuitous and Temerarious Nature, devoid of all
Order and Methodicalness; and such as deduce the Original of things from a
certain Orderly, Regular and Artificial, though Senseless Nature in Matter. The
former of which are the Anaximandrian and Democritick Atheisms, the latter the
Stoical and Stratonical.

It has been already observed, that those Atheisms that derive all things from
a mere Fortutious Principle, as also suppose every thing besides (...), the
bare Substance of Matter or Extended Bulk, to be Generated and Corrupted;
though they asserted the Eternity of Matter, yet they could not, agreeably to
their own Hypothesis, maintain the Eternity and Incorruptibility of the World.
And accordingly hereunto, both the Anaximandrian and Democritick Atheists did
conclude the World to be (...), such as was at first Made and should be again
Corrupted. And upon this account, Lucretius concerns himself highly herein, to
prove both the Novity of the World, and also its Future Dissolution and
Extinction, that Totum Nativum Mortali Corpore constat. But instead of the
Worlds Eternity, these Two sorts of Atheists, introduced another Paradox,
namely an (...), an Infinity of Worlds, and that not only Successive, in that
space which this World of ours is conceived now to occupy, in respect of the
Infinity of Past and Future Time, but also a Contemporary Infinity of
Coexistent Worlds, at all times throughout Endless and Unbounded Space.

However it is certain, that some Persons Atheistically inclined, have been
always apt to run out another way, and to suppose that the Frame of things, and
System of the World, ever was from Eternity, and ever will be to Eternity, such
as now it is, dispensed by a certain Orderly and Regular, but yet Senseless and
Unknowing Nature. And it is Prophesied in Scripture, that such Atheists as
these should especially abound in these latter days of ours; There shall come
in the last days ((...)) Atheistical Scoffers, 2 Pet. 3.
walking after their own Lusts and saying, Where is the promise of his Coming?
For since the Fathers fell as^eep all things continue as they were from the
beginning of the Creation. Which latter words are spoken only according to the
received Hypothesis of the Jews, the meaning of these Atheists being quite
otherwise, that there was neither Creation nor Beginning of the World; but that
things had continued, such as now they are, from all Eternity. As appears also
from what the Apostle there adds by way of Confutation, That they were wilfully
Ignorant of this, that by the word of God the Heavens were of old, and the
Earth standing out of the Water and in the Water; and that as the World that
then was, overflowing with Water perished, so the Heavens and Earth which now
are, by the same word are kept in store, and reserved unto Fire against the day
of Judgment and Perdition of Ungodly men. And it is evident, that some of these
Atheists at this very day, march in the garb of Enthusiastical Religionists,
acknowledging no more a God than a Christ without them, and Allegorizing the
day of Judgment and future Conflagration, into a kind of seemingly Mystical,
but really Atheistical Nonsense. These, if they did Philosophize, would
resolve themselves into one or other of those Two Hypotheses before mentioned;
either that of One Plastic Orderly and Methodical, but Senseless Nature, ruling
over the whole Universe; or else that of the Life of Matter, making one or
other of these two Natures to be their only God or Numen. It being sufficiently
agreeable to the Principles of both these Atheistick Hypotheses (and no others)
to maintain the Worlds both Ante and Post-Eternity; yet so as that the latter
of them, namely the Hylozoists, admitting a certain Mixture of Chance together
with the Life of Matter, would suppose, that though the main Strokes of things,
might be preserved the same, and some kind of constant Regularity always kept
up in the World, yet that the whole Mundane System did not in all respects
continue the same, from Eternity to Eternity, without any Variation. Strab. l.
1.
But as Strabo tells us that Strato Physicus maintained, the Euxine Sea at
first to have had no Outlet by Byzantium into the Mediterranean, but that by
the continual running in of Rivers into it, causing it to overflow, there was
in length of time a passage opened by the Propontis and Hellespont. As also
that the Mediterranean Sea forced open that passage of the Herculean straits,
being a continual Isthmus or neck of Land before; that many parts of the
present Continent were heretofore Sea, as also much of the present Ocean
habitable Land: So it cannot be doubted, but that the same Strato did likewise
suppose such kind of Alternations and Vicissitudes as these, in all the greater
parts of the Mundane System.

But the Stoical Atheists, who made the whole World to be dispensed by one
Orderly and Plastic Nature, might very well, and agreeably to their own
Hypothesis, maintain, besides the Worlds Eternity, one Constant and Invariable
Course or Tenor of things in it, as Plinius Secundus does, who, if he were any
thing, seems to have been one of these Atheists; Mundum and hoc quod nomine
alio Coelum appellare libuit, Not. H. l. 2. c. ^.
(cujus circumflexu reguntur cuncta) Numen esse, credi par est, Aeternum,
Immensum, neque Genitum neque Interiturum -- Idem rerum Naturae Opus, and rerum
ipsa Natura; The World, and that which by another name is called the Heavens,
by whose Circumgyration all things are governed, ought to be believed to be a
Numen, Eternal, Immense, such as was never Made, and shall never be Destroyed.
Where by the way, it may be again observed, that those Atheists who denied a
God according to the True Notion of him, as a Conscious, Understanding Being,
presiding over the whole World, did notwithstanding look upon either the World
it self, or else a mere Senseless Plastic Nature in it, as a kind of Numen or
Deity, they supposing it to be Ingenerable and Incorruptible. Which same Pliny,
as upon the grounds of the Stoical Atheism, he maintained against the
Anaximandrians and Democriticks the Worlds Eternity and Incorruptibility; so
did he likewise in way of Opposition to that (...), that Infinity of Worlds of
theirs, assert that there was but One World, and that Finite. In like manner we
read concerning that Famous Stoic Boethus, whom Laertius affirms, to have
denied the World to be an Animal (which according to the language and sense of
those times was all one as to deny a God) that he also maintained, contrary to
the received Doctrine of the Stoics, the Worlds Ante-Eternity and
Incorruptibllity, Philo in his Treatise (...), or the Incorruptibility of the
World testifying the same of him.

Nevertheless it seems, that some of these Stoical Atheists did also agree with
the Generality of the other Stoical Theists, in supposing a successive Infinity
of Worlds Generated and Corrupted, by reason of intervening Periodical
Conflagrations; though all dispensed by such a Stupid and Senseless Nature as
governs Plants and Trees. For thus much we gather from those words of Seneca
before cited, where describing this Atheistical Hypothesis, he tells us, that
though the World were a Plant, that is, governed by a Vegetative or Plastic
Nature, without any Animality, yet notwithstanding, ab initio ejus usque ad
exitum, etc. it had both a Beginning and will have an End, and from its
Beginning to its End, all was dispensed by a kind of Regular Law, even its
Successive Conflagrations too, as well as those Inundations or Deluges which
have sometimes happened. Which yet they understood after such a manner, as that
in these several Revolutions and Successive Circuits or Periods of Worlds, all
things should be (...), exactly alike, to what had been Infinitely before, and
should be again Infinitely afterward. Of which more elsewhere.

XXXIV. This Quadripartite Atheism which we have now represented, is the
Kingdom of Darkness Divided, or Laboring with an Intestine Seditious War in
its own Bowels, and thereby destroying it self. Insomuch that we might well
save our selves the labor of any further Confutation of Atheism, merely by
committing these several Forms of Atheism together, and dashing them one
against another, they opposing and contradicting each other, no less than they
do Theism it self. For first, those two Pairs of Atheisms, on the one hand the
Anaximandrian and Democritick, on the other the Stoical and Stratonical, do
absolutely destroy each other; the Former of them supposing the First Principle
of all things to be Stupid Matter devoid of all manner of Life, and contending
that all Life as well as other Qualities is Generable and Corruptible, or a
mere Accidental thing, and looking upon the Plastic Life of Nature as a
Figment or Fantastic Capritio, a thing almost as formidable and altogether as
impossible as a Deity; the other on the contrary, founding all upon this
Principle, That there is a Life and Natural Perception Essential to Matter,
Ingenerable and Incorruptible, and contending it to be utterly impossible to
give any account of the Phenomenon of the World, the Original of Motion, the
Orderly Frame and Disposition of things, and the Nature of Animals, without
this Fundamental Life of Nature.

Again, the Single Atheisms belonging to each of these several Pairs, quarrel
as much also between themselves. For the Democritick Atheism explodes the
Anaximandrian Qualities and Forms, demonstrating that the Natural Production of
such Entities out of Nothing, and the Corruption of them again into Nothing, is
of the two, rather more impossible, than a Divine Creation and Annihilation.
And on the other side, the Anaximandrian Atheist plainly discovers, that when
the Democriticks and Atomicks have spent all their Fury against these Qualities
and Forms, and done what they can to salve the Phenomenon of Nature, without
them another way, themselves do notwithstanding like drunken men reel and
stagger back again into them, and are unavoidably necessitated at last, to take
up their Sanctuary in them.

In like manner the Stoical and Stratonical Atheists, may as effectually undo
and confute each other; the Former of them urging against the Latter, That
besides that Prodigious Absurdity, of making every Atom of Senseless Matter
Infallibly Wise or Omniscient, without any Consciousness, there can be no
reason at all given by the Hylozoists, why the Matter of the whole Universe,
might not as well Conspire and Confederate together into One, as all the single
Atoms that compound the Body of any Animal or Man, or why one Conscious Life
might not as well result from the Totum of the former, as of the latter; by
which means the whole World would become an Animal or God. Again, the Latter
contending, that the Stoical or Cosmo-plastick Atheist can pretend no reason,
why the whole World might not have one Sentient and Rational, as well as one
Plastic Soul in it, that is, as well be an Animal as a Plant. Moreover, that
the Sensitive Souls of Brute Animals, and the Rational Souls of Men, could
never possibly emerge out of one Single, Plastic and Vegetative Soul in the
whole Universe. And lastly, that it is altogether as impossible, that the whole
World should have Life in it, and yet none of its Parts have any Life of their
own, as that the whole World should be White or Black, and yet no part of it
have any Whiteness or Blackness at all in it. And therefore that the Stoical
Atheists, as well as the Stoical Theists, do both alike deny Incorporeal
Substance but in words only, whilst they really admit the thing it self;
because One and the same Life, ruling over all the distant parts of the
Corporeal Universe, must needs be an Incorporeal Substance, it being all in the
Whole, and all acting upon every part, and yet none of it in any part by it
self; for then it would be many and not one. From all which it may be
concluded, That Atheism is a certain strange kind of Monster, with Four Heads,
that are all of them perpetually biting, tearing and devouring one another.

Now though these several Forms of Atheism do mutually destroy each other, and
none of them be really Considerable or Formidable in it self, as to any
strength of Reason which it has; yet as they are compared together among
themselves; so some of them may be more considerable than the rest. For first,
as the Qualities and Forms of the Anaximandrian Atheist, supposed to be really
distinct from the Substances, are things unintelligible in themselves; so he
cannot, with any color or pretense of Reason, maintain the Natural Production
of them out of Nothing, and the Reduction of them again into Nothing, and yet
withstand a Divine Creation and Annihilation, as an Impossibility. Moreover the
Anaximandrian Atheism, is as it were swallowed up into the Democritick, and
further improved in it, this latter carrying on the same Design, with more
seeming Artifice, greater Plausibility of Wit, and a more pompous Show of
Something where indeed there is Nothing. Upon which account, it has for many
Ages past beaten the Anaximandrian Atheism, in a manner quite off the Stage,
and reigned there alone. So that the Democritick or Atomick Atheism, seems to
be much more considerable of the Two, than the Anaximandrian or Hylopathian.

Again; as for the two other Forms of Atheism, if there were any Life at all in
Matter, as the First and Immediate Recipient of it, then in reason this must
needs be supposed to be after the same manner in it, that all other Corporeal
Qualities are in Bodies, so as to be Divisible together with it, and some of it
be in every part of the Matter; which is according to the Hypothesis of the
Hylozoists: Whereas on the contrary the Stoical Atheists supposing one Life
only in the whole Mass of Matter, after such a manner, as that none of the
parts of it by themselves should have any Life of their own, do thereby no less
than the Stoical Theists, make this Life of theirs to be no Corporeal Quality
or Form, but an Incorporeal Substance; which is to contradict their own
Hypothesis. From whence we may conclude, that the Cosmoplastick or Stoical
Atheism, is of the two, less considerable than the Hylozoick or Stratonical.

Wherefore amongst these Four Forms of Atheism, that have been propounded,
these Two, the Atomick or Democritical, and the Hylozoick or Stratonical are
the Chief. The former of which, namely the Democritick Atheism, admitting a
true Notion of Body, that (according to the Doctrine of the first and most
Ancient Atomists) it is nothing but Resisting Bulk, devoid of all manner of
Life; yet because it takes for granted, that there is no other Substance in the
World besides Body, does therefore conclude, that all Life and Understanding in
Animals and Men, is Generated out of Dead and Stupid Matter, though not as
Qualities and Forms (which is the Anaximandrian way) but as resulting from the
Contextures of Atoms, or some peculiar Composition of Magnitudes, Figures,
Sites and Motions, and consequently that they are themselves really nothing
else but Local Motion and Mechanism: Which is a thing, that sometime since, was
very Pertinently and Judiciously both observed and perstringed, by the Learned
Author of the Exercitatio Epistolica, S^ct. 4. c. 3.
now a Reverend Bishop. But the latter, namely the Hylozoick, though truly
acknowledging on the contrary, that Life, Cogitation and Understanding are
Entities really distinct from Local Motion and Mechanism, and that therefore
they cannot be Generated out of Dead and Stupid Matter, but must needs be
somewhere in the World, Originally, Essentially, and Fundamentally; yet because
they take it also for granted, that there is no other Substance besides Matter,
do thereupon adulterate the Notion of Matter or Body, blending and confounding
it with Life, as making them but two Inadequate Conceptions of Substance, and
concluding that all Matter and Substance as such, has Life and Perception or
Understanding Natural and Inconscious, Essentially belonging to it; and that
Sense and Conscious Reason or Understanding in Animals arises only from the
Accidental Modification of this Fundamental Life of Matter by Organization.

We conclude therefore, that if these Two Atheistick Hypotheses, which are
found to be the most Considerable, be once Confuted, the Reality of all Atheism
will be ipso facto Confuted. There being indeed nothing more requisite, to a
thorough Confutation of Atheism, than the proving of these Two things; First,
that Life and Understanding are not Essential to Matter as such; and Secondly,
that they can never possibly rise out of any Mixture or Modification of Dead
and Stupid Matter whatsoever. The reason of which Assertion is, because all
Atheists, as was before observed, are mere Corporealists, of which there can be
but these Two Sorts; Either such as make Life to be Essential to Matter, and
therefore to be Ingenerable and Incorruptible; or else such as suppose Life and
Every thing besides (...), the Bare Substance of Matter, or Extended Bulk to be
merely Accidental, Generable or Corruptible, as rising out of some Mixture or
Modification of it. And as the Proving of those Two Things will overthrow all
Atheism, so it will likewise lay a clear Foundation, for the demonstrating of a
Deity distinct from the Corporeal World.

XXXV. Now that Life and Perception or Understanding, should be Essential to
Matter as such, or that all Senseless Matter should be Perfectly and Infallibly
wise (though without Consciousness) as to all its own Congruities and
Capabilities, which is the Doctrine of the Hylozoists; This I say, is an
Hypothesis so Prodigiously Paradoxical, and so Outragiously Wild, as that very
few men ever could have Atheistick Faith enough, to swallow it down and digest
it. Wherefore this Hylozoick Atheism has been very obscure ever since its
first Emersion, and has found so few Fautors and Abettors, that it has looked
like a forlorn and deserted thing. Neither indeed are there any Public
Monuments at all extant, in which it is avowedly Maintained, Stated and Reduced
into any System. Insomuch that we should not have taken any notice of it at
this time, as a Particular Form of Atheism, nor have Conjured it up out of its
Grave, had we not Understood, that Strato's Ghost had begun to walk of late,
and that among some Well-wishers to Atheism, despairing in a manner of the
Atomick Form, this Hylozoick Hypothesis, began already to be looked upon, as
the Rising Sun of Atheism, -- Et tanquam Spes altera Trojae, it seeming to
smile upon them, and flatter them at a distance, with some fairer hopes of
supporting that Ruinous and Desperate Cause.

Whereas on the Contrary, that other Atomick Atheism, as it insists upon a True
Notion of Body, that it is nothing but Resisting Bulk; by which means we,
joining issue thereupon, shall be fairly conducted on to a clear Decision of
this present Controversy, as likewise to the disintangling of many other
points of Philosophy; so it is that which has filled the World with the Noise
of it, for Two Thousand years past; that concerning which several Volumes have
been formerly written, in which it has been stated and brought into a kind of
System; and which has of late obtained a Resurrection amongst us, together
with the Atomick Physiology, and been recommended to the World anew, under a
Specious Show of Wit and profound Philosophy.

Wherefore as we could not here insist upon both these Forms of Atheism
together, because that would have been to confound the Language of Atheists,
and to have made them like the Cadmean Offspring, to do immediate Execution
upon themselves; so we were in all reason obliged to make our First and
Principal Assault upon the Atomick Atheism, as being the only considerable,
upon this account, because it is that alone which publicly confronts the
World, and like that proud Uncircumcised Philistine, openly defies the Hosts of
the Living God. Intending nevertheless in the Close of this whole Discourse,
(that is, the Last Book) where we are to determine the Right Intellectual
System of the Universe, and to assert an Incorporeal Deity, to demonstrate,
That Life, Cogitation and Understanding do not Essentially belong to Matter,
and all Substance as such, but are the Peculiar Attributes and Characteristicks
of Substance Incorporeal.

XXXVI. However since we have now started these Several Forms of Atheism, we
shall not in the mean time neglect any of them neither. For in the Answer to
the Second Atheistick Ground, we shall Confute them all together at once, as
agreeing in this One Fundamental Principle, That the Original of all things in
the Universe is Senseless Matter, or Matter devoid of all Animality or Conscious
Life. In the Reply to the Fourth Atheistick Argumentation, we shall briefly
hint the Grounds of Reason, from which Incorporeal Substance is Demonstrated.
In the Examination of the Fifth, we shall confute the Anaximandrian Atheism
there propounded, which is as it were, the First Sciography, and Rude
Delineation of Atheism. And in the Confutation of the Sixth, we shall show, how
the ancient Atomick Atheists, did preventively overtherthrow the Foundation of
Hylozoism. Besides all which, in order to a Fuller and more Thorough
Confutation, both of the Cosmo-plastick and Hylozoick Atheism, we shall in this
very place take occasion to insist largely upon the Plastic life of Nature,
giving in the First Place, a True Account of it; and then afterward showing,
how grossly it is misunderstood, and the Pretense of it abused by the Asserters
of both these Atheistick Hypotheses. The Heads of which Larger Digression,
because they could not be so conveniently inserted in the Contents of the
Chapter, shall be represented to the Readers View, at the End of it.

XXXVII. For we think fit here to observe, that neither the Cosmo-plastick or
Stoical, nor the Hylozoick or Stratonical Atheists are therefore condemned by
us, because they suppose such a thing, as a Plastic Nature, or Life distinct
from the Animal; albeit this be not only exploded, as an Absolute Nonentity,
by the Atomick Atheists, who might possibly be afraid of it, as that which
approached too near to a Deity, or else would hazard the introducing of it; but
also utterly discarded by some Professed Theists of later times; who might
notwithstanding have an Undiscerned Tang of the Mechanic Atheism, hanging
about them, in that their so confident rejecting of all Final and Intending
Causality in Nature, and admitting of no other Causes of things, as
Philosophical, save the Material and Mechanical only. This being really to
banish all Mental, and consequently Divine Causality, quite out of the World;
and to make the whole World to be nothing else, but a mere Heap of Dust,
Fortuitously agitated, or a Dead Cadaverous thing, that has no Signatures of
Mind and Understanding, Counsel and Wisdom at all upon it; nor indeed any other
Vitality acting in it, than only the Production of a certain Quantity of Local
Motion and the Conservation of it according to some General Laws; which things
the Democritick Atheists take for granted, would all be as they are, though
there were no God. And thus De Coe. l. 2. c. 12.
Aristotle describes this kind of Philosophy, That it made the whole World to
consist, (...), of nothing but Bodies and Monads (that is, Atoms or Small
Particles of Matter) only ranged and disposed together into such an order, but
altogether Dead and Inanimate.

2. For unless there be such a thing admitted as a Plastic Nature, that acts
(...), for the sake of something, and in order to Ends, Regularly, Artificially
and Methodically, it seems that one or other of these Two Things must be
concluded, That Either in the Efformation and Organization of the Bodies of
Animals, as well as the other Phenomena, every thing comes to pass
Fortuitously, and happens to be as it is, without the Guidance and Direction of
any Mind or Understanding; Or else, that God himself does all Immediately, and
as it were with his own Hands, Form the Body of every Gnat and Fly, Insect and
Mite, as of other Animals in Generations, all whose Members have so much of
Contrivance in them, that Galen professed he could never enough admire that
Artifice which was in the Leg of a Fly, (and yet he would have admired the
Wisdom of Nature more, had he been but acquainted with the Use of Microscopes.)
I say, upon supposition of no Plastic Nature, one or other of these Two things
must be concluded; because it is not conceived by any, that the things of
Nature are all thus administered, with such exact Regularity and Constancy every
where, merely by the Wisdom, Providence and Efficiency, of those Inferior
Spirits, Demons or Angels. As also, though it be true that the Works of Nature
are dispensed by a Divine Law and Command, yet this is not to be understood in
a Vulgar Sense, as if they were all effected by the mere Force of a Verbal Law
or Outward Command, because Inanimate things are not Commandable nor Governable
by such a Law; and therefore besides the Divine Will and Pleasure, there must
needs be some other Immediate Agent and Executioner provided, for the producing
of every Effect; since not so much as a Stone or other Heavy Body, could at any
time fall downward, merely by the Force of a Verbal Law, without any other
Efficient Cause; but either God himself must immediately impel it, or else
there must be some other subordinate Cause in Nature for that Motion. Wherefore
the Divine Law and Command, by which the things of Nature are administered, must
be conceived to be the Real Appointment of some Energetick Effectual and
Operative Cause for the Production of every Effect.

3. Now to assert the Former of these Two things, that all the Effects of
Nature come to pass by Material and Mechanical Necessity, or the mere
Fortuitous Motion of Matter, without any Guidance or Direction, is a thing no
less Irrational than it is Impious and Atheistical. Not only because it is
utterly Unconceivable and Impossible, that such Infinite Regularity and
Artificialness, as is every where throughout the whole World, should constantly
result out of the Fortuitous Motion of Matter, but also because there are many
such Particular Phenomenon in Nature, as do plainly transcend the Powers of
Mechanism, of which therefore no Sufficient Mechanical Reasons can be devised,
as the Motion of Respiration in Animals; as there are also other Phenomenon
that are perfectly Cross to the Laws of Mechanism; as for Example, that of the
Distant Poles of the Equator and Ecliptic which we shall insist upon
afterward. Of both which kinds, there have been other Instances proposed, by my
Learned Friend Dr. More in his Enchiridion Metaphysicum, and very ingeniously
improved by him to this very purpose, namely to Evince that there is something
in Nature besides Mechanism, and consequently Substance Incorporeal.

Moreover those Theists, who Philosophize after this manner, by resolving all
the Corporeal Phenomenon into Fortuitous Mechanism, or the Necessary and
Unguided Motion of Matter, make God to be nothing else in the World, but an
Idle Spectator of the Various Results of the Fortuitous and Necessary Motions
of Bodies; and render his Wisdom altogether Useless and Insignificant, as being
a thing wholly Enclosed and shut up within his own breast, and not at all
acting abroad upon any thing without him.

Furthermore all such Mechanists as these, whether Theists or Atheists, De
part. An. l. 1. c. 1.
do, according to that Judicious Censure passed by Aristotle long since upon
Democritus, but substitute as it were (...), a Carpenters or Artificers Wooden
Hand, moved by Strings and Wires, in stead of a Living Hand. They make a kind
of Dead and Wooden World, as it were a Carved Statue, that has nothing neither
Vital nor Magical at all in it. Whereas to those who are Considerative, it will
plainly appear, that there is a Mixture of Life or Plastic Nature together
with Mechanism, which runs through the whole Corporeal Universe.

And whereas it is pretended, not only that all Corporeal Phenomenon may be
sufficiently salved Mechanically, without any Final, Intending and Directive
Causality, but also that all other Reasons of things in Nature, besides the
Material and Mechanical, are altogether Vnphilosophical, the same Aristotle
ingeniously exposes the Ridiculousness of this Pretense after this manner;
telling us, That it is just as if a Carpenter, Joyner or Carver should give
this account, as the only Satisfactory, of any Artificial Fabric or Piece of
Carved Imagery, (...), that because the Instruments, Axes and Hatchets, Plains
and Chissels, happened to fall so and so upon the Timber, cutting it here and
there, that therefore it was hollow in one place, and plain in another, and the
like, and by that means the whole came to be of such a Form. For is it not
altogether as Absurd and Ridiculous, for men to undertake to give an account of
the Formation and Organization of the Bodies of Animals, by mere Fortuitous
Mechanism, without any Final or Intending Causality, as why there was an Heart
here and Brains there, and why the Heart had so many and such different Valves
in the Entrance and Outlet of its Ventricles, and why all the other Organick
Parts, Veins and Arteries, Nerves and Muscles, Bones and Cartilages, with the
Joints and Members, were of such a Form? Because forsooth, the Fluid Matter of
the Seed happened to move so and so, in several places, and thereby to cause
all those Differences, which are also diverse in different Animals; all being
the Necessary Result of a certain Quantity of Motion at first indifferently
impressed, upon the small Particles of the Matter of this Universe turned round
in a Vortex. But as the same Aristotle adds, no Carpenter or Artificer is so
simple, as to give such an Account as this, and think it satisfactory, but he
will rather declare, that himself directed the Motion of the Instruments, after
such a manner, and in order to such Ends: De Part. An. l. 1. c. 1.
(...), etc. (...)^ A Carpenter would give a better account than so, for he
would not think it sufficient to say, that the Fabric came to be of such a
form, because the Instruments happened to fall so and so, but he will tell you
that it was because himself made such strokes, and that he directed the
Instruments and determined their motion after such a manner, to this End that
he might make the Whole a Fabric fit and useful for such purposes. And this is
to assign the Final Cause. And certainly there is scarcely any man in his Wits,
that will not acknowledge the Reason of the different Valves in the Heart, from
the apparent Usefulness of them, according to those particular Structures of
theirs, to be more Satisfactory, than any which can be brought from mere
Fortuitous Mechanism, or the Unguided Motion of the Seminal Matter.

4. And as for the Latter Part of the Disjunction, That every thing in Nature
should be done Immediately by God himself; this, as according to Vulgar
Apprehension, it would render Divine Providence Operose, Sollicitous and
Distractious, and thereby make the Belief of it to be entertained with greater
difficulty, and give advantage to Atheists; so in the Judgment of the Writer De
Mundo, it is not so Decorous in respect of God neither, that he should (...),
set his own Hand, as it were, to every Work, and immediately do all the Meanest
and Triflingest things himself Drudgingly, without making use of any Inferior
and Subordinate Instruments. Cap. ^.
(...), etc. If it were not congruous in respect of the State and Majesty of
Xerxes the Great King of Persia that he should condescend to do all the meanest
Offices himself; much less can this be thought decorous in respect of God. But
it seems far more August, and becoming of the Divine Majesty, that a certain
Power and Virtue, derived from him, and passing through the Universe, should
move the Sun and Moon, and be the Immediate Cause of those lower things done
here upon Earth.

Moreover it seems not so agreeable to Reason neither, that Nature as a
Distinct thing from the Deity, should be quite Superseded or made to Signify
Nothing, God himself doing all things Immediately and Miraculously; from whence
it would follow also, that they are all done either Forcibly and Violently, or
else Artificially only, and none of them by any Inward Principle of their own.

Lastly; This Opinion is further Confuted, by that Slow and Gradual Process
that is in the Generations of things, which would seem to be but a Vain and
Idle Pomp, or a Trifling Formality, if the Agent were Omnipotent: as also by
those (...) (as Aristotle calls them) those Errors and Bungles which are
committed, when the Matter is Inept and Contumacious; which argue the Agent not
to be Irresistible, and that Nature is such a thing, as is not altogether
incapable (as well as Humane Art) of being sometimes frustrated and
disappointed, by the Indisposition of Matter. Whereas an Omnipotent Agent, as
it could dispatch its work in a Moment, so it would always do it Infallibly and
Irresistibly; no Ineptitude or Stubbornness of Matter, being ever able to
hinder such a one, or make him Bungle or Fumble in any thing.

5. Wherefore since neither all things are produced Fortuitously, or by the
Unguided Mechanism of Matter, nor God himself may reasonably be thought to do
all things Immediately and Miraculously; it may well be concluded, that there
is a Plastic Nature under him, which as an Inferior and Subordinate
Instrument, does Drudgingly Execute that Part of his Providence, which consists
in the Regular and Orderly Motion of Matter: yet so as that there is also
besides this, a Higher Providence to be acknowledged, which presiding over it,
does often supply the Defects of it, and sometimes Overrule it; forasmuch as
this Plastic Nature cannot act Electively nor with Discretion. And by this
means the Wisdom of God will not be shut up nor concluded wholly within his own
Breast, but will display it self abroad, and print its Stamps and Signatures
every where throughout the World; so that God, as Plato (after Orpheus) speaks,
will be not only the Beginning and End, but also the Middle of all things, they
being as much to be ascribed to his Causality, as if himself had done them all
Immediately, without the concurrent Instrumentality of any Subordinate Natural
Cause. Notwithstanding which, in this way it will appear also to Humane Reason,
that all things are Disposed and Ordered by the Deity, without any Sollicitous
Care or Distractious Providence.

And indeed those Mechanic Theists, who rejecting a Plastic Nature, affect to
concern the Deity as little as is possible in Mundane Affairs, either for fear
of debasing him and bringing him down to too mean Offices, or else of
subjecting him to Sollicitous Encumberment, and for that Cause would have God
to contribute nothing more to the Mundane System and Economy, than only the
First Impressing of a certain Quantity of Motion, upon the Matter, and the
After-conserving of it, according to some General Laws: These men (I say) seem
not very well to understand themselves in this. Forasmuch as they must of
necessity, either suppose these their Laws of Motion to execute themselves, or
else be forced perpetually to concern the Deity in the Immediate Motion of
every Atom of Matter throughout the Universe, in order to the Execution and
Observation of them. The Former of which being a Thing plainly Absurd and
Ridiculous, and the Latter that, which these Philosophers themselves are
extremely abhorrent from, we cannot make any other Conclusion than this, That
they do but unskilfully and unawares establish that very Thing which in words
they oppose; and that their Laws of Nature concerning Motion, are Really
nothing else, but a Plastic Nature, acting upon the Matter of the whole
Corporeal Universe, both Maintaining the Same Quantity of Motion always in it,
and also Dispensing it (by Transferring it out of one Body into another)
according to such Laws, Fatally Impressed upon it. Now if there be a Plastic
Nature, that governs the Motion of Matter, every where according to Laws, there
can be no Reason given, why the same might not also extend further, to the
Regular Disposal of that Matter, in the Formation of Plants and Animals and
other things, in order to that Apt Coherent Frame and Harmony of the whole
Universe.

6. And as this Plastic Nature is a thing which seems to be in it self most
Reasonable, so has it also had the Suffrage of the best Philosophers in all
Ages. For First, it is well known, that Aristotle concerns himself in nothing
more zealously than this, That Mundane things are not Effected, merely by the
Necessary and Unguided Motion of Matter, or by Fortuitous Mechanism, but by
such a Nature as acts Regularly and Artificially for Ends; yet so as that this
Nature is not the Highest Principle neither, or the Supreme Numen, but
Subordinate to a Perfect Mind or Intellect, he affirming, that (...), That Mind
together with Nature was the Cause of this Universe; and that Heaven and Earth,
Plants and Animals were framed by them both; that is, by Mind as the Principal
and Directive Cause, but by Nature as a Subservient or Executive Instrument:
and elsewhere joining in like manner God and Nature both together, as when he
concludes, That God and Nature do nothing in Vain.

Neither was Aristotle the First Broacher or Inventor of this Doctrine, Plato
before him having plainly asserted the same. For in a Passage already cited, he
affirms that Nature together with Reason, and according to it, orders all
things; thereby making Nature, as a Distinct thing from the Deity, to be a
Subordinate Cause under the Reason and Wisdom of it. And elsewhere he resolves,
that there are (...), Certain Causes of a Wise and Artificial Nature, which the
Deity uses as Subservient to it self; as also, that there are (...), Con-causes
which God makes use of, as Subordinately Cooperative with himself.

Moreover before Plato, Empedocles Philosophized also in the same manner, when
supposing Two Worlds, the one Archetypal, the other Extypal, he made (...) and
(...), Friendship and Discord, to be the (...), the Active Principle and
Immediate Operator in this Lower World. He not understanding thereby, as
Plutarch and some others have conceited, Two Substantial Principles in the
World, the one of Good the other of Evil, but only a Plastic Nature, as
Aristotle in sundry places intimates: which he called by that name, partly
because he apprehended that the Result and Upshot of Nature in all Generations
and Corruptions, amounted to nothing more than Mixtures and Separations, or
Concretion and Secretion of Preexistent things, and partly because this
Plastic Nature is that which does reconcile the Contrarieties and Enmities of
Particular things, and bring them into one General Harmony in the Whole. Which
latter is a Notion that Plotinus, describing this very Seminary Reason or
Plastic Nature of the World, (though taking it in something a larger sense,
than we do in this place) does ingeniously pursue after this manner; En. 3. l.
2.. 16.
(...). -- (...). The Seminary Reason or Plastic Nature of the Universe,
opposing the Parts to one another and making them severally Indigent, produces
by that means War and Contention. And therefore though it be One, yet
notwithstanding it consists of Different and Contrary things. For there being
Hostility in its Parts, it is nevertheless Friendly and Agreeable in the Whole;
after the same manner as in a Dramatick Poem, Clashings and Contentions are
reconciled into one Harmony. And therefore the Seminary and Plastic Nature of
the World, may fitly be resembled to the Harmony of Disagreeing things. Which
Plotinick Doctrine, may well pass for a Commentary upon Empedocles, accordingly
as Simplicius briefly represents his sense, In Arist. de Coe. l. 1. c. 10.
(...)^ Empedocles makes Two Worlds, the one United and Intelligible, the other
Divided and Sensible; and in this lower Sensible World, he takes notice both of
Unity and Discord.

It was before observed, that Heraclitus likewise did assert a Regular and
Artificial Nature, as the Fate of things in this Lower World; for his Reason
passing thorough the Substance of all things, or Ethereal Body, which was the
Seed of the Generation of the Universe, was nothing but that Spermatick or
Plastic Nature which we now speak of. And whereas there is an odd Passage of
this Philosophers recorded, (...), that neither any God nor Man made this
World, which as it is justly derided by Plutarch for its Simplicity, so it
looks very Atheistically at first sight; yet because Heraclitus has not been
accounted an Atheist, we therefore conceive the meaning of it to have been
this, That the World was not made by any whatsoever, after such a manner as an
Artificer makes an House, by Machins and Engines, acting from without upon the
Matter, Cumbersomly and Moliminously, but by a certain Inward Plastic Nature
of its own.

And as Hippocrates followed Heraclitus in this (as was before declared) so did
Zeno and the Stoics also, they supposing besides an Intellectual Nature, as
the Supreme Architect and Master Builder of the World, another Plastic Nature
as the Immediate Workman and Operatour. Which Plastic Nature has been already
described in the words of Balbus, as a thing which acts not Fortuitously but
Regularly, Orderly and Artificially; and Laertius tells In Vita Z^n*
us, it was defined by Zeno himself after this manner, (...)^ Nature is a Habit
moved from it self according to Spermatick Reasons or Seminal Principles,
perfecting and containing those several things, which in determinate times are
produced from it, and acting agreeably to that from which it was secreted.

Lastly, as the Latter Platonists and Peripateticks have unanimously followed
their Masters herein, whose Vegetative Soul also is no other than a Plastic
Nature; so the Chemists and Paracelsians insist much upon the same thing, and
seem rather to have carried the Notion on further, in the Bodies of Animals,
where they call it by a new name of their own, the Archeus.

Moreover, we cannot but observe here, that as amongst the Ancients, They were
generally condemned for downright Atheists, who acknowledged no other
Principle besides Body or Matter, Necessarily and Fortuitously moved, such as
Democritus and the first Ionicks; so even Anaxagoras himself, notwithstanding
that he was a professed Theist, and plainly asserted Mind to be a Principle,
yet because he attributed too much to Material Necessity, admitting neither
this Plastic Nature nor a Mundane Soul, was severely censured, not only by the
Vulgar (who unjustly taxed him for an Atheist) but also by Plato and Aristotle,
as a kind of spurious and imperfect Theist, and one who had given great
advantage to Atheism. Aristotle in his Metaphysics thus represents his
Philosophy, L. 1. c. 4.
(...)^ Anaxagoras uses Mind and Intellect, that is, God, as a Machin in the
Cosmopoeia, and when he is at a loss to give an account of things by Material
Necessity, then and never but then, does he draw in Mind or God to help him
out; but otherwise he will rather assign any thing else for a Cause than Mind.
Now if Aristotle censure Anaxagoras in this manner, though a professed Theist,
because he did but seldom make use of a Mental Cause, for the salving of the
Phenomenon of the World, and only then when he was at a loss for other Material
and Mechanical Causes (which it seems he sometimes confessed himself to be)
what would that Philosopher have thought of those our so confident Mechanists
of later times, who will never vouchsafe so much as once to be beholding to God
Almighty, for any thing in the Economy of the Corporeal World, after the first
Impression of Motion upon the Matter?

Plato likewise in his Phaedo and elsewhere, condemns this Anaxagoras by name,
for this very thing, that though he acknowledged Mind to be a Cause, yet he
seldom made use of it, for salving the Phenomenon; but in his twelfth de
Legibus, he perstringeth him Unnamed, as one who though a professed Theist, had
notwithstanding given great Encouragement to Atheism, after this manner; P.
967. Steph.
(...)^ Some of them who had concluded, that it was Mind that ordered all
things in the Heavens, themselves erring concerning the Nature of the Soul, and
not making that Older than the Body, have overturned all again; for Heavenly
Bodies being supposed by them, to be full of Stones, and Earth, and other
Inanimate things (dispensing the Causes of the whole Universe) they did by this
means occasion much Atheism and Impiety.

Furthermore the same Plato there tells us, that in those times of his,
Astronomers and Physiologers commonly lay under the prejudice and suspicion of
Atheism amongst the vulgar, merely for this reason, because they dealt so much
in Material Causes, (...)^ The Vulgar think that they who addict themselves to
Astronomy and Physiology, are made Atheists thereby, they seeing as much as is
possible how things come to pass by Material Necessities, and being thereby
disposed to think them not to be ordered by Mind and Will, for the sake of
Good. From whence we may observe, that according to the Natural Apprehensions
of Men in all Ages, they who resolve the Phenomenon of Nature, into Material
Necessity, allowing of no Final nor Mental Causality (disposing things in order
to Ends) have been strongly suspected for Friends to Atheism.

7. But because some may pretend, that the Plastic Nature is all one with an
Occult Quality, we shall here show how great a Difference there is betwixt
these Two. For he that asserts an Occult Quality, for the Cause of any
Phenomenon, does indeed assign no Cause at all of it, but only declare his own
Ignorance of the Cause; but he that asserts a Plastic Nature, assigns a
Determinate and proper Cause, nay the only Intelligible Cause, of that which is
the greatest of all Phenomenon in the World, namely the (...), the Orderly,
Regular and Artificial Frame of things in the Universe, whereof the Mechanic
Philosophers, however pretending to salve all Phenomenon by Matter and Motion,
assign no Cause at all. Mind and Understanding is the only true Cause of
Orderly Regularity, and he that asserts a- Plastic Nature, asserts Mental
Causality in the World; but the Fortuitous Mechanists, who exploding Final
Causes, will not allow Mind and Understanding to have any Influence at all upon
the Frame of things, can never possibly assign any Cause of this Grand
Phenomenon, unless Confusion may be said to be the Cause of Order, and Fortune
or Chance of Constant Regularity; and therefore themselves must resolve it into
an Occult Quality. Nor indeed does there appear any great reason why such men
should assert an Infinite Mind in the World, since they do not allow it to act
any where at all, and therefore must needs make it to be in Vain.

8. Now this Plastic Nature being a thing which is not without some Difficulty
in the Conception of it, we shall here endeavor to do these Two things
concerning it; First, to set down a right Representation thereof, and then
afterward to show how extremely the Notion of it has been Mistaken, Perverted
and Abused by those Atheists, who would make it to be the only God Almighty, or
First Principle of all things.

How the Plastic Nature is in general to be conceived, Aristotle instructs us
in these words, Phys. l. 2. c. 8.
(...)^ If the Naupegical Art, that is the Art of the Shipwright, were in the
Timber it self, Operatively and Effectually, it would there act just as Nature
does. And the Case is the same for all other Arts; If the Oecodomical Art,
which is in the Mind of the Architect, were supposed to be transfused into the
Stones, Bricks and Mortar, there acting upon them in such a manner, as to make
them come together of themselves and range themselves into the Form of a
complete Edifice, as Amphion was said by his Harp, to have made the Stones
move, and place themselves Orderly of their own accord, and so to have built
the Walls of Thebes: Or if the Musical Art were conceived to be immediately in
the Instruments and Strings, animating them as a Living Soul, and making them
to move exactly according to the Laws of Harmony, without any External Impulse.
These and such like Instances, in Aristotle's Judgment, would be fit Iconisms
or Representations of the Plastic Nature, That being Art it self acting
Immediately upon the Matter as an inward Principle in it. To which purpose the
same Philosopher adds, that this thing might be further illustrated by an other
Instance or Resemblence, (...)^ Nature may be yet more clearly Resembled to the
Medicinal Art, when it is employed by the Physician, in curing himself. So that
the meaning of this Philosopher is, that Nature is to be conceived as Art
Acting not from without and at a Distance, but Immediately upon the thing it
self which is Formed by it. And thus we have the first General Conception of
the Plastic Nature, That it is Art it self, acting immediately on the Matter,
as an Inward Principle.

9. In the next Place we are to observe, that though the Plastic Nature be a
kind of Art, yet there are some Considerable Preeminences which it has above
Humane Art, the First whereof is this; That whereas Humane Art cannot act upon
the Matter otherwise than from without and at a distance, nor communicate it
self to it, but with a great deal of Tumult and Hurliburly, Noise and Clatter,
it using Hands and Axes, Saws and Hammers, and after this manner with much ado,
by Knockings and Thrustings, slowly introducing its Form or Idea (as for
Example of a Ship or House) into the Materials. Nature in the mean time is
another kind of Art, which Insinuating it self Immediately into things
themselves, and there acting more Commandingly upon the Matter as an Inward
Principle, does its Work Easily, Cleaverly and Silently. Nature is Art as it
were Incorporated and Imbodied in matter, which does not act upon it from
without Mechanically, but from within Vitally and Magically, Pl. Eu. 3. l. 8..
1.
(...), etc. Here are no Hands, nor Feet, nor any Instrument, Connate or
Adventitious, there being only need of Matter to work upon and to be brought
into a certain Form, and Nothing else. For it is manifest that the Operation of
Nature is different from Mechanism, it doing not its Work by Trusion or
Pulsion, by Knockings or Thrustings, as if it were without that which it
wrought upon. But as God is Inward to every thing, so Nature Acts Immediately
upon the Matter, as an Inward and Living Soul or Law in it.

10. Another Preeminence of Nature above Humane Art is this, That whereas
Humane Artists are often to seek and at a loss, and therefore Consult and
Deliberate, as also upon second thoughts mend their former Work; Nature, on the
contrary, is never to seek what to do, nor at a stand; and for that Reason also
(besides another that will be Suggested afterward) it does never Consult nor
Deliberate. Indeed Aristotle Intimates, as if this had been the Grand Objection
of the old Atheistick Philosophers against the Plastic Nature, That because we
do not see Natural Bodies to Consult or Deliberate, therefore there could be
Nothing of Art, Counsel or Contrivanee in them, but all came to pass
Fortuitously. But he confutes it after this manner: Phys. l. 2. c. 8.
(...)^ It is absurd for Men to think nothing to be done for Ends, if they do
not see that which moves to consult, although Art it self does not Consult.
Whence he concludes that Nature may Act Artificially, Orderly and Methodically,
for the sake of Ends, though it never Consult or Deliberate. Indeed Humane
Artists themselves do not Consult properly as they are Artists, but when ever
they do it, it is for want of Art, and because they are to seek, their Art
being Imperfect and Adventitious: but Art it self or Perfect Art, is never to
seek, and therefore does never Consult or Deliberate. And Nature is this Art,
which never hesitates nor studies, as unresolved what to do, but is always
readily prompted; nor does it ever repent afterward of what it has formerly
done, or go about, as it were upon second thoughts, to alter and mend its
former Course, but it goes on in one Constant, Unrepenting Tenor, from
Generation to Generation, because it is the Stamp or Impress of that Infallibly
Omniscient Art, of the Divine Understanding, which is the very Law and Rule of
what is Simply the Best in every thing.

And thus we have seen the Difference between Nature and Humane Art; that the
Latter is Imperfect Art, acting upon the Matter from without, and at a
Distance; but the Former is Art it self or Perfect Art, acting as an Inward
Principle in it. Wherefore when Art is said to imitate Nature, the meaning
thereof is, that Imperfect Humane Art imitates that Perfect Art of Nature,
which is really no other than the Divine Art it self, as before Aristotle,
Plato had declared in his Sophist, in these words, (...)^ Those things which
are said to be done by Nature, are indeed done by Divine Art.

11. Notwithstanding which, we are to take notice in the next place, that as
Nature is not the Deity it self, but a Thing very remote from it and far below
it, so neither is it the Divine Art, as it is in it self Pure and Abstract, but
Concrete and Embodied only; for the Divine Art considered in it self, is
nothing but Knowledge, Understanding or Wisdom in the Mind of God: Now
Knowledge and Understanding, in its own Nature is (...), a certain Separate and
Abstract thing, and of so Subtle and Refined a Nature, as that it is not
Capable of being Incorporated with Matter, or Mingled and Blended with it, as
the Soul of it. And therefore Aristotle's Second Instance, which he propounds
as most pertinent to Illustrate this business of Nature by, namely of the
Physicians Art curing himself, is not so adequate thereunto; because when the
Medicinal Art Cures the Physician in whom it is, it does not there Act as
Nature, that is, as Concrete and Embodied Art, but as Knowledge and
Understanding only, which is Art Naked, Abstract and Unbodied; as also it does
its Work Ambagiously, by the Physician's Willing and Prescribing to himself,
the use of such Medicaments, as do but conduce, by removing of Impediments, to
help that which is Nature indeed, or the Inward Archeus to effect the Cure. Art
is defined by Aristotle, to be (...), The Reason of the thing without Matter;
and so the Divine Art or Knowledge in the Mind of God is Unbodied Reason; but
Nature is Ratio Mersa and Confusa, Reason Immersed and Plunged into Matter, and
as it were Fuddled in it, and Confounded with it. Nature is not the Divine Art
Archetypal, but only Ectypal, it is a living Stamp or Signature of the Divine
Wisdom, which though it act exactly according to its Arthetype, yet it does not
at all Comprehend nor Understand the Reason of what it self does. And the
Difference between these two, may be resembled to that between the (...), the
Reason of the Mind and Conception, called Verbum Mentis, and the (...), The
Reason of External Speech; the Latter of which though it bear a certain Stamp
and Impress of the Former upon it, yet it self is nothing but Articulate Sound,
devoid of all Understanding and Sense. Or else we may Illustrate this business
by another Similitude, comparing the Divine Art and Wisdom to an Architect, but
Nature to a Manuary Opificer; the Difference betwixt which two is thus set
forth by Aristotle pertinently to our purpose; M^t. l. 1. c. ^,
(...) (...). We account the Architects in every thing more honorable than the
Manuary Opificers, because they understand the Reason of the things done,
whereas the other, as some Inanimate things, only Do, not knowing what they Do:
the Difference between them being only this, that Inanimate Things Act by a
certain Nature in them, but the Manuary Opificer by Habit. Thus Nature may be
called the (...) or Manuary Opificer that Acts subserviently under the
Architectonical Art and Wisdom of the Divine Understanding, (...), which does
Do without Knowing the Reason of what ^t Does.

12. Wherefore as we did before observe the Preeminences of Nature above Humane
Art, so we must here take Notice also of the Imperfections and Defects of it,
in which respect it falls short of Humane Art, which are likewise Two; and the
First of them is this, That though it Act Artificially for the sake of Ends,
yet it self does neither Intend those Ends, nor Understand the Reason of that
it does. Nature is not Master of that Consummate Art and Wisdom according to
which it acts, but only a Servant to it, and a Drudging Executioner of the
Dictates of it. This Difference betwixt Nature and Abstract Art or Wisdom is
expressed by Plotinus in these words: En. 4. l. 4. c. 13.
(...). How does Wisdom differ from that which is called Nature? Verily in this
Manner, That Wisdom is the First Thing, but Nature the Last and Lowest; for
Nature is but an Image or Imitation of Wisdom, the Last thing of the Soul,
which has the lowest Impress of Reason shining upon it; as when a thick piece
of Wax, is thoroughly impressed upon by a Seal, that Impress which is clear and
distinct in the superior Superficies of it, will in the lower side be weak and
obscure; and such is the Stamp and Signature of Nature, compared with that of
Wisdom and Understanding, Nature being a thing which does only Do, but not
Know. And elsewhere the same Writer declares the Difference between the
Spermatick (...), En. 2. l. 3. s. 17.
or Reasons, and Knowledges or Conceptions of the Mind in this manner; (...).
Whether are these Plastic Reasons or Forms in the Soul Knowledges? But how
shall it then Act according to those Knowledges? For the Plastic Reason or
Form Acts or Works in Matter, and that which acts Naturally is not Intellection
nor Vision, but a certain Power of moving Matter, which does not Know, but only
Do, and makes as it were a Stamp or Figure in Water.

And with this Doctrine of the Ancients, a Modern Judicious Writer and
Sagacious Inquirer into Nature, seems fully to agree, that Nature is such a
Thing as does not Know but only Do: For after he had admired that Wisdom and
Art by which the Bodies of Animals are framed, he concludes that one or other
of these two things must needs be acknowledged, that either the Vegetative or
Plastic Power of the Soul, by which it Fabricates and Organizes its own body,
is more Excellent and Divine than the Rational; Or else, Harv. Genesis Ex. 49.
In Naturae Operibus neque Prudentiam nec Intellectum inesse, sedita solum
videri Conceptui nostro, qui secundum Arts nostras and Facultates, seu
Exemplaria a nobismetipsis mutuata, de rebus Naturae divinis judicamus; Quasi
Principia Naturae Activa, effectus suos eo modo producerent, quo nos opera
nostra Artificialia solemus: That in the Works of Nature there is neither
Prudence nor Understanding, but only it seems so to our Apprehensions, who
judge of these Divine things of Nature, according to our own Arts and
Faculties, and Patterns borrowed from our selves; as if the Active Principles
of Nature did produce their Effects in the same manner, as we do our Artificial
Works. Wherefore we conclude, agreeably to the Sense of the best Philosophers,
both Ancient and Modern, That Nature is such a Thing, as though it act
Artificially and for the sake of Ends, yet it does but Ape and Mimick the
Divine Art and Wisdom, it self not Understanding those Ends which it Acts for,
nor the Reason of what it does in order to them; for which Cause also it is not
Capable of Consultation or Deliberation, nor can it Act Electively or with
Discretion.

13. But because this may seem strange at the first sight, that Nature should
be said to Act (...), for the sake of Ends, and Regularly or Artificially, and
yet be it self devoid of Knowledge and Understanding, we shall therefore
endeavor to persuade the Possibility, and facilitate the Belief of it, by some
other Instances; and first by that of Habits, particularly those Musical ones,
of Singing, Playing upon Instruments, and Dancing. Which Habits direct every
Motion of the Hand, Voice, and Body, and prompt them readily, without any
Deliberation or Studied Consideration, what the next following Note or Motion
should be. If you jogg a sleeping Musician, and sing but the first Words of a
Song to him, which he had either himself composed, or learnt before, he will
presently take it from you, and that perhaps before he is thoroughly awake,
going on with it, and singing out the remainder of the whole Song to the End.
Thus the Fingers of an exercised Lutonist, and the Legs and whole Body of a
skilful Dancer, are directed to move Regularly and Orderly, in a long Train and
Series of Motions, by those Artificial Habits in them, which do not themselves
at all comprehend those Laws and Rules of Music or Harmony, by which they are
governed: So that the same thing may be said of these Habits, which was said
before of Nature, That they do not Know, but only Do. And thus we see there is
no Reason, why this Plastic Nature (which is supposed to move Body Regularly
and Artificially) should be thought to be an Absolute Impossibility, since
Habits do in like manner, Gradually Evolve themselves, in a long Train or
Series of Regular and Artificial Motions, readily prompting the doing of them,
without comprehending that Art and Reason by which they are directed. The
forementioned Philosopher illustrates the Seminary Reason and Plastic Nature
of the Universe, by this very Instance: En. 3. l. 2. s. 16.
(...). The Energy of Nature is Artificial, as when a Dancer moves; for a
Dancer resembles this Artificial Life of Nature, forasmuch as Art it self moves
him, and so moves him as being such a Life in him. And agreeably to this
Conceit, the Ancient Mythologists represented the Nature of the Universe, by
Pan Playing upon a Pipe or Harp, and being in love with the Nymph Echo; as if
Nature did, by a kind of Silent Melody, make all the Parts of the Universe
every where Dance in measure and Proportion, it self being as it were in the
mean time delighted and ravished with the Reecchoing of its own Harmony. Habits
are said to be an Adventitious and Acquired Nature, and Nature was before
defined by the Stoics to be (...), or a Habit: so that there seems to be no
other Difference between these two, than this, that whereas the One is Acquired
by Teaching, Industry and Exercise; the other, as was expressed by Hippocrates,
is (...), Unlearned and Untaught, and may in some sense also be said to be
(...), Self-taught, though she be indeed always Inwardly Prompted, Secretly
Whispered into, and Inspired, by the Divine Art and Wisdom.

14. Moreover, that something may Act Artificially and for Ends, without
Comprehending the Reason of what it does, may be further evinced from those
Natural Instincts that are in Animals, which without Knowledge direct them to
Act Regularly, in Order both to their own Good and the Good of the Universe. As
for Example; the Bees in Mellification, and in framing their Combs and
Hexagonial Cells, the Spiders in spinning their Webs, the Birds in building
their Nests, and many other Animals in such like Actions of theirs, which would
seem to argue a great Sagacity in them, whereas notwithstanding, as Aristotle
observes, (...)^ They do these things, neither by Art nor by Counsel nor by any
Deliberation of their own, and therefore are not Masters of that Wisdom
according to which they Act, but only Passive to the Instincts and Impresses
thereof upon them. And indeed to affirm, that Brute Animals do all these things
by a Knowledge of their own, and which themselves are Masters of, and that
without Deliberation and Consultation, were to make them to be endued with a
most Perfect Intellect, far transcending that of Humane Reason; whereas it is
plain enough, that Brutes are not above Consultation, but Below it, and that
these Instincts of Nature in them, are Nothing but a kind of Fate upon them.

15. There is in the next place another Imperfection to be observed in the
Plastic Nature, that as it does not comprehend the Reason of its own Action,
so neither is it Clearly and Expressly Conscious of what it does; in which
Respect, it does not only fall short of Humane Art, but even of that very
Manner of Acting which is in Brutes themselves, who though they do not
Understand the Reason of those Actions, that their Natural Instincts lead them
to, yet they are generally conceived to be Conscious of them, and to do them by
Fancy; whereas the Plastic Nature in the Formation of Plants and Animals,
seems to have no Animal Fancy, no Express (...), En. 4. L. 4. s. 13.
Con-sense or Consciousness of what it does. Thus the often Commended
Philosopher, (...). Nature has not so much as any Fancy in it; As
Intellection and Knowledge is a thing Superior to Fancy, so Fancy is
Superior to the Impress of Nature, for Nature has no Apprehension nor
Conscious Perception of any thing. In a Word, Nature is a thing that has no
such Self-perception or Self-injoyment in it, as Animals have.

16. Now we are well aware, that this is a Thing which the Narrow Principles of
some late Philosophers will not admit of, that there should be any Action
distinct from Local Motion besides Expressly Conscious Cogitation. For they
making the first General Heads of all Entity, to be Extension and Cogitation,
or Extended Being and Cogitative, and then supposing that the Essence of
Cogitation consists in Express Consciousness, must needs by this means exclude
such a Plastic Life of Nature, as we speak of, that is supposed to act without
Animal Fancy or Express Consciousness. Wherefore we conceive that the first
Heads of Being ought rather to be expressed thus; Resisting or Antitypous
Extension, and Life, (i.e. Internal Energy and Self-activity:) and then again,
that Life or Internal Self-activity, is to be subdivided into such as either
acts with express Consciousness and Synaesthesis, or such as is without it; the
Latter of which is this Plastic Life of Nature: So that there may be an Action
distinct from Local Motion, or a Vital Energy, which is not accompanied with
that Fancy, or Consciousness, that is in the Energies of the Animal Life; that
is, there may be a simple Internal Energy or Vital Autokinesie, which is
without that Duplication, that is included in the Nature of (...), Con-sense
and Consciousness, which makes a Being to be Present with it self, Attentive to
its own Actions, or Animadversive of them, to perceive it self to Do or Suffer,
and to have a Fruition or Enjoyment of it self. And indeed it must be granted,
that what moves Matter or determines the Motion of it Vitally, must needs do it
by some other Energy of its own, as it is Reasonable also to conceive, that it
self has some Vital Sympathy with that Matter which it Acts upon. But we
apprehend, that Both these may be without Clear and Express Consciousness. Thus
the Philosopher, En. 3. L. 2 c. 16.
(...). Every Life is Energie, even the worst of Lives, and therefore that of
Nature. Whose Energie is not like that of Fire, but such an Energie, as though
there be no Sense belonging to it, yet is it not Temerarious or Fortuitous, but
Orderly and Regular.

Wherefore this Controversy whether the Energy of the Plastic Nature, be
Cogitation, or no, seems to be but a Logomachy, or Contention about Words. For
if Clear and Express Consciousness be supposed to be included in Cogitation,
then it must needs be granted that Cogitation does not belong to the Plastic
Life of Nature: but if the Notion of that Word be enlarged so as to comprehend
all Action distinct from Local Motion, and to be of equal Extent with Life,
then the Energie of Nature is Cogitation.

Nevertheless if any one think fit to attribute some Obscure and Imperfect
Sense or Perception, different from that of Animals, to the Energie of Nature,
and will therefore call it a kind of Drowsy, Vnawakened, or Astonished
Cogitation, the Philosopher, before mentioned, will not very much gainsay it:
(...). En. 3. L. 8. S. 3.
If any will needs attribute some kind of Apprehension or Sense to Nature, then
it must not be such a Sense or Apprehension, as is in Animals, but something
that differs as much from it, as the Sense or Cogitation of one in a profound
sleep, differs from that of one who is awake. And since it cannot be denied but
that the Plastic Nature has a certain Dull and Obscure Idea of that which it
Stamps and Prints upon Matter, the same Philosopher himself sticks not to call
this Idea of Nature, (...) and (...), a Spectacle and Contemplamen, as likewise
the Energy of Nature toward it, (...), a Silent Contemplation; nay he allows,
that Nature may be said to be, in some Sense, (...), a Lover of Spectacles or
Contemplation.

17. However, that there may be some Vital Energy without Clear and Express
(...), Con-sense and Consciousness, Animadversion, Attention, or
Self-perception, seems reasonable upon several accounts. For first, those
Philosophers themselves, who make the Essence of the Soul to consist in
Cogitation, and again the Essence of Cogitation in Clear and Express
Consciousness, cannot render it any way probable, that the Souls of Men in all
profound Sleeps, Lethargies and Apoplexies, as also of Embryo's in the Womb,
from their very first arrival thither, are never so much as one moment without
Expressly Conscious Cogitations; which if they were, according to the Principles
of their Philosophy, they must, ipso facto, cease to have any Being. Now if the
Souls of Men and Animals be at any time without Consciousness and
Self-perception, then it must needs be granted, that Clear and Express
Consciousness is not Essential to Life. There is some appearance of Life and
Vital Sympathy in certain Vegetables and Plants, which however called Sensitive
Plants and Plant-animals, cannot well be supposed to have Animal Sense and
Fancy, or Express Consciousness in them; although we are not ignorant in the
mean time, how some endeavor to salve all those Phenomenon Mechanically. It is
certain, that our Humane Souls themselves are not always Conscious, of whatever
they have in them; for even the Sleeping Geometrician, has at that time, all
his Geometrical Theorems and Knowledges some way in him; as also the Sleeping
Musician, all his Musical Skill and Songs: and therefore why may it not be
possible for the Soul to have likewise some Actual Energie in it, which it is
not Expressly Conscious of? We have all Experience, of our doing many Animal
Actions Non-attendingly, which we reflect upon afterward; as also that we
often continue a long Series of Bodily Motions, by a mere Virtual Intention of
our Minds, and as it were by Half a Cogitation. That Vital Sympathy, by which
our Soul is united and tied fast, as it were with a Knot, to the Body, is a
thing that we have no direct Consciousness of, but only in its Effects. Nor can
we tell how we come to be so differently affected in our Souls, from the many
different Motions made upon our Bodies. As likewise we are not Conscious to our
selves of that Energy, whereby we impress Variety of Motions and Figurations
upon the Animal Spirits of our Brain in our Fantastic Thoughts. For though
the Geometrician perceive himself to make Lines, Triangles and Circles in the
Dust, with his Finger, yet he is not aware, how he makes all those same
Figures, first upon the Corporeal Spirits of his Brain, from whence
notwithstanding, as from a Glass, they are reflected to him, Fancy being
rightly concluded by Aristotle to be a Weak and Obscure Sense. There is also
another more Interior kind of Plastic Power in the Soul (if we may so call
it) whereby it is Formative of its own Cogitations, which it self is not always
Conscious of; as when in Sleep or Dreams, it frames Interlocutory Discourses
betwixt it self and other Persons, in a long Series, with Coherent Sense and
Apt Connexions, in which oftentimes it seems to be surprised with unexpected
Answers and Reparties; though it self were all the while the Poet and Inventor
of the whole Fable. Not only our Nictations for the most part when we are
awake, but also our Nocturnal Volutations in Sleep, are performed with very
little or no Consciousness. Respiration or that Motion of the Diaphragmae and
other Muscles which causes it (there being no sufficient Mechanical account
given of it) may well be concluded to be always a Vital Motion, though it be
not always Animal; since no man can affirm that he is perpetually Conscious to
himself, of that Energy of his Soul, which does produce it when he is awake,
much less when asleep. And Lastly, the Cartesian Attempts to salve the Motion
of the Heart Mechanically, seem to be abundantly confuted, by Autopsy and
Experiment, evincing the Systole of the Heart to be a Muscular Constriction,
caused by some Vital Principle, to make which, nothing but a Pulsifick
Corporeal Quality in the Substance of the Heart it self, is very
Unphilosophical and Absurd. Now as we have no voluntary Imperium at all, upon
the Systole and Diastole of the Heart, so are we not conscious to our selves of
any Energy of our own Soul that causes them, and therefore we may reasonably
conclude from hence also, that there is some Vital Energy, without Animal Fancy
or Synaesthesis, express Consciousness and Self-perception.

18. Wherefore the Plastic Nature acting neither by Knowledge nor by Animal
Fancy, neither Electively nor Hormetically, must be concluded to act Fatally,
Magically and Sympathetically. And thus that Curious and Diligent Inquirer into
Nature, before commended, resolves, Natura tanquam Fato quodam, Harvey de Genesis
An.
seu Mandato secundum Leges operante, movet; Nature moves as it were by a kind
of Fate or Command, acting according to Laws. Fate, and the Laws or Commands of
the Deity, concerning the Mundane Economy (they being really the same thing)
ought not to be looked upon, neither as Verbal things, nor as mere Will and
Cogitation in the Mind of God; but as an Energetical and Effectual Principle,
constituted by the Deity, for the bringing of things decreed to pass. The
Aphrodisian Philosopher with others of the Ancients, have concluded, that Fate
and Nature are but two different Names, for one and the same thing, and that
(...), both that which is done Fatally, is done Naturally, and also whatever is
done Naturally, is done Fatally; but that which we assert in this place is only
this, that the Plastic Nature may be said to be, the True and Proper Fate of
Matter, or the Corporeal World. Now that which acts not by any Knowledge or
Fancy, Will or Appetite of its own, but only Fatally according to Laws and
Impresses made upon it (but differently in different Cases) may be said also to
act Magically and Sympathetically. (...) (says the Philosopher) (...), The
true Magic is the Friendship and Discord that is in the Universe; and again
Magic is said to be founded (...), In the Sympathy and Variety of diverse
Powers conspiring together into one Animal. Of which Passages, though the
Principal meaning seem to be this, that the ground of Magical Fascination, is
one Vital Vnitive Principle in the Universe; yet they imply also, that there is
a certain Vital Energy, not in the way of Knowledge and Fancy, Will and Animal
Appetite, but Fatally Sympathetical and Magical. As indeed that Mutual Sympathy
which we have constant Exp^rience of, betwixt our Soul and our Body, (being not
a Material and Mechanical, but Vital thing) may be called also Magical.

19. From what has been hitherto declared concerning the Plastic Nature, it
may appear; That though it be a thing that acts for Ends Artificially, and
which may be also called the Divine Art, and the Fate of the Corporeal World;
yet for all that it is neither God nor Goddess, but a Low and Imperfect
Creature. Forasmuch as it is not Master of that Reason and Wisdom according to
which it acts nor does it properly Intend those Ends which it acts for, nor
indeed is it Expressly Conscious of what it does; it not Knowing but only Doing,
according to Commands and Laws impressed upon it. Neither of which things ought
to seem strange or incredible, since Nature may as well act Regularly and
Artificially, without any Knowledge and Consciousness of its own, as Forms of
Letters compounded together, may Print Coherent Philosophic Sense, though they
understand nothing at all; and it may also act for the sake of those Ends, that
are not intended by it self, but some Higher Being, as well as the Saw or
Hatchet in the hand of the Architect or Mechanic does, Simplic. in Arist.
Phys. L. 2.
(...), the Ax cuts for the sake of something, though it self does not
ratiocinate, nor intend or design any thing, but is only subservient to that
which does so. It is true, that our Humane Actions are not governed by such
exact Reason, Art, and Wisdom, nor carried on with such Constancy, Eavenness
and Uniformity, as the Actions of Nature are; notwithstanding which, since we
act according to a Knowledge of our own, and are Masters of that Wisdom by
which our Actions are directed, since we do not act Fatally only, but
Electively and Intendingly, with Consciousness and Self-perception; the
Rational Life that is in us, ought to be accounted a much Higher and more Noble
Perfection, than that Plastic Life of Nature. Nay, this Plastic Nature, is so
far from being the First and Highest Life, that it is indeed the Last and
Lowest of all Lives; it being really the same thing with the Vegetative, which
is Inferior to the Sensitive. The difference betwixt Nature and Wisdom was
before observed, that Wisdom is the First and Highest thing, but Nature the
Last and Lowest; this latter being but an Umbratile Imitation of the former.
And to this purpose, this Plastic Nature is further described by the same
Philosopher in these Words, En. 3. l. 2. c. 16.
(...). The Spermatick Reason or Plastic Nature, is no pure Mind or perfect
Intellect, nor any kind of pure Soul neither; but something which depends upon
it, being as it were an Effulgency or Eradiation, from both together, Mind and
Soul, or Soul affected according to Mind, generating the same as a Lower kind
of Life.

And though this Plastic Nature contain no small part of Divine Providence in
it, yet since it is a thing that cannot act Electively nor with Discretion, it
must needs be granted that there is a Higher and Diviner Providence than this,
which also presides over the Corporeal World it self, which was a thing
likewise insisted upon by that Philosopher, (...)^ En. 4. l. 4. c. 39.
The things in the world, are not administered merely by Spermatick Reasons, but
by Perileptick (that is, Comprehensive Intellectual Reasons) which are in order
of Nature before the other, because in the Spermatick Reasons cannot be
contained that which is contrary to them, etc. Where though this Philosopher
may extend his Spermatick Reasons further than we do our Plastic Nature in
this place, (which is only confined to the Motions of Matter) yet he concludes,
that there is a higher Principle presiding over the Universe than this. So that
it is not Ratio mersa and confusa, a Reason drowned in Matter, and confounded
with it, which is the Supreme Governor of the World, but a Providence
perfectly Intellectual, Abstract and Released.

20. But though the Plastic Nature be the Lowest of all Lives, nevertheless
since it is a Life, it must needs be Incorporeal; all Life being such. For Body
being nothing but Antitypous Extension, or Resisting Bulk, nothing but mere
Outside, Aliud extra Aliud, together with Passive Capability, has no Internal
Energy, Self-activity, or Life belonging to it; it is not able so much as to
Move it self, and therefore much less can it Artificially direct its own
Motion. Moreover, in the Efformation of the Bodies of Animals, it is One and
the selfsame thing that directs the Whole; that which Contrives and Frames the
Eye, cannot be a distinct thing from that which Frames the Ear; nor that which
makes the Hand, from that which makes the Foot; the same thing which delineates
the Veins, must also form the Arteries; and that which fabricates the Nerves,
must also project the Muscles and Joints; it must be the same thing that
designs and Organizes the Heart and Brain, with such Communications betwixt
them; One and the self-same thing must needs have in it, the entire Idea and
the complete Model or Platform of the whole Organick Body. For the several
parts of Matter distant from one another, acting alone by themselves, without
any common Directrix, being not able to confer together, nor communicate with
each other, could never possibly conspire to make up one such uniform and
Orderly System or Compages, as the Body of every Animal is. The same is to be
said likewise concerning the Plastic Nature of the whole Corporeal Universe,
in which (...), all things are ordered together conspiringly into One. It must
be one and the same thing, which forms the whole, or else it could never have
fallen into such an Uniform Order and Harmony. Now that which is One and the
Same, acting upon several distant parts of Matter, cannot be Corporeal.

Indeed Aristotle is severely censured by some learned men for this, that
though he talk every where of such a Nature as acts Regularly, Artificially and
Methodically, in order to the Best, yet he does no where positively declare
whether this Nature of his be Corporeal or Incorporeal, Substantial or
Accidental, which yet is the less to be wondered at in him, because he does not
clearly determine these same points concerning the Rational Soul neither, but
seems to stagger uncertainly about them. In the mean time it cannot be denied,
but that Aristotle's Followers do for the most part conclude this Nature of his
to be Corporeal; whereas notwithstanding, according to the Principles of this
Philosophy, it cannot possibly be such: For there is nothing else attributed to
Body in it, besides these three, Matter, Form and Accidents; neither of which
can be the Aristotelick Nature. First, it cannot be Matter; because Nature,
according to Aristotle, is supposed to be the Principle of Motion and Activity,
which Matter in it self is devoid of. Moreover Aristotle concludes, that they
who assign only a Material Cause, assign no Cause at all (...), of well and
fit, of that Regular and Artificial Frame of things which is ascribed to
Nature; upon both which accounts, it is determined by that Philosopher, that
(...), Nature is more a Principle and Cause than Matter, and therefore it
cannot be one and the same thing with it. Again, it is as plain, that
Aristotle's Nature cannot be the Forms of particular Bodies neither, as Vulgar
Peripateticks seem to conceive, these being all Generated and Produced by
Nature, and as well Corruptible as Generable. Whereas Nature is such a thing as
is neither Generated nor Corrupted, it being the Principle and Cause of all
Generation and Corruption. To make Nature and the Material Forms of Bodies to
be one and the self-same thing, is all one as if one should make the Seal (with
the Stamper too) to be one and the same thing, with the Signature upon the Wax.
And Lastly, Aristotle's Nature can least of all be the Accidents or Qualities
of Bodies; because these act only in Virtue of their Substance, neither can
they exercise any Active Power over the Substance it self in which they are;
whereas the Plastic Nature is a thing that Domineers over the Substance of the
whole Corporeal Universe, and which Subordinately to the Deity, put both Heaven
and Earth into this Frame in which now it is. Wherefore since Aristotle's
Nature can be neither the Matter, nor the Forms, nor the Accidents of Bodies,
it is plain, that according to his own Principles, it must be Incorporeal.

21. Now if the Plastic Nature be Incorporeal, then it must of necessity, be
either an Inferior Power or Faculty of some Soul which is also Conscious,
Sensitive or Rational; or else a lower Substantial Life by it self, devoid of
Animal Consciousness. The Platonists seem to affirm both these together, namely
that there is a Plastic Nature lodged in all particular Souls of Animals,
Brutes and Men, and also that there is a General Plastic or Spermatick
Principle of the whole Universe distinct from their Higher Mundane Soul, though
subordinate to it, and dependent upon it, (...)^ That which is called Nature,
is the Offspring of an higher Soul, which has a more Powerful Life in it. And
though Aristotle do not so clearly acknowledge the Incorporeity and
Substantiality of Souls, yet he concurrs very much with this Platonic
Doctrine, that Nature is either a Lower Power or Faculty of some Conscious
Soul, or else an Inferior kind of Life by it self, depending upon a Superior
Soul.

And this we shall make to appear from his Book De Partibus Animalium, L. 1. c.
1.
after we have taken notice of some considerable Preliminary Passages in it in
order thereunto. For having first declared, that besides the Material Cause,
there are other Causes also of Natural Generations, namely these two, (...),
that for whose sake, (or the Final Cause) and that from which the Principle of
Motion is, (or the Efficient Cause) he determines that the former of these Two,
is the principal, (...). The chiefest of these two Causes seems to be the Final
or the Intending Cause; for this is Reason, and Reason is alike a Principle in
Artificial and in Natural things. Nay the Philosopher adds excellently, that
there is more of Reason and Art, in the things of Nature, than there is in
those things that are Artificially made by men, (...)^ There is more of Final
or Intending Causality and of the reason of Good, in the works of Nature than
in those of Humane Art. After which he greatly complains of the first and most
Ancient Physiologers, meaning thereby Anaximander, and those other Ionicks
before Anaxagoras, that they considered only (...), the Material Principle and
Cause of things, without attending to those Two other Causes, the Principle of
Motion, and that which aims at Ends, they talking only, of Fire, Water, Air and
Earth, and generating the whole World, from the Frotuitous Concourse of these
Senseless Bodies. But at length Aristotle falls upon Democritus, who being
Junior to those others before mentioned, Philosophised after the same
Atheistical manner, but in a new way of his own, by Atoms; acknowledging no
other Nature, neither in the Universe, nor in the Bodies of Animals, than that
of Fortuitous Mechanism, and supposing all things to arise from the different
Compositions of Magnitudes, Figures, Sites, and Motions. Of which Democritick
Philosophy, he gives his Censure in these following words, De part. An. Lib. 1.
cap. 1.
(...), etc. If Animals and their several parts did consist of nothing but
Figure and Color, then indeed Democritus would be in the right: But a Dead man
has the same Form and Figure of Body, that he had before, and yet for all that
he is not a Man; neither is a Brazen or Wooden Hand a Hand, but only
Equivocally, as a Painted Physician, or Pipes made of Stone are so called. No
member of a Dead Man's Body, is that which it was before, when he was alive,
neither Eye, nor Hand, nor Foot. Wherefore this is but a rude way of
Philosophizing, and just as if a Carpenter should talk of a Wooden Hand. For
thus these Physiologers declare the Generations and Causes of Figures only, or
the Matter out of which things are made, as Air and Earth. Whereas no Artificer
would think it sufficient, to render such a Cause of any Artificial Fabric,
because the Instrument happened to fall so upon the Timber, that therefore it
was Hollow here and Plane there; but rather because himself made such strokes,
and for such Ends, etc.

Now in the close of all, this Philosopher at length declares, That there is
another Principle of Corporeal things, besides the Material, and such as is not
only the Cause of Motion, but also acts Artificially in order to Ends, (...),
there is such a thing as that which we call Nature, that is, not the Fortuitous
Motion of Senseless Matter, but a Plastic Regular and Artificial Nature, such
as acts for Ends and Good; declaring in the same place, what this Nature is,
namely that it is (...), Soul, or Part of Soul, or not without Soul; and from
thence inferring, that it properly belongs to a Physiologer, to treat
concerning the Soul also. But he concludes afterward, (...), that the whole
Soul is not Nature; whence it remains, that according to Aristotle's sense,
Nature is (...), either part of a Soul or not without Soul, that is, either a
lower Part or Faculty of some Conscious Soul; or else an Inferior kind of Life
by it self, which is not without Soul, but Suborditate to it and dependent on
it.

22. As for the Bodies of Animals Aristotle first resolves in General, that
Nature in them is either the whole Soul, or else some part of it, (...), Nature
as the Moving Principle, or as that which acts Artificially for Ends, (so far
as concerns the Bodies of Animals) is either the whole Soul, or else some Part
of it. But afterward he determines more particularly, that the Plastic Nature
is not the whole Soul in Animals, but only some part of it; (...), that is,
Nature in Animals, properly so called, is some Lower Power or Faculty lodged in
their respective Souls, whether Sensitive or Rational.

And that there is Plastic Nature in the Souls of Animals, the same Aristotle
elsewhere affirms and proves after this manner: De An. l. 1. c. 4.
(...)^ What is that which in the Bodies of Animals holds together such things
as of their own Nature would otherwise move contrary ways, and fly asunder, as
Fire and Earth, which would be distracted and dissipated, the one tending
upwards, the other downwards, were there not something to hinder them: now if
there be any such thing, this must be the Soul, which is also the Cause of
Nourishment and Augmentation. Where the Philosopher adds, that though some were
of Opinion, that Fire was that which was the Cause of Nourishment and
Augmentation in Animals, yet this was indeed but (...), only the Concause or
Instrument, and not simply the Cause, but rather the Soul. And to the same
purpose he philosophizeth elsewhere, De Resp. ^. ^.
(...)^ Neither is Concoction by which Nourishment is made in Animals done
without the Soul, nor without Heat, for all things are done by Fire.

And certainly it seems very agreeable to the Phenomenon, to acknowledge
something in the Bodies of Animals Superior to Mechanism, as that may well be
thought to be, which keeps the more fluid parts of them constantly in the same
Form and Figure, so as not to be enormously altered in their Growth by
disproportionate nourishment; that which restores Flesh that was lost,
consolidates dissolved Continuities, Incorporates the newly received
Nourishment, and joins it Continuously with the preexistent parts of Flesh and
Bone; which regenerates and repairs Veins consumed or cut off; which causes
Dentition in so regular a manner, and that not only in Infants, but also Adult
persons; that which casts off Excrements and discharges Superfluities; which
makes things seem ungrateful to an Interior Sense, that were notwithstanding
pleasing to the Taste. That Nature of Hippocrates, that is the Curatrix of
Diseases, (...), and that Archeus of the Chemists or Paracelsians, to which all
Medicaments are but Subservient, as being able to effect nothing of themselves
without it. I say, there seems to be such a Principle as this in the Bodies of
Animals, which is not Mechanical but Vital; and therefore since Entities are
not to be multiplied without necessity, we may with Aristotle conclude it to be
(...) or (...), a certain part of the Soul of those Animals, or a Lower
Inconscious Power lodged in them.

23. Besides this Plastic Nature which is in Animals, forming their several
Bodies Artificially, as so many Microcosms or Little Worlds, there must be also
a general Plastic Nature in the Macrocosm the whole Corporeal Universe, that
which makes all things thus to conspire every where, and agree together into
one Harmony. Concerning which Plastic Nature of the Universe, the Author de
Mundo writes after this manner, (...), One Power passing thorough all things,,
ordered and formed the whole World. Again he calls the same (...), a Spirit,
and a Living and Generative Nature, and plainly declares it, to be a thing
distinct from the Deity, but Subordinate to it and dependent on it. But
Aristotle himself in that genuine Work of his before mentioned, speaks clearly
and positively concerning this Plastic Nature of the Universe, as well as that
of Animals, De Part. An. lib. 1. c. 1.
in these words, (...)^ It seems, that as there is Art in Artificial things,
so in the things of Nature, there is another such like Principle or Cause,
which we our selves partake of; in the same manner as we do of Heat and Cold,
from the Universe. Wherefore it is more probable that the whole World was at
first made by such a Cause as this (if at least it were made) and that it is
still conserved by the same, than that Mortal Animals should be so: For there
is much more of Order and determinate Regularity, in the Heavenly Bodies than
in our selves; but more of Fortuitousness and inconstant Regularity among these
Mortal things. Notwithstanding which, some there are, who, though they cannot
but acknowledge that the Bodies of Animals were all framed by an Artificial
Nature, yet they will needs contend that the System of the Heavens sprung
merely from Fortune and Chance; although there be not the least appearance of
Fortuitousness or Temerity in it. And then he sums up all into this Conclusion,
(...)^ Wherefore it is manifest, that there is some such thing as that which we
call Nature, that is, that there is not only an Artificial, Methodical and
Plastic Nature in Animals, by which their respective Bodies are Framed and
Conserved; but also that there is such a General Plastic Nature likewise in
the Universe, by which the Heavens and whole World are thus Artificially
Ordered and Disposed.

24. Now whereas Aristotle in the forecited Words, tells us, that we partake of
Life and Understanding, from that in the Universe, after the same manner as we
partake of Heat and Cold, from that Heat and Cold that is in the Universe; It
is observable, that this was a Notion borrowed from Socrates; (as we understand
both from Xenophon and Plato) that Philosopher having used it as an
Argumentation to prove a Deity. And the Sense of it is represented after this
manner by the Latin Poet; Principio Coelum ac Terram, Camposque Liquentes,
Lucentemque Globum Lunae, Titaniaque Astra,
Spiritus intus alit, totosque Infusa per Artus,
Men's agitat Molem, and Magno se Corpore miscet.
Inde Hominum Pecudumque Genus, Vitaeque Volantum.
From whence it may be collected, that Aristotle did suppose, this Plastic
Nature of the Universe to be, (...), Either Part of some Mundane Soul, that was
also Conscious and Intellectual, (as that Plastic Nature in Animals is) or at
least some Inferior Principle, depending on such a Soul. And indeed whatever
the Doctrine of the modern Peripateticks be, we make no doubt at all, but that
Aristotle himself held the Worlds Animation, or a Mundane Soul; Forasmuch as he
plainly declares himself concerning it, elsewhere in his Book De Coelo, after
this manner; Lib. c. 2:12.
(...)^ But we commonly think of the Heavens, as nothing else but Bodies and
Monads, having only a certain Order, but altogether ina^imate; wh^r^as we ought
on the contrary to conceive of them, as partaking of Life, and Action: that is,
as being endued with a Rational or Intellectual Life. For so Simplicius there
rightly expounds the place, (...)^ But we ought to think of the Heavens, as
Animated with a Rational Soul, and thereby partaking of Action and Rational
Life. For (says he) though (...) be affirmed not only of Irrational Souls, but
also of Inanimate Bodies, yet the word (...) does only denominate Rational
Beings. But further, to take away all manner of scruple or doubt, concerning
this business; that Philosopher before in the same Book, (...) affirms,
(...), That the Heaven is Animated, and has a Principle of Motion within it
self: Where by the Heaven, as in many other places of Aristotle and Plato, is
to be understood the Whole World.

There is indeed One Passage in the same Book De Coelo, which at first sight,
and slightly considered, may seem to contradict this again, and therefore
probably is that, which has led many into a contrary Persuasion, that
Aristotle denied the Worlds Animation, L. 2. c. 1.
(...). But it is not reasonable neither, to think that the Heavens continue to
Eternity, moved by a Soul necessitating, or violently compelling them. Nor
indeed is it possible, that the Life of such a Soul should be pleasurable or
happy. Forasmuch as the continual Violent Motion of a Body (naturally inclining
to move another way) must needs be a very unquiet thing, and void of all Mental
Repose; especially when there is no such Relaxation, as the Souls of Mortal
Animals have by sleep; and therefore such a Soul of the World as this, must of
necessity be condemned to an Eternal Ixionian Fate. But in these Words
Aristotle does not deny the Heavens to be moved by a Soul of their own, (which
is positively affirmed by him elsewhere) but only by such a Soul, as should
Violently and Forcibly agitate, or drive them round, contrary to their own
Natural Inclination, whereby in the mean time, they tended downwards of
themselves toward the Center. And his sense, concerning the Motion of the
Heavens, is truly represented by Simplicius in this manner, (...)^ The whole
World or Heaven, being as well a natural, as an Animalish Body, is moved
properly by Soul, but yet by means of Nature also, as an Instrument, so that
the Motion of it is not Violent. But whereas Aristotle there insinuates, as if
Plato had held the Heavens to be moved, by a Soul violently, contrary to their
Nature; Simplicius, though sufficiently addicted to Aristotle, ingenuously
acknowledges his Error herein, and vindicating Plato from that Imputation,
shows how he likewise held a Plastic Nature, as well as a Mundane Soul; and
that amongst his Ten Instances of Motion, De ^eg l. 10.
the Ninth is that of Nature, (...)^ that which always moves another, being it
self changed by something else; as the Tenth, that of the Mundane Soul, (...),
that which originally both moves it self and other things: as if his Meaning in
that place were, That though Nature be a Life and Internal Energy, yet it acts
Subserviently to a Higher Soul, as the First Original Mover.

But the Grand Objection against Aristotle's holding the Worlds Animation, is
still behind; namely from that in his Metaphysics, where he determines the
Highest Starry Heaven, to be moved by an Immovable Mover, commonly supposed to
be the Deity it self, and no Soul of the World; and all the other Spheres
likewise, to be moved by so many Separate Intelligencies, and not by Souls. To
which we reply, that indeed Aristotle's First Immovable Mover is no Mundane
Soul, but an Abstract Intellect Separate from Matter, and the very Deity it
self; whose manner of moving the Heavens is thus described by him, (...), It
Moves only as being Loved: wherefore besides this Supreme Vnmoved Mover, that
Philosopher supposed another Inferior Moved Mover also, that is, a Mundane
Soul, as the Proper and Immediate Efficient Cause of the Heavenly Motions; of
which he speaks after this manner, (...), that which it self being moved,
(objectively, or by Appetite and Desire of the First Good) moves other things.
And thus that safe and sure-footed Interpreter, Alex. Aphrodisius, expounds his
Masters Meaning; That the Heaven being Animated, and therefore indeed Moved by
an Internal Principle of its own, is notwithstanding Originally moved, by a
certain Immovable and Separate Nature, which is above Soul, Quaest. Not. L. 1.
c. 1.
(...), both by its contemplating of it, and having an Appetite and Desire, of
assimilating it self thereunto. Aristotle seeming to have borrowed this Notion
from Plato, who makes the Constant Regular Circumgyration of the Heavens, to be
an Imitation of the Motion or Energy of Intellect. So that Aristotle's First
Mover, is not properly the Efficient, but only the Final and Objective Cause,
of the Heavenly Motions, the Immediate Efficient Cause thereof being (...),
Soul and Nature.

Neither may this be Confuted from those other Aristotelick Intelligences of
the Lesser Orbs; that Philosopher conceiving in like manner concerning them,
that they were also the Abstract Minds or Intellects of certain other inferior
Souls, which moved their several Respective Bodies or Orbs, Circularly and
Uniformly, in a kind of Imitation of them. For this plainly appears from hence,
in that he a^firms of these his Inferior Intelligences likewise as well as of
the Supreme Mover, that they do (...), Move only as the end.

Where it is Evident, that though Aristotle did plainly suppose a Mundane
Intellectual Soul, such as also contained, either in it, or under it, a
Plastic Nature, yet he did not make either of these to be the Supreme Deity;
but resolved the First Principle of things, to be One Absolutely Perfect Mind
or Intellect, Separate from Matter, which was (...), an Immovable Nature,
whose Essence was his Operation, and which Moved only as being Loved, or as the
Final Cause: of which he pronounces in this manner, Met. L. 14. c. ^. Par.
(...), That upon such a Principle as this, Heaven and Nature depends; that is,
the Animated Heaven, or Mundane Soul, together with the Plastic Nature of the
Universe, must of necessity depend upon such an Absolutely Perfect, and
Immovable Mind or Intellect.

Having now declared the Aristotelick Doctrine concerning the Plastic Nature
of the Universe, with which the Platonic also agrees, that it is, (...),
either Part of a Mundane Intellectual Soul, (that is a Lower Power and Faculty
of it) or else not without it, but some inferior thing depending on it; we
think sit to add in this place, that though there were no such Mundane Soul, as
both Plato and Aristotle supposed, distinct from the Supreme Deity, yet th^re
might notwithstanding be a Plastic Nature of the Universe, depending
immediately upon the Deity it self. For the Plastic Nature essentially depends
upon Mind or Intellect, and could not possibly be without it; according to
those words before cited, (...), Nature depends upon such an Intellectual
Principle; and for this Cause that Philosopher does elsewhere join (...) and
(...), Mind and Nature both together.

25. Besides this General Plastic Nature of the Universe, and those Particular
Plastic Powers in the Souls of Animals, it is not impossible but that there
may be other Plastic Natures also (as certain Lower Lives, or Vegetative
Souls) in some Greater Parts of the Universe; all of them depending, if not
upon some higher Conscious Soul, yet at least upon a Perfect Intellect,
presiding over the whole. As for Example; Though it be not reasonable to think,
that every Plant, Herb and Pile of Grass, has a Particular Plastic Life, or
Vegetative Soul of its own, distinct from the Mechanism of the Body; nor that
the whole Earth is an Animal endued with a Conscious Soul: yet there may
possibly be, for ought we know, one Plastic Nature or Life, belonging to the
whole Terrestrial (or Terraqueous) Globe, by which all Plants and Vegetables,
continuous with it, may be differently formed, according to their different
Seeds, as also Minerals and other Bodies framed, and whatsoever else is above
the Power of Fortuitous Mechanism effected, as by the Immediate Cause, though
always Subordinate to other Causes, the chief whereof is the Deity. And this
perhaps may ease the Minds of those, who cannot but think it too much, to
impose all upon one Plastic Nature of the Universe.

26. And now we have finished our First Task, which was to give an Account of
the Plastic Nature, the Sum whereof briefly amounts to this; That it is a
certain Lower Life than the Animal, which acts Regularly and Artificially,
according to the Direction of Mind and Understanding, Reason and Wisdom, for
Ends, or in Order to Good, though it self do not know the Reason of what it
does, nor is Master of that Wisdom according to which it acts, but only a
Servant to it, and Drudging Executioner of the same; it operating Fatally and
Sympathetically, according to Laws and Commands, prescribed to it by a Perfect
Intellect, and impressed upon it; and which is either a Lower Faculty of some
Conscious Soul, or else an Inferior kind of Life or Soul by it self; but
essentially depending upon an Higher Intellect.

We proceed to our Second Undertaking; which was to show, how grossly those Two
Sorts of Atheists before mentioned, the Stoical or Cosmo-plastick, and the
Stratonical or Hylozoick, both of them acknowledging this Plastic Life of
Nature, do mistake the Notion of it, or Pervert it and Abuse it, to make a
certain Spurious and Counterfeit God-Almighty of it, (or a First Principle of
all things) thereby excluding the True Omnipotent Deity, which is a Perfect
Mind, or Consciously Understanding Nature, presiding over the Universe; they
substituting this Stupid Plastic Nature in the room of it.

Now the Chief Errors or Mistakes of these Atheists concerning the Plastic
Nature, are these Four following. First, that they make that to be the First
Principle of all, and the Highest thing in the Universe, which is the Last and
Lowest of all Lives; a thing Essentially Secondary, Derivative and Dependent.
For the Plastic Life of Nature is but the mere Vmbrage of Intellectuality, a
faint and shadowy Imitation of Mind and Understanding; upon which it does as
Essentially depend, as the Shadow does upon the Body, the Image in the Glass
upon the Face, or the Echo upon the Original Voice. So that if there had been
no Perfect Mind or Intellect in the World, there could no more have been any
Plastic Nature in it, than there could be an Image in the Glass without a
Face, or an Echo without an Original Voice. If there be (...), then there must
be (...), if there be a Plastic Nature, that acts Regularly and Artificially
in Order to Ends, and according to the Best Wisdom, though it self not
comprehending the reason of it, nor being clearly Conscious of what it does;
then there must of necessity be a Perfect Mind or Intellect, that is, a Deity
upon which it depends. Wherefore Aristotle does like a Philosopher in joining
(...) and (...), Nature and Mind both together; but these Atheists do very
Absurdly and Unphilosophically, that would make a Senseless and Inconscious
Plastic Nature, and therefore without any Mind or Intellect, to be the First
Original of all things.

Secondly, these Atheists augment the Former Error, in supposing those Higher
Lives of Sense or Animality, and of Reason or Understanding, to rise both of
them from that Lower Senseless Life of Nature, as the only Original Fundamental
Life. Which is a thing altogether as Irrational and Absurd, as if one should
suppose the Light that is in the Air or Ether, to be the Only Original and
Fundamental Light, and the Light of the Sun and Stars but a Secondary and
Derivative thing from it, and nothing but the Light of the Air Modificated and
Improved by Condensation. Or as if one should maintain that the Sun and Moon,
and all the Stars, were really nothing else, but the mere Reflections of those
Images that we see in Rivers and Ponds of Water. But this has always been the
Sottish Humor and Guise of Atheists, to invert the Order of the Universe, and
hang the Picture of the World, as of a Man, with its Heels upwards. Conscious
Reason and Understanding, being a far higher Degree of Life and Perfection,
than that Dull Plastic Nature, which does only Do, but not Know, can never
possibly emerge out of it; neither can the Duplication of Corporeal Organs be
ever able to advance that Simple and Stupid Life of Nature into Redoubled
Consciousness or Self-perception; nor any Triplication or indeed Milleclupation
of them, improve the same into Rea-Vnderstanding.

Thirdly; for the better Coloring of the Former Errors, the Hylozoists
adulterate the Notion of the Plastic Life of Nature; confounding it with
Wisdom and Understanding. And though themselves acknowledge, that no
Animal-sense, Self-perception and Consciousness belongs to it, yet they will
have it to be a thing Perfectly Wise, and consequently every Atom of Senseless
Matter that is in the whole World, to be Infallibly Omniscient, as to all its
own Capacities and Congruities, or whatsoever it self can Do or Suffer; which
is plainly Contradictious. For though there may be such a thing as the Plastic
Nature, that according to the Former Description of it, can Do without Knowing,
and is devoid of Express Consciousness or Self-perception, yet Perfect
Knowledge and Understanding without Consciousness, is Nonsense and
Impossibility. Wherefore this must needs be condemned for a great piece of
Sottishness, in the Hylozoick Atheists, that they attribute Perfect Wisdom and
Understanding to a Stupid Inconscious Nature, which is nothing but (...), the
mere Drudging Instrument, or Manuary Opificer of Perfect Mind

Lastly, these Atheists err in this, that they make this Plastic Life of
Nature, to be a mere Material or Corporeal thing; whereas Matter or Body cannot
move it self, much less therefore can it Artificially order and dispose its own
Motion. And though the Plastic Nature be indeed the Lowest of all Lives, yet
notwithstanding since it is a Life, or Internal Energy, and Self-activity,
distinct from Local Motion, it must needs be Incorporeal, all Life being
Essentially such. But the Hylozoists conceive grossly both of Life and
Understanding, spreading them all over upon Matter, just as Butter is spread
upon Bread, or Plaster upon a Wall, and accordingly slicing them out, in
different Quantities and Bulks, together with it; they contending that they are
but Inadequate Conceptions of Body, as the only Substance; and consequently
concluding, that the Vulgarly received Notion of God, is nothing else but such
an Inadeqaute Conception of the Matter of the Whole Corporeal Universe,
mistaken for a Complete and Entire Substance by it self, that is supposed to be
the Cause of all things. Which fond Dream or Dotage of theirs, will be furth^r
confut^d in due place. But it is now time to put a Period, to this long (though
necessary) Digression, concerning the Plastic Life of Nature, or an
Artificial, Orderly and Methodical Nature.

XXXVIII. Plato gives an account, why he judged it necessary in those times,
publicly to propose that Atheistick Hypothesis, in order to a Confutation, De
Leg. lib. 10.
as also to produce. Rational Arguments for the Proof of a Deity, after this
manner; (...)^ Had not these Atheistick Doctrines been publicly divulged, and
made known in a manner to all, it would not have been needful to have confuted
them, nor by Reasons to prove a Deity; but now it is necessary. And we conceive
that the same Necessity at this time, will justify our present undertaking
likewise; since these Atheistick Doctrines have been as boldly vented, and
publicly asserted in this latter Age of ours, as ever they could be in Plato's
time. When the severity of the Athenian Government, must needs be a great check
to such Designs, Socrates having been put to death upon a mere false and
groundless Accusation of Atheism, and Protagoras, (who doubtless was a Real
Atheist) having escaped the same punishment no otherwise than by flight, his
Books being notwithstanding publicly burnt in the Marketplace at Athens, and
himself condemned to perpetual Exile, though there was nothing at that time
proved against him, save only this one Skeptical Passage, in the beginning of a
Book of his, Diog. La. in Vita Prot.
(...)^ Concerning the Gods, I have nothing at all to say, either that they be
or be not; there being many things that hinder the knowledge of this Matter,
both the Obscurity of the thing it self, and the shortness of humane Life.
Whereas Atheism in this Latter Age of ours, has been impudently asserted, and
most industriously promoted: that very Atomick Form, that was first introduced
(a little before Plato's time) by Leucippus, Protagoras and Democritus, having
been also Revived amongst us, and that with no small Pomp and Ostentation of
Wisdom and Philosophy.

It was before observed that there were Two several Forms of Atomical
Philosophy; First, the most Ancient and Genuine that was Religious, called
Moschical (or if you will Mosaical) and Pythagorical; Secondly, the Adulterated
Atheistick Atomology, called Leucippean or Democritical. Now accordingly, there
have been in this Latter Age of ours, Two several successive Resurrections or
Restitutions of those Two Atomologies. For Renatus Cartesius first revived and
restored the Atomick Philosophy, agreeably for the most part, to that ancient
Moschical and Pythagorick Form, acknowledging besides Extended Substance and
Corporeal Atoms, another Cogitative Incorporeal Substance, and joining
Metaphysics or Theology, together with Physiology, to make up one entire
System of Philosophy. Nor can it well be doubted, but that this Physiology of
his, as to the Mechanic part of it, has been Elaborated by the ingenious
Author, into an Exactness at least equal with the best Atomologies of the
Ancients. Nevertheless, this Cartesian Philosophy is highly obnoxious to
Censure upon some Accounts, the Chief whereof is this; That deviating from that
Primitive Moschical Atomology, in rejecting all Plastic Nature, it derives the
whole System of the Corporeal Universe, from the Necessary Motion of Matter,
only divided into Particles Insensibly small, and turned round in a Vortex,
without the Guidance or Direction of any Understanding Nature. By means
whereof, though it boast of Salving all the Corporeal Phenomenon, by mere
Fortuitous Mechanism, and without any Final or Mental Causality, yet it gives
no Account at all of that which is the Grandest of all Phenomenon, the (...),
The Orderly Regularity and Harmony of the Mundane System. The Occasion of which
Miscarriage has been already intimated, namely from the acknowledging only Two
Heads of Being, Extended and Cogitative, and making the Essence of Cogitation
to consist in Express Consciousness; from whence it follows, that there could
be no Plastic Nature, and therefore either all things must be done by
Fortuitous Mechanism, or else God himself be brought Immediately upon the
Stage, for the salving of all Phenomenon. Which Latter Absurdity, our
Philosopher being over careful to avoid, cast himself upon the Former, the
banishing of all Final and Mental Causality quite out of the World, and
acknowledging no other Philosophic Causes, beside Material and Mechanical. It
cannot be denied, but that even some of the ancient Religious Atomists, were
also too much infected with this Mechanizing Humor; but Renatus Cartesius has
not only outdone them all herein, but even the very Atheists themselves also,
as shall be showed afterward. And therefore as much as in him lies, has quite
disarmed the World, of that grand Argument for a Deity, taken from the Regular
Frame and Harmony of the Universe. To which Gross Miscarriage of his, there
might be also another added, That he seems to make Matter Necessarily Existent,
and Essentially Infinite and Eternal. Notwithstanding all which, we cannot
entertain that Uncharitable Opinion of him, that he really designed Atheism,
the Fundamental Principles of his Philosophy being such, as that no Atheistick
Structure can possibly be built upon them. But shortly after this Cartesian
Restitution of the Primitive Atomology that acknowledges Incorporeal
Substance, we have had our Leucippus and Democritus too, who also revived and
brought again upon the Stage, that other Atheistick Atomology, that makes
(...), Senseless and Lifeless Atoms, to be the only Principles of all things in
the Universe, thereby necessarily excluding, besides Incorporeal Substance and
Immortality of Souls, a Deity and Natural Morality; as also making all Actions
and Events, Materially and Mechanically necessary.

Now there could be no Satisfactory Confutation of this Atheistick Hypothesis,
without a fair Proposal first made of the several Grounds of it, to their best
advantage, which we have therefore endeavored in the Former Chapter. The
Answers to which Atheistick Arguments, ought, according to the Laws of Method,
to be reserved for the Last Part of the whole Treatise, where we are positively
to determine the Right Intellectual System of the Universe; it being properly
our Work here, only to give an Account of the Three False Hypotheses of the
Mundane System, together with their several Grounds. Nevertheless, because it
might not only seem Indecorous, for the Answers to those Atheistick Arguments,
to be so long deferred, and placed so far behind the Arguments themselves, but
also prove otherwise really Inconvenient, we shall therefore choose rather to
break those Laws of Method, (neglecting the Scrupulosity thereof) and subjoyn
them immediately in this place, craving the Readers Pardon for this
Preposterousness.

It is certain that the Source of all Atheism, is generally a Dull and Earthy
Disbelief of the Existence of things beyond the Reach of Sense; and it cannot
be denied but that there is something of Immorality in the Temper of all
Atheists, as all Atheistick Doctrine tends also to Immorality. Notwithstanding
which, it must not be therefore concluded, that all Dogmatick Atheists came to
be such, merely by means of Gross Intemperance, Sensuality, and Debauchery. De
L^g. l. 10. p. 908.
Plato indeed describes one sort of Atheists in this manner; (...)^ Such who
together with this Opinion, that all things are void of Gods, are acted also by
Intemperance of Pleasures and Pains, and hurried away with Violent Lusts, being
Persons otherwise endued with strong Memories, and quick Wits. And these are
the Debauched, Ranting, and Hectoring Atheists. But besides These, Ibid.
that Philosopher tells us, that there is another Sort of Atheists also, (...)^
Such, who though they think there be no Gods at all, yet notwithstanding being
naturally disposed to Justice and Moderation, as they will not do Outrageous
and Exorbitant things themselves, so they will shun the Conversation of wicked
debauched persons, and delight rather in the Society of those that are Fair and
Just. And these are a sort of Externally honest, or Civilized Atheists. Now
what that thing is, which besides Gross Sensuality and Debauchery, might tempt
men to entertain Atheistick Opinions, the same Philosopher also declares;
namely that it is, an Affectation of Singularity, or of seeming Wiser than the
Generality of Mankind. For thus when Clinias had disputed honestly against
Atheists, from those Vulgar Topics, of the Regularity and Harmony of the
Universe (observable in the Courses of Sun, Moon and Stars, and the Seasons of
the Year) and of the common Notions of Mankind, in that both Greeks and
Barbarians generally agreed in this, that there were Gods, thinking he had
thereby made a Sufficient Confutation of Atheism, the Athenian Hospes hereupon
discovers a great Fear and Jealousy which he had, lest he should thereby but
render himself an Object of Contempt to Atheists, as being a conceited and
scornful Generation of men. (...), etc. I am afraid of those wicked men the
Atheists, lest they should despise you: For you are ignorant concerning them,
when you think the only Cause of Atheism to be Intemperance of Pleasures and
Lusts, violently hurrying men's Souls on to a wicked Life. Clin. What other
Cause of Atheism can there be besides this? Ath. That which you are not aware
of, who live remotely, namely, (...)^ A certain grievous Ignorance, which yet
notwithstanding has the appearance of the greatest Wisdom. And therefore
afterward, when that Philosopher goes about to propose the Atheistick
Hypothesis, he calls it, (...), That which to many seems to be the Wisest and
Profoundest of all Doctrines.

And we find the same thing at this very day, that Atheists make a great
Pretense to Wisdom and Philosophy, and that many are tempted to maintain
Atheistick Opinions, that they may gain a Reputation of Wit by it. Which indeed
was one Reason that the rather induced us, nakedly to reveal all the Mysteries
of Atheism, because we observed, that so long as these things are concealed and
kept up in Huggermugger, many will be the rather apt to suspect, that there is
some great Depth and Profundity of Wisdom lodged in them, and that it is some
Noble and Generous Truth, which the Bigotick Religionists endeavor to smoother
and oppress.

Now the Case being thus, it was pertinently suggested also, by the
forementioned Philosopher, (...), That it must needs be a Matter of no small
moment, for any one to make it appear, that they who maintain wicked
Atheistical Opinions, do none of them reason rightly, but grossly fumble in all
their Ratiocinations. And we hope to effect this in our present Undertaking, to
make it evident, that Atheists are no such Conjurers, as (though they hold no
Spirits) they would be thought to be; no such Gigantick men of Reason, nor
Profound Philosophers, but that notwithstanding all their Pretensions to Wit,
their Atheism is really nothing else, but (...), a most Grievous Ignorance,
Sottishness and Stupidity of Mind in them.

Wherefore we shall in the next place, Conjure down all those Devils raised and
displayed in their most Formidable Colors, in the Precedent Chapter; or rather
we shall discover that they are really nothing else, but what these Atheists
pretend God and Incorporeal Spirits to be, Mere Fantastic Specter and
Impostures, Vain Imaginations of deluded Minds, utterly devoid of all Truth and
Reality. Neither shall we only Confute those Atheistick Arguments, and so stand
upon our defensive Posture; but we shall also assault Atheism even with its own
Weapons, and plainly demonstrate, that all Forms of Atheism are unintelligible
Nonsense, and Absolute Impossibility to Humane Reason. As we shall likewise
over and above, Occasionally insert some (as we think) Undeniable Arguments for
a Deity.

The Digression concerning the Plastic Life of Nature, or an Artificial,
Orderly and Methodical Nature, N. 37. Chap. 3.
1. That neither the Hylozoick nor Cosmo-plastick Atheists are condemned for
asserting an Orderly and Artificial Plastic Nature, as a Life distinct from
the Animal, however this be a Thing exploded, not only by the Atomick Atheists,
but also by some Professed Theists, who notwithstanding might have an
undiscerned Tang of the Mechanically-Atheistick Humor hanging about them. 2.
If there be no Plastic Artificial Nature admitted, then it must be concluded,
that either all things come to pass by Fortuitous Mechanism, and Material
Necessity (the Motion of Matter unguided) or else that God does (...), do all
things himself Immediately and Miraculously, framing the Body of every Gnat and
Fly, as it were with his own hands; since Divine Laws and Commands cannot
Execute themselves, nor be the proper Efficient Causes of things in Nature. 3.
To suppose all things to come to pass Fortuitously, or by the Unguided Motion
of Matter, a thing altogether as Irrational as it is Atheistical and Impious;
there being many Phenomenon, not only above the Powers of Mechanism, but also
contrary to the Laws of it. The Mechanic Theists make God but an Idle
Spectator of the Fortuitous Motions of Matter, and render his Wisdom altogether
Useless and Insignificant. Aristotle's Judicious Censure of the Fortuitous
Mechanists, with the Ridiculousness of that Pretense, that Material and
Mechanical Reasons are the Only Philosophical. 4. That it seems neither
decorous in respect of God, nor congruous to Reason, that he should (...), do
all things himself Immediately and Miraculously, Nature being quite Superseded
and made to signify nothing. The same further confuted by the Slow and Gradual
Process of things in Nature, as also by those Errors and Bungles that are
committed, when the Matter proves Inept and Contumacious, arguing the Agent not
to be Irresistible. 5. Reasonably inferred, that there is a Plastic Nature in
the Universe, as a Subordinate Instrument of Divine Providence, in the Orderly
Disposal of Matter; but yet so as not without a Higher Providence presiding
over it, forasmuch as this Plastic Nature, cannot act Electively or with
Discretion. Those Laws of Nature concerning Motion, which the Mechanic Theists
themselves suppose, really nothing else but a Plastic Nature. 6. The
Agreeableness of this Doctrine with the Sentiments of the best Philosophers in
all Ages, Aristotle, Plato, Empedocles, Heraclitus, Hippocrates, Zeno and the
Paracelsians. Anaxagoras, though a Professed Theist, severely censured, both by
Aristotle and Plato, as an Encourager of Atheism, merely because he used
Material and Mechanical Causes more than Mental and Final. Physiologers and
Astronomers why vulgarly suspected of Atheism in Plato's time. 7. The Plastic
Nature, no Occult Quality, but the only Intelligible Cause of that which is the
Grandest of all Phenomenon, the Orderly Regularity and Harmony of Things, which
the Mechanic Theists, however pretending to salve all Phenomenon, can give no
account at all of. A God, or Infinite Mind, asserted by them, in vain and to no
purpose. 8. Two Things here to be performed by us; First to give an Account of
the Plastic Nature, and then to show how the Notion of it has been Mistaken,
and Abused by Atheists. The First General Account of this Plastic Nature
according to Aristotle, that it is to be conceived as Art it self acting,
Inwardly and Immediately upon the Matter: as if Harmony Living in the Musical
Instruments, should move the Strings of them, without any External Impulse. 9.
Two Preeminencies of the Plastic Nature above Humane Art. First, that whereas
Humane Art acts upon the Matter from without Cumbersomely and Moliminously,
with Tumult and Hurliburly, Nature acting on it from within more Commandingly,
does its Work Easily, Cleaverly and Silently. Humane Art acts on the Matter
Mechanically, but Nature Vitally and Magically. 10. The Second Preeminence of
Nature above Humane Art, that, whereas Humane Artists are often to seek and at
a loss, anxiously Consult and Deliberate, and upon Second thoughts Mend their
former Work, Nature is never to seek, nor Vnresolved what to do, nor does she
ever Repent afterward of what she has done, changing her Former Course.
Humane Artists themselves Consult not, as Artists, but only for want of Art;
and therefore Nature, though never Consulting, may act Artificially. Concluded,
that what is called Nature, is really the Divine Art. 11. Nevertheless, that
Nature is not the Divine Art, Pure and Abstract, but Concreted and Embodied in
Matter: Ratio Mersa and Confusa: Not the Divine Art Archetypal, but Ectypal.
Nature differs from the Divine Art, as the Manuary Opificer from the Architect.
12. Two Imperfections of the Plastic Nature, in respect whereof it falls short
even of Humane Art; First, That though it act for Ends Artificially, yet it
self neither Intends those Ends, nor Understands the Reason of what it does,
and therefore cannot act Electively. The Difference between the Spermatick
Reasons and Knowledge. Nature does but Ape or Mimick the Divine Art or Wisdom,
being not Master of that Reason, according to which it acts, but only a Servant
to it, and Drudging Executioner of it. 13. Proved that there may be such a
thing as acts Artificially, though it self do not comprehend that Art, by which
its Motions are Governed, First from Musical Habits; The Dauncer resembles the
Artificial Life of Nature. 14. The same further evinced from the Instincts of
Brute-animals, directing them to act Rationally and Artificially, in order to
their own Good and the Good of the Universe, without any Reason of their own.
The Instincts in Brutes but Passive Impresses of the Divine Wisdom, and a kind
of Fate upon them. 15. The Second Imperfection of the Plastic Nature, that it
acts without Animal Fancy, (...), Express Con-sense, and Consciousness, and is
devoid of Self-perception and Self-enjoyment. 16. Whether this Energy of the
Plastic Nature, be to be called Cogitation or no, but a Logomachy or
Contention about Words. Granted that what moves Matter Vitally, must needs do
it by some Energy of its own, distinct from Local Motion; but that there may be
a simple Vital Energy, without that Duplicity which is in Synaesthesis, or
clear and express Consciousness. Nevertheless that the Energy of Nature might
be called a certain Drowsy, Vnawakened, or Astonished Cogitation. 17.
Instances which render it probable, that there may be a Vital Energy, without
Synaesthesis, clear and express Con-sense, or Consciousness. 18. The Plastic
Nature, acting neither Knowingly nor Phantastically, acts Fatally, Magically
and Sympathetically. The Divine Laws and Fate, as to Matter, not mere
Cogitation in the Mind of God, but an Energetick and Effectual Principle; and
the Plastic Nature, the true and proper Fate of Matter, or the Corporeal
World. What Magic is, and that Nature which acts Fatally, acts also Magically
and Sympathetically. 19. That the Plastic Nature, though it be the Divine Art
and Fate, yet for all that, it it neither God nor Goddess, but a Low and
Imperfect Creature, it acting Artificially and Rationally no otherwise, than
compounded Forms of Letters, when printing Coherent Philosophic Sense, nor for
Ends, than a Saw or Hatchet in the hands of a skilful Mechanic. The Plastic
and Vegetative Life of Nature the Lowest of all Lives, and Inferior to the
Sensitive. A Higher Providence than that of the Plastic Nature governing the
Corporeal World it self. 20. Notwithstanding which, forasmuch as the Plastic
Nature is a Life, it must needs be Incorporeal. One and the same thing, having
in it an entire Model and Platform, and acting upon several distant parts of
Matter at once coherently, cannot be Corporeal; and though Aristotle no where
declare whether his Nature be Corporeal or Incorporeal (which he neither does
clearly concerning the Rational Soul) and his Followers conclude it to be
Corporeal, yet according to the very Principles of that Philosophy it must
needs be otherwise. 21. The Plastic Nature being Incorporeal, must either be a
Lower Power lodged in Souls that are also Conscious, Sensitive or Rational; or
else a distinct Substantial Life by it self, and Inferior Kind of Soul. How
the Platonists complicate both these together; with Aristotle's agreeable
Determination, that Nature is either Part of a Soul, or not without Soul. 22.
The Plastic Nature as to Animals, according to Aristotle, a Part or Lower
Power of their Respective Souls. That the Phenomenon prove a Plastic Nature or
Archeus in Animals, to make which a distinct thing from the Soul, is to
multiply Entities without necessity. The Soul endued with a Plastic Power, the
chief Formatrix of its own Body, the Contribution of certain other Causes not
excluded. 23. That besides that Plastic Principle in Particular Animals,
forming them as so many Little Worlds, there is a General Plastic Nature in
the whole Corporeal Universe, which likewise according to Aristotle is either a
Part and Lower Power of a Conscious Mundane Soul, or else something depending
on it. 24. That no less according to Aristotle than Plato and Socrates, our
selves partake of Life from the Life of the Universe, as well as we do of Heat
and Cold, from the Heat and Cold of the Universe; from whence it appears, that
Aristotle also held the worlds Animation, with further Undeniable Proof
thereof. An Answer to Two the most considerable places of that Philosopher that
seem to imply the contrary. That Aristotle's First Immovable Mover, was no
Soul, but a Perfect Intellect Abstract from Matter, but that he supposed this
to move only as a Final Cause, or as being Loved, and besides it a Mundane Soul
and Plastic Nature, to move the Heavens Efficiently. Neither Aristotle's
Nature nor his Mundane Soul, the Supreme Deity. However, though there be no
such Mundane Soul as both Plato and Aristotle conceived, yet notwithstanding
there may be a Plastic Nature depending upon a Higher Intellectual Principle.
25. No Impossibility of some other Particular Plastic Principles; and though
it be not reasonable to think, that every Plant, Herb, and Pile of Grass has a
Plastic or Vegetative Soul of its own, nor that the Earth is an Animal; yet
that there may possibly be One Plastic Inconscious Nature, in the whole
Terraqueous Globe, by which Vegetables may be severally organized and framed,
and all things performed which transcend the Power of Fortuitous Mechanism. 26.
Our Second Undertaking, which was to show how grossly those Atheists, (who
acknowledge this Plastic Nature) Misunderstand it and Abuse the Notion, to
make a Counterfeit God-almighty or Numen of it, to the exclusion of the True
Deity. First, in their supposing that to be the First and Highest Principle of
the Universe, which is the Last and lowest of all Lives, a thing as Essentially
Derivative from, and Dependent upon a Higher Intellectual Principle, as the
Echo on the Original Voice. 27. Secondly, in their making Sense and Reason in
Animals to Emerge out of a Senseless Life of Nature, by the mere Modification
and Organization of Matter. That no Duplication of Corporeal Organs, can ever
make One Single Inconscious Life, to advance into Redoubled Consciousness and
Self-enjoyment. 28. Thirdly, in attributing Perfect Knowledge and Understanding
to this Life of Nature, which yet themselves suppose to be devoid of all Animal
Sense and Consciousness. 29. Lastly, in making the Plastic Life of Nature to
be merely Corporeal; the Hylozoists contending that it is but an Inadequate
Conception of Body, as the only Substance, and fondly dreaming, that the Vulgar
Notion of God, is nothing but such an Inadequate Conception of the Matter of
the Whole Universe, mistaken for a Complete and Entire Substance by it self,
the Cause of all things.

CHAP. IV.
The Idea of God declared, in way of Answer to the First Atheistick Argument.
The Grand Prejudice against the Naturality of this Idea, as Essentially
including Unity or Onelyness in it, from the Pagan Polytheism, removed. Proved
that the Intelligent Pagans generally acknowledged One Supreme Deity. What
their Polytheism and Idolatry was: with some Account of Christianity. 1. The
either Stupid Insensibility or Gross Impudence of Atheists, in denying the word
GOD, to have any Signification, or that there is any other Idea answering to
it, besides the mere Phantasm of the Sound. The Disease called by the
Philosopher, (...), the Petrification (or Dead Insensibility) of the Mind. 2.
That the Atheists themselves must needs have an Idea of God in their minds, or
otherwise when they deny his Existence, they should deny the Existence of
Nothing. And that they have also the same Idea of him with Theists, they
denying the very same thing which the others affirm. 3. A Lemma or Preparatory
Proposition to the Idea of God, That though some things be Made or Generated,
yet it is not possible that all things should be Made, but something must of
Necessity Exist of it self from Eternity Unmade, and be the Cause of those
other things that are Made. 4. The Two most Opposite Opinions, concerning that
which was Self-existent from Eternity or Unmade, and the Cause of all other
things Made: One, That it was nothing but Senseless Matter, the most Imperfect
of all things; The Other, That it was something Most Perfect, and therefore
Consciously Intellectual. The Asserters of this latter Opinion, Theists in a
strict and proper sense; of the former, Atheists. So that the Idea of God in
general, is a Perfect Consciously Understanding Being (or Mind) Self-existent
from Eternity, and the Cause of all other things. 5. Observed, That the
Atheists who deny a God, according to the true Idea of him, do often Abuse the
word, calling Senseless Matter by that Name, and meaning nothing else thereby,
but a First Principle or Self-existent Unmade thing. That according to this
Notion of the word God, there can be no such thing as an Atheist, no man being
able to persuade himself, that all things sprung from Nothing. 6. In order to
the more punctual Declaration of the Divine Idea, the Opinion of those taken
notice of, who suppose Two Self-existent Unmade Principles, God and Matter, and
so God not to be the Sole but only the Chief Principle. 7. That these are but
Imperfect and Mistaken Theists. Their Idea of God declared, with its
Defectiven^ss. A Latitude in Theism. None to be condemned for Absolute
Atheists, but ^uch as deny an Eternal Unmade Mind, ruling over the matter. 8.
The most Compendious Idea of God, An Absolutely Perfect Being. that this
includes not only Conscious Intellectuality and Necessary Existence, but also,
Omni-causality, Omnipotence and Infinite Power: and therefore God, the sole
Principle of all, and Cause of Matter. The true Notion of Infinite Power.
Pagans acknowledged the Divine Omnipotence. And that the Atheists supposed
Infinite Power to be included in the Idea of God, proved from Lucretius. 9.
That absolute Perfection implies something more than Power and Knowledge. A
Vaticination in men's minds of a Higher Good than either. That God is Better
than Knowledge, according to Aristotle: and that there is Morality in the
Nature of God, wherein his chief Happiness consis^eth. This borrowed from
Plato, who makes the Highest Perfection, and Supreme Deity, to be Goodness it
self, above Knowledge and Intellect. God, and the Supreme Good, according to
the Scripture, Love. God no soft or fond Love, but an Impartial Law, and the
Measure of all things. That the Atheists supposed Goodness also to be included
in the Idea of God. The Idea of God more Explicate and Unfolded, A Being
absolutely Perfect, Infinitely Good, Wise and Powerful, Necessarily Existent,
and not only the Framer of the World, but also the Cause of all things. 10.
That this Idea of God Essentially includes Unity or Onelyness in it; since
there can be but One Supreme, One Cause of all things, One Omnipotent, and One
Infinitely Perfect. This Unity or Onelyness of the Deity, supposed also by
Epicurus and Lucretius, who professedly denied a God according to this Idea.
11. The Grand Prejudice against the Naturality of this Idea of God, as it
Essentially includes Unity and Solitariety, from the Polytheism of all Nations
formerly, besides the Jews, and of all the wisest men and Philosophers; from
whence it is inferred, that this Idea of God is but Artificial, and owes its
Original to Laws and Institution. An Enquiry to be made concerning the true
sense of the Pagan Polytheism. That the Objectors take it for granted, that the
Pagan Polytheists universally asserted, Many Self-existent Intellectual Beings,
and Independent Deities, as so many Partial Causes of the World. 12. First, the
Irrationality of this Opinion, and its manifest Repugnancy to the Phenomenon,
which render it less probable, to have been the Belief of all the Pagan
Polytheists. 13. Secondly, That no such thing at all appears, as that ever any
Intelligent Pagans asserted a Multitude of Eternal, Unmade, Independent
Deities. The Hesiodian Gods. The Valentinian Aeons. The nearest Approach made
thereunto by the Manichean Good and Evil Gods. This Doctrine not generally
asserted by the Greek Philosophers, as Plutarch affirms. Questioned whether
the Persian Evil Demon or Arimanius, were a Self-existent Principle,
Essentially Evil. Aristotle's Confutation and Explosion of Many Principles, or
Independent Deities. Faustus the Manichean his Conceit, that the Jews and
Christians Paganized, in the Opinion of Monarchy, with St. Austin's Judgment,
concerning the Pagans, thereupon. 14. Concluded that the Pagan Polytheism must
be understood according to another Equivocation in the word Gods, as used for
Created Intellectual Beings, superior to Men, that ought to be Religiously
Worshipped. That the Pagans held both Many Gods and One God, (as Onatus the
Pythagorean declares himself) in different Senses: Many Inferior Deities
Suberdinate to One Supreme. 15. Further Evidence of this, that the Intelligent
Pagan Polytheists, held only a Plurality of Inferior Deities, Subordinate to
one Supreme: First because after the Emersion of Christianity, and its contest
with Paganism, when occasion was offered, not only no Pagan asserted a
Multiplicity of Independent Deities, but also all Universally disclaimed it,
and professed to acknowledge One Supreme God. 16. That this was no Refinement
or Interpolation of Paganism, as might possibly be suspected, but that the
Doctrine of the most Ancient Pagan Theologers, and greatest Promoters of
Polytheism was agreeable hereunto; which will be proved, not from suspected
Writings (as of Trismegist and the Sibyls) but such as are Indubitate. First,
That Zoroaster the chief Promoter of Polytheism in the Eastern Parts,
acknowledged one Supreme Deity, the Maker of the World, proved from Eubulus in
Porphyry, besides his own words cited by Eusebius. 17. That Orpheus, commonly
called by the Greeks, The Theologer, and the Father of the Grecanick
Polytheism, clearly asserted one Supreme Deity, proved by his own words, out of
Pagan Records. 18. That the Egyptians themselves, the most Polytheistical of
all Nations, had an acknowledgement amongst them of one Supreme Deity. 19. That
the Poets, who were the greatest Depravers of the Pagan Theology, and by their
Fables of the Gods, made it look more Aristocratically, did themselves
notwithstanding acknowledge a Monarchy, one Prince and Father of Gods. That
famous Passage of Sophocles not to be suspected, though not found in any of
these Tragedies now extant. 20. That all the Pagan Philosophers, who were
Theists, universally asserted a Mundane Monarchy. Pythagoras as much a
Polytheist as any, and yet his First Principle of Things, as well as Numbers, a
Monad or Unity. Anaxagoras his One Mind ordering all things for Good.
Xenophanes his One and All, and his One God the Greatest among the Gods. 21.
Parmenides his Supreme God, One Immovable. Empedocles his both Many Gods
Junior to Friendship and Contention, and his One God called (...) Senior to
them. Zeno Eleates his Demonstration of One God, in Aristotle. 22. Philolaus,
his Prince and Governor of all, God always One. Euclides Megarensis his God
called (...), One the Very Good. Timaeus Locrus his Mind and Good, above the
Soul of the World. Antisthenes his One Natural God. Onatus his Corypheus. 23.
Generally believed and true, that Socrates acknowledged One Supreme God; but
that he disclaimed all the Inferior Gods of the Pagans, a Vulgar Error. Plato
also a Polytheist, and that Passage which some lay so great stress upon (That
he was serious, when he began his Epistles with God, but when with Gods
jocular) Spurious and Counterfeit; and yet he was notwithstanding an undoubted
Monotheist also in another sense; an Asserter, of One God over all, of a Maker
of the World, of a First God, of a Greatest of the Gods. The First Hypostasis
of the Platonic Trinity, properly the King of all things, for whose sake are
all things; The Father of the Cause and Prince of the World, that is, of the
Eternal Intellect, or (...). 24. Aristotle an Acknowledger of Many Gods (he
accounting the Stars such) and yet an express Asserter of (...), One Prince,
One Immovable Mover. 25. Cleanthes and Chrysippus Stoics, though they filled
the whole Heaven, Earth, Air and Sea with Gods; yet notwithstanding they
acknowledged, only One G^d Immortal, Jupiter; all the rest being consumed into
him, in the Successive Conflagrations, and afterward made anew by him.
Cleanthes his excellent and devout Hymn to the Supreme God. 26. E^dless to cite
all the Passages of the later Pagan Writers and Polytheists, in which one
Supreme God is asserted. Excellent Discourses in some of them concerning the
Deity, particularly Plotinus. Who though he derived all things, even Matter it
self, from one Supreme Deity, yet was a Contender for Many Gods. 27. This not
only the Opinion of Philosophers and Learned men, but also the General Belief
of the Pagan Vulgar; that there was One Supreme God, proved from Maximus
Tyrius. The Romans Deus Optimus Maximus. The Pa^ans when most serious spoke of
God singularly. Kyrie Eleeson part of the Pagans Litany to the Supreme God. The
more civiliz^d Pagans at this very day acknowledge one Supreme Deity, the Maker
of the World. 28. Plutarch's Testimony, that notwithstanding the variety of
Paganick Religions, and the different Names of Gods used in them; yet One
Reason, Mind or Providence ordering all things, and its Inferior Ministers,
were alike every where Worshipped. 29. Plain that the Pagan Theists must needs
acknowledge One Supreme Deity, because they generally believed, the whole World
to be One Animal, g^vern^d by One Soul. Some Pagans made this Soul of the World
their Supreme God, others an Abstract Mind Superior to it. 30. The Hebrew
Doctors generally of this Persuasion, that the Pagans worshipped one Supreme
God, and that all their other Gods were but Mediators betwixt him and men. 31.
Lastly, this confirmed from Scripture. The Pagans Knew God. Aratus his Jupiter,
and the Athenians Unknown God, the True God. 32. In order to a fuller
Explication of the Pagan Theology, and showing the Occasion of its being
misunderstood, Three Heads requisite to be insisted on. First, that the Pagans
worshipped One Supreme God under Many Names: Secondly, that besides this one
God, they worshipped also Many Gods, which were indeed Inferior Deities
Subordinate to him: Thirdly, that they worshipped both the Supreme and
inferior Gods in Images, Statues and Symbols, sometimes abusively called also
Gods. First, that the Supreme God amongst the Pagans was Polyonymous, and
worshipped under several Personal Names, according to his several Attributes
and the Manifestations of them, his Gifts and Effects in the World. 33. That
upon the same account, Things not Substantial were Personated and Deified by
the Pagans, and worshipped as so many several Names or Notions of One God. 34.
That as the whole Corporeal World Animated, was supposed by some of the Pagans
to be the Supreme God, so he was worshipped in the several Parts and Members of
it (having Personal Names bestowed upon them) as it were by Parcels and
Piecemeal, or by so many Inadequate Conceptions. That some of the Pagans made
the Corporeal World the Temple of God only, but others the Body of God. 35. The
Second Head proposed, that besides the One Supreme God, under several Names,
the Pagans acknowledged and Worshipped also Many Gods; (...), Made Gods,
Created intellectual Beings Superior to Men. 36. The Pythagorick or Platonic
Trinity of Divine Hypostases. And the Higher of the Inferior Deities,
according to this Hypothesis; Nous, Psyche, and the whole Corporeal World; with
particular Noes and Henades. 37. The other Inferior Deities acknowledged as
well by the Vulgar as Philosophers, of Three Sorts. First the Sun, Moon and
Stars, and other greater Parts of the Universe, Animated; called Sensible Gods.
38. Secondly, their Inferior Deities Invisible, Ethereal and Aereal Animals,
called Demons. These appointed by the Supreme Deity, to preside over Kingdoms,
Cities, Places, Persons and Things. 39. The Last sort of the Pagan Inferior
Deities, Heroes and (...), or Men-gods. Euemerus taxed by Plutarch, for making
all the Pagan Gods nothing but Dead Men. 40. The Third general Head proposed,
That the Pagans worshipped both the Supreme and Inferior Gods, in Images,
Statues and Symbols. That first of all, before Images and Temples, Rude Stones
and Pillars without Sculpture, were erected for Religious Monuments, and called
(...) or Bethels. 41. That afterward Images, Statues and Symbols were used,
and housed in Temples. These placed in the West End of the Temples to face the
East; so that the Pagans entering, worshipped toward the West: One probable
Occasion of the Ancient Christians Praying toward the East. The Golden Calf
made for a Symbolick Presence of the God of Israel. 42. All the parts of the
entire Pagan Religion represented together at once in Plato. 43. That some late
Writers, not well understanding the Sense of Pagans, have confounded all their
Theology, by supposing them to Worship the Inanimate parts of the World as
such, for Gods; therefore distinguishing betwixt their Animal and their Natural
Gods. That no Corporeal thing was worshipped by the Pagans otherwise, than
either as being it self Animated with a Particular Soul of its own, or as being
part of the whole Animated World, or as having Demons presiding over it, to
whom the Worship was properly directed; or Lastly, as being Images or Symbols
of Divine Things. 44. That though the Egyptians be said to have Worshipped
Brute Animals, and were generally therefore condemned by the other Pagans; yet
the wiser of them used them only as Hieroglyphics and Symbols. 45. That the
Pagans worshipped not only the Supreme God, but also the Inferior Deities, by
Material Sacrifices. Sacrifices or Fire-offerings, in their First and General
Notion, nothing else but Gifts and Signs of Gratitude, and Appendices of
Prayer. But that Animal Sacrifices had afterward a Particular Notion also of
Expiation fastened on them, whether by Divine Direction, or Humane Agreement,
left undetermined. 46. The Pagans Apology for the Three forementioned Things.
First, for Worshipping one Supreme one God under Many Personal Names, and that
not only according to his several Attributes, but also his several
Manifestations, Gifts and Effects, in the Visible World. With an Excuse for
those Corporeal Theists, who Worshipped the whole Animated World as the Supreme
God, and the several Parts of it under Personal Names, as Living Members of
him. 47. Their Apology for Worshipping, besides the One Supreme God, Many
Inferior Deities. That they Worshipping them only as Inferior, could not
therefore be guilty of giving them that Honor, which was proper to the
Supreme. That they Honored the Supreme God Incomparably above all. That they
put a Difference in their Sacrifices, and that Material Sacrifices were not the
proper Worship of the Supreme God, but rather below him. 48. Several Reasons of
the Pagans, for giving Religious Worship to Inferior Created Beings. First
that this Honor which is bestowed upon them, does ultimately redound to the
Supreme God, and aggrandize his State and Majesty, they being all his Ministers
and Attendants. 49. That as Demons are Mediators betwixt the Celestial Gods
and Men, so those Celestial Gods and all the other Inferior Deities, are
themselves also Mediators betwixt Men and the Supreme God, and as it were
Convenient steps, by which we ought with Reverence to approach him. 50. That
there is an Honor in Justice due, to all those excellent Beings that are above
us, and that the Pagans do but honor every thing as they ought, in that due
rank and place, in which the Supreme God has set it. 51. That Demons or
Angels being appointed to preside over Kingdoms, Cities and Persons, and the
several parts of the Corporeal Universe, and being many ways Benefactors to us,
Thanks ought to be returned to them by Sacrifice. 52. That the Inferior Gods,
Demons and Heroes, being all of them able to do us either Good or Hurt, and
being also Irascible, and therefore Provokable by our neglect of them, it is as
well our Interest as our Duty, to Pacify and Appease them by Worship. 53.
Lastly, that it cannot be thought, that the Supreme God will envy those
Inferior Gods, that Worship or Honor which is bestowed upon them; nor
suspected, that any of those Inferior Deities will Factiously go about to set
up themselves against the Supreme God. 54. That many of the Pagans worshipped
none but Good Demons, and that those of them who worshipped Evil ones did it
only in order to their Appeasment and Mitigation, that so they might do them no
hurt. None but Magicians to be accounted properly Devil-Worshippers, who honor
Evil Demons, in order to the gratification of their Revenge, Lust and
Ambition. 55. The Pagans plead that those Demons, who delivered Oracles, and
did Miracles amongst them, must needs be Good, since there cannot be a greater
reproach to the Supreme God, than to suppose him to appoint Evil Demons as
Presidents and Governors over the World, or to suffer them to have so great a
sway and share of Power in it. The Faith of Plato in Divine Providence, that
the Good every where prevails over the Bad, and that the Delphick Apollo was
therefore a Good Demon. 56. The Pagans Apology for Worshipping the Supreme God
in Images, Statues and Symbols. That these are only Schetically Worshipped by
them, the Honor passing from them to the Prototype. And that since we living
in Bodies, cannot easily have a Conception of any thing without some Corporeal
Image or Phantasm, thus much must be indulged to the Infirmity of Humane Nature
(at least in the Vulgar) to Worship God Corporeally in Images, to prevent their
running to Atheism. 57. That though it should appear by this Apology of the
Pagans, that their Case were not altogether so Bad, as is commonly supposed,
yet they cannot be Justified thereby, in the Three Particulars above mentioned,
but the Scripture-Condemnation of them is Irrefragable, That knowing God, they
did not Glorify him as God, or Sanctify his Name; that is, Worship him
according to his Uncommon and Incommunicable, his Peerless and Insociable,
Transcendent and Singular, Incomparable and Vnresembleable Nature; but mingled
some way or other Creature-worship with the Worship of the Creator. First,
that the Worshipping of One God in his Various Gifts and Effects, under several
personal Names, a thing in it self absurd, may also prove a great occasion of
Atheism, when the things themselves come to be called by those Names, as Wine
Bacchus, Corn Ceres. The Conclusion easily following from thence, that the Good
things of Nature are the only Deities. But to Worship the Corporeal World it
self Animated, as the Supreme God, and the Parts of it, as the Members of God,
plainly to Confound God with the Creature, and not to Glorify him as Creator,
nor according to his Separate and Spiritual Nature. 58. To give Religious
Worship to Demons or Angels, Heroes or Saints, or any other Intellectual
Creatures, though not honoring them equally with the Supreme God, is to deny
God the Honor of his Holiness, his Singular, Insociable and Incommunicable
Nature, as he is the only Self-originated Being, and the Creator of all: Of
whom, Through Whom, and To Whom are all things. As God is such a Being, that
there is nothing Like him, so ought the Worship which is given him, to be such
as has nothing Like to it, A Singular, Separate and Incommunicate Worship.
They not to be Religiously Worshipped that Worship. 59. That the Religious
Worship of Created Spirits proceeded chiefly from a Fear that if they were not
worshipped, they would be provoked and do hurt, which is both highly Injurious
to Good Spirits, and a Distrust of the Sufficiency of God's Power to protect
his Worshippers. That all Good Spirits Vninvok'd, are of themselves officiously
ready to assist those who sincerely Worship and Propitiate the Supreme Deity,
and therefore no need of the Religious Worship of them, which would be also
Offensive to them. 60. That Men's praying to Images and Statues is much more
Ridiculous than Childrens talking to Babies made of Clouts, but not so
Innocent, they thereby Debasing both themselves and God, not Glorifying him
according to his Spiritual and Vnresembleable Nature, but changing the Glory of
the Incorruptible God, into the Likeness of Corruptible Man or Beast. 61. The
Mistake of those who think none can be guilty of Idolatry, that believe One God
the Maker of the World. 62. That from the same ground of Reason, That nothing
ought to be Religiously Worshipped besides the Supreme God, or whom he appoints
to represent himself (because he ought to be Sanctified, and dealt withal
according to his Singular Nature as unlike to every thing) it follows, contrary
to the Opinion of some Opposers of Idolatry, that there ought also to be a
Discrimination made, between things Sacred and Profane, and Reverence used in
Divine Worship. Idolatry and Sacrilege allied. 63. Another Scripture-Charge
upon the Pagans, that they were Devil-worshippers; not as though they intended
all their Worship to Evil Demons or Devils as such, but because their
Polytheism and Idolatry (unacceptable to God and Good Spirits) was promoted by
Evil Spirits delivering Oracles and doing Miracles for the Confirmation of it,
they also insinuating themselves into the Temples and Statues, therefore the
Worship was looked upon, as done to them. The same thing said of others besides
Pagans, that they Worshipped Devils. 64. Proved that they were Evil Demons who
delivered Oracles and did Miracles amongst the Pagans, for the carrying on of
that Religion, from the many Obscene Rites and Mysteries, not only not
prohibited, but also enjoined by them. 65. The same thing further proved, from
other cruel and bloody Rites, but especially that of Man Sacrifices. Plutarch's
Clear Acknowledgement, that both the Obscene Rites and Man-Sacrifices, amongst
the Pagans, owed their Original to Wicked Demons. 66. That the God of Israel,
neither required, nor accepted of Man-Sacrifices, against a modern Diatribist.
67. That what Faith soever Plato might have in the Delphick Apollo, he was no
other than an Evil Demon or Devil. An Answer to the Pagans Argument from
Divine Providence. 68. That the Pagans Religion, unsound in its Foundation, was
Infinitely more Corrupted and Depraved by means of these Four Things; First,
the Superstition of the Ignorant Vulgar. 69. Secondly, the Licentious Figments
of Poets and Fable-Mongers, frequently condemned by Plato and other Wiser
Pagans. 70. Thirdly, the Craft of Priests and Politicians. 71. Lastly, the
Imposture of evil Demons or Devils. That by means of these Four Things, the
Pagan Religion became a most foul and unclean thing. And as some were
captivated by it under a most grievous Yoke of Superstition, so others strongly
inclined to Atheism. 72. Plato not insensible that the Pagan Religion stood in
need of Reformation; nevertheless, supposing many of those Religious Rites, to
have been introduced by Visions, Dreams, and Oracles, he concluded that no wise
Legislator would of his own head venture to make an Alteration. Implying, that
this was a thing not to be effected otherwise than by Divine Revelation and
Miracles. The generally received Opinion of the Pagans, that no man ought to
trouble himself about Religion, but content himself to worship God, (...),
according to the Law of that Country which he lived in. 73. Wherefore God
Almighty in great compassion to Mankind, designed himself to reform the
Religion of the Pagan World, by introducing another Religion of his own framing
in stead of it; after he had first made a Praeludium thereunto, in one Nation
of the Israelites, where he expressly prohibited by a Voice out of the Fire, in
his First Commandment, the Pagan Polytheism, or the worshipping of other
Inferior Deities besides himself, and in the Second, their Idolatry, or the
Worshipping of the Supreme God in Images, Statues or Symbols. Besides which he
restrained the use of Sacrifices. As also successively gave Predictions, of a
Messiah to come, such as together with Miracles might reasonably conciliate
Faith to him when he came. 74. That afterward in due time, God sent the
promised Messiah, who was the Eternal Word Hypostatically united with a Pure
Humane Soul and Body, and so a true (...), or God-man: Designing him for a
Living Temple and Visible Statue or Image, in which the Deity should be
represented and Worshipped; as also after his Death and Resurrection, when he
was to be invested with all Power and Authority, for a Prince and King, a
Mediator and Intercessour, betwixt God and Men. 75. That this (...) or God-man
was so far from intending to require Men-sacrifices of his Worshippers, as the
Pagan Demons did, that he devoted himself to be a Catharma and Expiatory
Sacrifice for the Sins of the whole World, and thereby also abolished all
Sacrifices or Oblations by Fire whatsoever, according to the Divine Prediction.
76. That the Christian Trinity, though a Mystery, is more agreeable to Reason
than the Platonic, and that there is no absurdity at all, in supposing the
Pure Soul and Body of the Messiah, to be made a Living Temple or Shechinah,
Image or Statue of the Deity. That this Religion of One God and One Mediator,
or (...) God-man, preached to the Pagan World and confirmed by Miracles, did
effectually destroy all the Pagan Inferior Deities, Middle Gods and
Mediators, Demons and Heroes, together with their Statues and Images. 77. That
it is no way incongruous to suppose that the Divine Majesty, in prescribing a
Form of Religion to the World, should graciously condescend to comply with
Humane Infirmity, in order to the removing of Two such Grand Evils, as
Polytheism and Idolatry, and the bringing of men to Worship God in Spirit and
in Truth. 78. That Demons and Angels, Heroes and Saints are but different Names
for the same things, which are made Gods by being worshipped. And that the
introducing of Angel and Saint-worship, together with Image Worship, into
Christianity, seems to be a defeating of one grand design of God Almighty in
it, and the Paganizing of that, which was intended for the Vnpaganizing of the
World. 79. Another Key for Christianity in the Scripture, not disagreeing with
the former, That since the way of Wisdom and Knowledge, proved Ineffectual as
to the Generality of Mankind, men might by the contrivance of the Gospel be
brought to God and a holy Life (without profound Knowledge) in the way of
Believing. 80. That according to the Scripture, there is a Higher, more
Precious and Diviner Light, than that of Theory and Speculation. 81. That in
Christianity, all the Great, Goodly and most Glorious things of this World, are
slurried and disgraced, comparatively with the Life of Christ. 82. And that
there are all possible Engines in it to bring men up to God, and engage them in
a holy Life. 83. Two Errors here to be taken notice of; The First of those who
make Christianity, nothing but an Antinomian Plot against Real Righteousness,
and as it were a secret Confederacy with the Devil. The Second, of those who
turn that into Matter of mere Notion and Opinion, Dispute and Controversy,
which was designed by God only as a Contrivance, Machin, or Engine to bring men
Effectually to a Holy and Godly Life. 84. That Christianity may be yet further
illustrated, from the consideration of the Adversary or Satanical Power, which
is in the World. This no M^nichean Substantial Evil Principle, but a Polity of
Lapsed Angels, with which the Souls of Wicked men are also Incorporated, and
may therefore be called The Kingdom of Darkness. 85. The History of the Fallen
Angels in Scripture briefly explained. 86. The concurrent Agreement of the
Pagans concerning Evil Demons or Devils, and their Activity in the World. 87.
That there is a perpetual War betwixt Two Polities or Kingdoms in the World,
the one of Light, the other of Darkness; and that our Savior Christ or the
Messiah, is appointed the Head or Chieftain over the Heavenly Militia, or the
Forces of the Kingdom of Light. 88. That there will be at length a Palpable and
Signal Overthrow, of the Satanical Power, and whole Kingdom of Darkness, by
(...), God appearing in an extraordinary and miraculous manner; and that this
great affair is to be managed by our Savior Christ, as God's Vicegerent, and a
Visible Judge both of Quick and Dead. 89. That our Savior Christ designed not,
to set up himself Factiously against God Almighty, nor to be accounted (...),
superior to God, but that when he has done his Work, and put down all
Adversary Power, himself will then be subject to God, even the Father, that so
God may be all in all. 90. Lastly, having spoken of Three Forms of Religious,
the Jewish, Christian and the Pagan, and there remaining only a Fourth the
Mohammedan, in which the Divine Monarchy is zealously asserted, we may now
Conclude, that the Idea of God (as essentially including Unity in it) has been
entertained in all Forms of Religion. An Account of that seemingly-strange
Phenomenon of Providence; the Rise, Growth and Continuance of the Mohammedan
Religion, not to be attempted by us, at least in this place.

I. HAving in the Former Chapter prepared the way, we shall now proceed (with
the Divine Assistance) to Answer and Confute all those Atheistick Arguments
before proposed. The First whereof was this, That there is no Idea of God, and
therefore, either no such Thing existing in Nature, or at least no Possible
Evidence of it.

To affirm that there is no Idea of God, is all one as to affirm, that there is
no Conception of the Mind answering to that Word or Name; And this the Modern
Atheists stick not to maintain, That the Word God has no Signification, and
that there is no other Idea or Conception in Men's Minds, answering thereunto,
besides the mere Phantasm of the Sound. Now for any one to go about soberly to
confute this, and to Prove that God is not the Only Word without a
Signification, and that men do not every where pay all their Religious
Devotions, to the mere Phantasm of a Transient Sound, expecting all Good from
it, might very well seem to all Intelligent persons, a most Absurd and
Ridiculous Undertaking; both because the thing is so evident in it self, and
because the plainest things of all can least be Proved; Procl. in Timae. p. 176.
for (...)^ He that thinks all things to be Demonstrable, takes away
Demonstration it self. Wherefore we shall here only suggest thus much, that
since there are different words for God in several Languages, and men have the
same Notion or Conception in their Minds answering to them all, it must needs
be granted, that they have some other Idea or Conception belonging to those
Words, besides the Phantasms of their several Sounds. And indeed it can be
nothing else, but either Monstrous Sottishness and Stupidity of Mind, or else
Prodigious Impudence, in these Atheists to deny, that there is any Idea of God
at all, in the Minds of men, or that the Word has any Signification.

It was hereofore observed by Epictetus, Arria. l. 1. c. 5.
(...)^ That if any man will oppose or contradict the most evident Truths, it
will not be easy, to find arguments wherewith to convince him. And yet this
notwithstanding, ought neither to be Imputed, to any Inability in the Teacher,
nor to any strength of Wit in the Denier, but only to a certain dead
Insensibility in him. Whereupon he further adds, that there is a double (...)
or (...), Mortification or Petrification of the Soul; the one, when it is
Stupefied and Besotted in its Intellectuals; the other, when it is Bedeaded in
its Morals, as to that Pudor that naturally should belong to a Man. And he
concludes, that either of these States (though it be not commonly so
apprehended) is a Condition little less deplorable, than that of Bodily Death;
as also that such a person is not at all to be Disputed with. For (...)^ What
Sword can one bring or what Fire, by burning or slashing, to make such a one
perceive that he is dead? but if he be sensible, and will not acknowledge it,
then he is worse than dead, being castrated as to that Pudor that belongs to a
man. Moreover, that Philosopher took notice that in those times, when this
Denial of most Evident Truths, proceeded rather from Impudence than Stupidity
or Sottishness, the Vulgar would be apt to admire it, for strength of Wit and
great Learning; (...)^ But if any man's Pudor be deaded or mortified in him, we
call this Power and Strength.

Now as this was sometimes the Case of the Academicks, so is it also commonly
of the Atheists, that their Minds are Partly Petrified and Benumbed into a kind
of Sottish and Stupid Insensibility, so that they are not able to discern
things that are most Evident; and Partly Depudorated or become so void of
Shame, as that though they do perceive, yet they will Obstinately and
Impudently deny the plainest things that are, as this, that there is any Idea
answering to the word God, besides the Phantasm of the Sound. And we do the
rather insist upon this Prodigious Monstrosity of Atheists in this place,
because we shall have occasion afterward more than once to take notice of it
again, in other Instances, as when they affirm, that Local Motion and
Cogitation, are really one and the self same thing, and the like. And we
conceive it to be unquestionably True, that it is many times nothing else, but
either this Shameless Impudence or Sottish Insensibility in Atheists, that is
admired by the Ignorant, for Profoundness of Wit and Learning, (...). But shall
I call this Power or Wit, and commend it upon that account? No more than I will
commend the Impudence of the Cinaedi, who stick not publicly to Do and Say any
thing.

II. But whatever these Atheists deny in words, it is notwithstanding evident,
that even themselves have an Idea or Conception in their Minds answering to the
Word, God, when they deny his Existence, because otherwise they should deny the
existence of Nothing. Nor can it be at all doubted, but that they have also the
same Idea of God with Theists, they denying the Existence of no other thing
than what these assert. And as in all other Controversies, when men dispute
together, the one Affirming the other Denying, both Parties must needs have the
same Idea in their Minds of what they dispute about, or otherwise their whole
Disputation would be but a kind of Babel-Language and Confusion; so must it be
likewise in this present Controversy, betwixt Theists and Atheists* Neither
indeed would there be any Controversy at all between them, did they not both
by God, mean one and the same thing; nor would the Atheists be any longer
Atheists, did they not deny the Existence of that very same Thing, which the
Theists affirm, but of something else.

III. Wherefore we shall in the next place declare what this Idea of God is, or
what is that thing whose Existence they that affirm are called Theists, and
they who deny Atheists. In order whereunto, we must first lay down this Lemma
or Preparatory Proposition, That as it is generally acknowledged, that all
things did not exist from Eternity, such as they are, Unmade, but that
something were Made and Generated or produced; so it is not possible that All
things should be Made neither, but there must of necessity be something
Self-existent from Eternity, and Unmade; because if there had been once
Nothing, there could never have been any thing. The Reason of which is so
evident and irresistible, that even the Atheists confess themselves conquered
by it, and readily acknowledge it for an indubitable Truth, That there must be
something (...), something which was never Made or Produced, and which
therefore is the Cause of those other things that are Made, something (...) and
(...), that was Self-originated and Self-existing, and which is as well (...)
and (...), as (...), Incorruptible and Vndestroyable, as Ingenerable; whose
Existence therefore must needs be Necessary, because if it were supposed to
have happened by Chance to exist from Eternity, then it might as well happen
again to Cease to Be. Wherefore all the Question now is, what is this (...) and
(...) and (...), this Ingenerable and Incorruptible, Self-originated and
Self-existent Thing, which is the Cause of all other things that are Made.

IV. Now there are Two Grand Opinions Opposite to one another concerning it:
For first, some contend that the only Self-existent, Unmade and Incorruptible
Thing, and First Principle of all things, is Senseless Matter, that is, Matter
either perfectly Dead and Stupid, or at least devoid of all Animalish and
Conscious Life. But because this is really the Lowest and most Imperfect of all
Beings, Others on the contrary judge it reasonable, that the First Principle
and Original of all things, should be that which is Most Perfect (as Aristotle
observes of Pherecydes and his Followers, (...), That they made the First Cause
and Principle of Generation to be the Best) and then apprehending that to be
endewed with Conscious Life and Understanding, is much a Greater Perfection
than to be devoid of both, (as Balbus in Cicero declares upon this very
occasion, Nec dubium quin quod Animans sit, De Not. Deo* L. 2.
habeatque Mentem and Rationem and Sensum, id sit melius quam id quod his
careat) they therefore conclude, That the only Unmade thing, which was the
Principle, Cause and Original of all other things, was not Senseless Matter, but
a Perfect Conscious Understanding Nature, or Mind. And these are they who are
strictly and properly called Theists, who affirm that a Perfectly Conscious
Understanding Being, or Mind, existing of it self from Eternity, was the Cause
of all other things; and they on the contrary who derive all things from
Senseless Matter, as the First Original, and deny that there is any Conscious
Understanding Being Self-existent or Unmade, are those that are properly called
Atheists. Wherefore the true and genuine Idea of God in general, is this, A
Perfect Conscious Understanding Being (or Mind) Existing of it self from
Eternity, and the Cause of all other things.

V. But it is here observable, that those Atheists who deny a God, according to
this True and Genuine Notion of him, which we have declared, do often Abuse the
Word, calling Senseless Matter by that Name. Partly perhaps as endeavoring
thereby, to decline that odious and ignominious name of Atheists, and partly as
conceiving, that whatsoever is the First Principle of things, Ingenerable and
Incorruptible, and the Cause of all other things besides it self, must
therefore needs be the Divinest Thing of all. Wherefore by the word God, these
mean nothing else, but that which is (...), Unmade or Self-existent, and the
(...) or First Principle of things. Thus it was before observed, that
Anaximander called Infinite Matter, devoid of all manner of Life, the (...) or
God; and Pliny, the Corporeal World, endewed with nothing but a Plastic
Unknowing Nature, Numen; as also others in Aristotle, upon the same account
called the Inanimate Elements Gods, as Supposed First Principles of things,
(...), for these are also Gods. And indeed Aristotle himself seems to be guilty
of this miscarriage of Abusing the word God after this manner, when speaking of
Love and Chaos, Metaph. lib. 1. cap. 4.
as the two first Principles of things, he must, according to the Laws of
Grammar, be understood to call them both Gods: (...)^ Concerning these two
(Gods) how they ought to be ranked, and which of them is to be placed first,
whether Love or Chaos, is afterward to be resolved. Which Passage of
Aristotle's seems to agree with that of Epicharmus, (...); But Chaos is said to
have been made the first of the Gods; unless we should rather understand him
thus, That Chaos was said, to have been made before the Gods. And this Abuse of
the Word God, is a thing which the learned Origin took notice of in his Book
against Celsus, where he speaks of that Religious Care, which ought to be had
about the use of Words: L. 1. p. 19. Caut.
(...)^ He therefore that has but the least consideration of these things,
will take a Religious care, that he give not improper names to things, left he
should fall into a like miscarriage with those, who attribute the name of God
to Inanimate and Senseless matter. Now according to this false and spurious
Notion of the word God, when it is taken for any Supposed First Principle, or
Self-existent Unmade Thing, whatsoever that be, there neither is nor can be any
such things as an Atheist; since whosoever has but the least dram of Reason,
must needs acknowledge, that Something or other Existed from Eternity Unmade,
and was the Cause of those other things that are Made. But that Notion or Idea
of God, according to which some are Atheists, and some Theists, is in the
strictest sense of it, what we have already declared, A Perfect Mind, or
Consciously Understanding Nature, Self-existent from Eternity, and the Cause of
all other things. The genuine Theists being those who make the First Original
of all things Universally, to be a Consciously Understanding Nature (or Perfect
Mind) but the Atheists properly such, as derive all things from Matter, either
perfectly Dead and Stupid, or else devoid of all Conscious and Animalish Life.

VI. But that we may more fully and punctually declare the true Idea of God, we
must here take notice of a certain Opinion of some Philosophers, who went as it
were in a middle betwixt both the Former, and neither made Matter alone, nor
God, the Sole Principle of all things; but joined them both together and held
Two First Principles or Self-existent Unmade Beings, independent upon one
another, God, and the Matter. Amongst whom the Stoics are to be reckoned, who
notwithstanding because they held, that there was no other Substance besides
Body, strangely confounded themselves, being by that means necessitated, to
make their Two First Principles, the Active and the Passive, to be both of them
really but One and the self-same Substance: their Doctrine to this purpose
being thus declared by Cicero; Naturam dividebant in Res Duas, ut Altera esset
Efficiens, Altera autem quasi huic se praebens, ex qua Efficeretur aliquid. In
eo quod Efficeret, Vim esse censebant; in eo quod Efficeretur, Materiam
quandam; in Vtroque tamen Vtrumque. Neque enim Materiam ipsam ohaerere potuisse
si nulla Vi contineretur, neque Vim sine aliqua Materia; Nihil est enim quod
non Alicubi esse cogatur. The Stoics divided Nature into Two Things as the
First Principles, One whereof is the Efficient, or Artificer, the Other that
which offers it self to him for things to be made out of it. In the Efficienti
Principle they took notice of Active Force, in the Patient of Matter; but so as
that in each of these were both together: forasmuch as neither the Matter could
cohere together unless it were contained by some Active Force, nor the Active
Force subsist of it self without Matter, because that is Nothing which is not
somewhere. But besides these Stoics, there were other Philosophers, who
admitting of Incorporeal Substance, did suppose Two First Principles, as
Substances really distinct from one another that were Coexistent from Eternity,
an Incorporeal Deity and Matter; as for Example Anaxagoras, Archelaus, Atticus,
and many more; See Eusebius. Praep. Ev. Li. 7. c. 7.
insomuch that Pythagoras himself was reckoned amongst those by Numenius, and
Plato by Plutarch and Laertius.

And we find it commonly taken for granted, that Aristotle also was of this
Persuasion, though it cannot be certainly concluded from thence (as some seem
to suppose) because he asserted the Eternity of the World: Plotinus,
Porphyrius, Jamblichus, Proclus and Simplicius, doing the like, and yet
notwithstanding maintaining, that God was the Sole Principle of all things, and
that Matter also was derived from him. L. 1. c. 1,
Neither will that Passage of Aristotle's in his Metaphysics, necessarily
evince the Contrary, (...), God seems to be a Cause to all things and a certain
Principle, because this might be understood only of the Forms of things.

But it is plain that Plutarch was a Maintainer of this Doctrine, from his
Discourse upon the Platonic Psychogonia, (besides other Places) (...). It is
therefore better for us to follow Plato (than Heraclitus) and loudly to
declare, that the World was made by God. For as the world is the Best of all
Works, so is God the Best of all Causes. Nevertheless the Substance or Matter
out of which the World was made, was not it self made; but always ready at
hand, and subject to the Artificer, to be ordered and disposed by him. For the
making of the World, was not the Production of it out of Nothing, but out of an
antecedent Bad and Disorderly State, like the Making of an House, Garment or
Statue.

It is also well known, that Hermogenes and other ancient Pretenders to
Christianity, did in like manner assert the Self-existence and Improduction of
the Matter, for which Cause they were commonly called Materiarii, or the
Materiarian Heretics; they pretending by this means to give an account (as the
Stoics had done before them) of the Original of Evils, and to free God from
the Imputation of them. Their Ratiocination to which purpose, is thus set down
by Tertullian. Adver. Hermog. p. 282. Reg.
God made all things, either out of Himself, or out of Nothing, or out of
Matter. He could not make all things out of Himself, because himself being
always Unmade, he should then really have been the Maker of Nothing. And he did
not make all out of Nothing, because being Essentially good, he would have made
Nihil non optimum, every thing in the Best manner, and so there could have been
no Evil in the World. But since there are Evils, and these could not proceed
from the Will of God, they must needs arise from the Fault of something, and
therefore of the Matter, out of which things were made. Lastly, it is
sufficiently known likewise, that some Modern Sects of the Christian
Profession, at this day, do also assert the Vncreatedness of the Matter. But
these suppose, in like manner as the Stoics did, Body to be the Only
Substance.

VII. Now of all these whosoever they were who thus maintained Two
Self-existent Principles, God and the Matter, we may pronounce Universally,
that they were neither Better nor Worse, than a kind of Imperfect Theists.

They had a certain Notion or Idea of God, such as it was, which seems to be
the very same, with that expressed in Aristotle, (...), An Animal the Best
Eternal, and represented also by Epicurus in this manner, (...)^ An Animal that
has all Happiness with Incorruptibility.

Wherein it was acknowledged by them, that besides Senseless Matter, there was
also an Animalish and Conscious or Perceptive Nature, Self-existent from
Eternity; in opposition to Atheists, who made Matter, either devoid of all
manner of Life, or at least of such as is Animalish and Conscious, to be the
Sole Principle of All things. For it has been often observed, that some
Atheists attributed, a kind of Plastic Life or Nature, to that Matter, which
they made to be the Only Principle of the Universe. And these Two sorts of
Atheisms were long since taken notice of by Seneca in these words; Not. Qu.
Praef. L. 1.
Vniversum in quo nos quoque sumus, expers esse Consilii, and aut ferri
Temeritate quadam aut Natura Nesciente quid faciat. The Atheists make the
Universe, whereof our selves are part, to be devoid of Counsel, and therefore
either to be carried on Temerariously and Fortuitously; or else by such a
Nature, as which (though it be Orderly, Regular and Methodical) yet is
notwithstanding Nescient of what it does. But no Atheist ever acknowledged
Conscious Animality, to be a First Principle in the Universe; nor that the
Whole was governed by any Animalish, Sentient, and Understanding Nature,
presiding over it as the Head of it; but as it was before declared, they
Concluded all Animals and Animality, all Conscious, Sentient and
Self-perceptive Life, to be Generated and Corrupted, or Educed out of Nothing,
and Reduced to Nothing again. Wherefore they who on the Contrary asserted
Animality and Conscious Life, to be a First Principle or Unmade thing in the
Universe are to be accounted Theists. Thus Balbus in Cicero, declares, that to
be a Theist, is to assert, Ab Animantibus Principiis Mundum, esse Generatum,
That the World was Generated or Produced at first from Animant Principles, and
that it is also still governed by such a Nature, Res omnes subjectas esse
Naturae Sentienti, That all things are subject to a Sentient and Conscious
Nature, steering and guiding of them.

But to distinguish this Divine Animal, from all others, these Desiners added,
that it was (...) and (...), the Best and most Happy Animal; and accordingly,
this Difference is added to that Generical Nature of Animality, by Balbus the
Stoic, to make up the Idea or Definition of God complete: Cicero de Not. D. l.
2.
Talem esse Deum certa Notione animi praesentimus; Primum, ut sit Animans;
Deinde, ut in omni Natura nihil Illo sit Praestantius: We presage concerning
God, by a certain Notion of our Mind; First, that he is an Animans, or
Consciously Living Being; and then Secondly, that he is such an Animans, as
that there is nothing in the Whole Universe, or Nature of things, more
Excellent than Him.

Wherefore these Materiarian Theists acknowledged God to be a
Perfectly-understanding Being, and Such as had also Power over the Whole Matter
of the Universe; which was utterly unable to move it self, or to produce any
thing without him. And all of them except the Anaxagoreans concluded, that He
was the Creator of all the Forms of Inanimate Bodies, and of the Souls of
Animals. However, it was Universally agreed upon amongst them, that he was at
least The Orderer and Disposer of all, and that therefore he might upon that
account well be called, the (...), The Maker or Framer of the World.

Notwithstanding which, so long as they Maintained Matter to exist
Independently upon God, and sometimes also to be Refractory and Contumacious to
him, and by that means to be the Cause of Evli, contrary to the Divine Will; it
is plain that they could not acknowledge the Divine Omnipotence, according to
the Full and Proper sense of it. Which may also further appear from these
Queries of Seneca concerning God. Quantum Deus possit? Materiam ipse sibi
Formet, an Data utatur? Deus quicquid Vult efficiat? An in multis rebus illuni
Tractanda destituant, and a Magno Artifice Prave formentur multa, non quia
cessat Ars, sed quia id in quo exercetur, saepe Inobsequens Arti est? How far
Gods Power does extend? Whether he make his own Matter, or only use that which
is offered him? Whether he can do whatsoever he will? Or the Materials in many
things Frustrate and Disappoint him, and by that means things come to be
Ill-framed by this great Artificer, not because his Art fails him, but because
that which it is exercised upon, proves Stubborn and Contumacious? Wherefore, I
think, we may well conclude, that those Materiarian Theists, had not a Right
and Genuine Idea of God.

Nevertheless, it does not therefore follow, that they must needs be concluded
Absolute Atheists; for there may be a Latitude allowed in Theism; and though in
a strict and proper sense, they be only Theists, who acknowledge One God
perfectly Omnipotent, the Sole Original of of all things, and as well the Cause
of Matter, as of any thing else; yet it seems reasonable, that such
Consideration should be had of the Infirmity of Humane Understandings, as to
extend the Word further, that it may comprehend within it, those also who
assert One Intellectual Principle Self-existent from Eternity, the Framer and
Governor of the whole World, though not the Creator of the Matter; and that
none should be condemned for Absolute Atheists, merely because they hold
Eternal Uncreated Matter, unless they also deny, an Eternal Unmade Mind, ruling
over the Matter, and so make Senseless Matter the Sole Original of all things.
And this is certainly most agreeable to common apprehensions; for Democritus
and Epicurus, would never have been condemned for Atheists, merely for
asserting Eternal Self-existent Atoms, no more than Anaxagoras and Archelaus
were, (who maintained the same thing) had they not also denied, that other
Principle of theirs, a Perfect Mind, and concluded that the World was made,
(...), Without the ordering and disposal of any Understanding Being, that had
all Happiness with Incorruptibility.

VIII. The True and Proper Idea of God, in its Most Contracted Form is this, A
Being Absolutely Perfect. For this is that alone, to which Necessary Existence
is Essential, and of which it is Demonstrable. Now as Absolute Perfection
includes in it all that belongs to the Deity, so does it not only comprehend
(besides Necessary Existence) Perfect Knowledge or Understanding, but also
Omni-causality and Omnipotence (in the full extent of it) otherwise called
Infinite Power. God is not only (...), and Animans quo nihil in omni Natura
praestantius, as the Materiarian Theists described him, The Best Living Being;
nor as Zeno Eleates called him, (...), the Most Powerful of all things; but he
is also (...), and (...), and (...), Absolutely Omnipotent, and Infinitely
Powerful: and therefore neither Matter, nor any thing else can exist of it self
Independently upon God; but he is the Sole Principle and Source, from which all
things are derived.

But because this Infinite Power, is a thing, which the Atheists quarrel much
withal, as if it were altogether Unintelligible and therefore Impossible, we
shall here briefly declare the Sense of it, and render it (as we think) easily
Intelligible or Conceivable, in these Two following steps. First, that by
Infinite Power is meant nothing else, but Perfect Power, or else as Simplicius
calls it, (...), a Whole and Entire Power, such as has no Allay and Mixture of
Impotency, nor any Defect of Power mingled with it. And then again, that this
Perfect Power (which is also the same with Infinite) is really nothing else,
but a Power of Producing and Doing, all whatsoever is Conceivable, and which
does not imply a Contradiction; for Conception is the Only Measure of Power and
its Extent; as shall be showed more fully in due place.

Now here we think fit to observe, that the Pagan Theists did themselves also,
vulgarly acknowledge Omnipotence as an Attribute of the Deity; which might be
proved from sundry Passages of their Writings.

Homer. Od. (...). -- (...)
(...).
-- Deus aliud post aliud
Jupiter, Bonumque Malumque dat, Potest enim Omnia.
And again, Od. (...). -- (...),
(...).
-- Deus autem hoc dabit, illud omittet,
Quodcunque ei libitum fuerit, Potest enim Omnia.
To this Purpose also before Homer, Linus, (...)^ And after him, Callimachus,
(...)^ All things are possible for God to do, and nothing transcends his Power:
Thus also amongst the Latin Poets, Virgil Aen. the First, Sed Pater Omnipotens,
Speluncis abdidit Atris. Again Aen. the Second, At Pater Anchises, oculos ad
sydera laetus
Extulit, and Coelo palmas cum Voce tetendit;
Jupiter Omnipotens, precibus si flecteris ullis*:
And Aen. the Fourth, Talibus orantem dictis, arasque tenentem
Audiit Omnipotens.
Ovid in like manner, Metamorph. 1. Tum Pater Omnipotens, misso persregit
Olympum
Fulmine, and excussit subjectum Pelion Ossae.
And to cite no more, Agatho an ancient Greek Poet, is commended by Aristotle,
for affirming, nothing to be exempted from the Power of God, but only this,
that he cannot make That not to have been, which has been; that is, do what
implies a Contradiction. (...), Eth. Nic. L. 4. c. 2.

(...)^
Hoc namque duntaxat, negatum etiam Deo est,
Quae facta sunt, Infecta posse reddere.
Lastly, that the Atheists themselves under Paganism looked upon Omnitence, and
Infinite Power, as an Essential Attribute of the Deity, appears plainly from
Lucretius, when he tells us, that Epicurus, in order to the Taking away of
Religion, set himself to Confute Infinite Power. Lib. 1.
-- Omne Immensum peragravit Mente Animoque,
Vnde refert nobis Victor, quid possit Oriri,
Quid nequeat: Finita Potestas denique quoique
Quanam sit ratione, atque alte Terminus haerens.
Quare Relligio pedibus subjecta vicissim
Obteritur, nos exaequat Victoria Coelo.
As if he should have said, Epicurus by showing that all Power was Finite,
effectually destroyed Religion; he thereby taking away the Object of it, which
is an Omnipotent and Infinitely Powerful Deity. And this is a thing which the
same Poet often harps upon again, that there is No Infinite Power, and
Consequently no Deity, according to the true Idea of it. But last of all, in
his Sixth Book, he condemns Religionists, as guilty of great folly, in
asserting Omnipotence or Infinite Power (that is, a Deity) after this manner.
Rursus in antiquas referuntur Relligiones,
Et Dominos acres asciscunt, Omnia Posse,
Quos miseri credunt, ignari quid queat esse,
Quid nequeat, Finita Potestas denique quoique,
Quanam sit ratione, atque alte Terminus haerens:
Quo magis errantes tota regione feruntur.
Where though the Poet, speaking carelessly, after the manner of those times,
seem to attribute Omnipotence and Infinite Power to Gods Plurally, yet as it is
evident in the thing it self, that this can only be the Attribute of One
Supreme Deity; so it may be observed, that in those Passages of the Poets
before cited, it is accordingly always ascribed to God Singularly. Nevertheless
all the Inferior Pagan Deities, were supposed by them to have their certain
shares of this Divine Omnipotence, severally dispensed and imparted to them.

IX. But we have not yet dispatched all that belongs to the Entire Idea of God.
For Knowledge and Power alone, will not make a God. For God is generally
conceived by all to be a Most Venerable and Most Desirable Being: whereas an
Omniscient and Omnipotent Arbitrary Deity, that has nothing either of
Benignity or Morality in its Nature to Measure and Regulate its Will, as it
could not be truly August and Venerable, according to that Maxim, sine
Bonitate nulla Majestas; so neither could it be Desirable, it being that which
could only be Feared and Dreaded, but not have any Firm Faith or Confidence
placed in it. Plutarch in the Life of Aristides, (...), etc. God seems to excel
in these Three things, Incorruptibility, Power and Virtue, of all which the
Most Divine and Venerable is Virtue, for Vacuum and the Senseless Elements have
Incorruptibility, Earthquakes, and Thunders, Blustering Winds and Overflowing
Torrents, Much of Power and Force. Wherefore the Vulgar being affected three
manner of ways toward the Deity, so as to admire its Happiness, to Fear it,
and to Honor it; they esteem the Deity Happy for its Incorruptibility, they
Fear it and stand in awe of it for its Power, but they Worship it, that is Love
and Honor it, for its Justice. And indeed an Omnipotent Arbitrary Deity, may
seem to be in some sense, a Worse and more Vndesireable Thing, than the
Manichean Evil God; forasmuch as the Latter could be but Finitely Evil, whereas
the Former might be so Infinitely. However (I think) it can be little doubted,
but that the whole Manichean Hypothesis, taken all together, is to be
preferred, before this of One Omnipotent Arbitrary Deity (devoid of Goodness
and Morality) ruling all things; because there the Evil Principle is Yoaked
with another Principle Essentially Good, checking and controlling it. And it
also seems less Dishonorable to God, to impute Defect of Power than of
Goodness and Justice to him.

Neither can Power and Knowledge alone, make a Being in it self completely
Happy; for we have all of us by Nature (...) (as both Plato and Aristotle call
it) a certain Divination, Presage, and Parturient Vaticination in our minds, of
some Higher Good and Perfection, than either Power or Knowledge. Knowledge is
plainly to be preferred before Power, as being that which guides and directs
its blind Force and Impetus; but Aristotle himself declares, Eth Eudem. l. 7^
c. 1^.
that there is (...), which is (...), Something better than Reason and
Knowledge, which is the Principle and Original of it. For (says he) (...)^ The
Principle of Reason is not Reason, but Something Better. Where he also
intimates this to be the Proper and Essential Character of the Deity; (...);
For what is there, that can be better than Knowledge, but God? Likewise the
same Philosopher elsewhere plainly determines, that there is Morality in the
Nature of God, and that his Happiness consists principally therein, and not
in External things, and the Exercise of his Power, De Rep. l. 7. c. ^.
(...). That every man has so much of Happiness, as he has of Virtue and
Wisdom, and of Acting according to these, ought to be confessed and
acknowledged by us, it being a thing that may be proved from the Nature of God,
who is Happy, but not from any external Goods, but because he is himself (or
that which he is) and in such a manner affected according to his Nature, that
is, because he is Essentially Moral and Virtuous.

Which Doctrine of Aristotle's, seems to have been borrowed from Plato. who in
his Dialogues De Republica, discoursing about Moral Virtue, occasionally falls
upon this Dispute concerning the Summum Bonum or Chiefest Good; wherein he
concludes, that it neither consisted in Pleasure as such, according to the
Opinion of the Vulgar, nor yet in Mere Knowledge and Understanding, according
to the Conceit of others, Lib. 6.
who were more Polite and Ingenious. (...). You know that to the Vulgar,
Pleasure seems to be the Highest Good, but to those who are more Elegant and
Ingenuous, Knowledge: But they who entertain this Latter Opinion, can none of
them declare what kind of Knowledge it is, which is that Highest and Chiefest
Good, but are necessitated at last to say, that it is The Knowledge of Good,
very ridiculously: Forasmuch as herein they do but run round in a Circle, and
upbraiding us for being ignorant of this Highest Good, they talk to us at the
same time, as knowing what it is. And thereupon he adds (...). That though
Knowledge and Truth be both of them Excellent things, yet he that shall
conclude the Chief Good to be something which transcends them both, will ^ot be
mistaken. For as Light, and Sight or the Seeing Faculty, may both of them
rightly be said to be Soliform things, or of Kin to the Sun, but neither of
them to be the Sun it self; so Knowledge and Truth, may likewise both of them
be said to be Boniform things, and of Kin to the Chief Good, but neither of
them to be that Chief Good it self; but this is still to be looked upon as a
thing more August and Honorable. In all which of Plato's, there seems to be
little more, than what may be experimentally found within our selves; namely,
that there is a certain Life, or Vital and Moral Disposition of Soul, which is
much more Inwardly and thoroughly Satisfactory, not only than Sensual Pleasure,
but also than all Knowledge and Speculation whatsoever.

Now whatever this Chiefest Good be, which is a Perfection Superior to
Knowledge and Understanding; that Philosopher resolves that it must needs be
First and Principally in God, who is therefore called by him, (...), The very
Idea or Essence of Good. Wherein he trod in the Footsteps of the Pythagoreans,
and particularly of Timaeus Locrus, who making Two Principles of the Universe,
Mind and Necessity, adds concerning the Former, (...)^ The First of these Two,
is of the Nature of Good, and it is called God, the Principle of the Best
things. Agreeably with which Doctrine of theirs, the Hebrew Cabalists also make
a Sephirah in the Deity, Superior both to Binah and Chochmah (Understanding
and Wisdom) which they call Chether or the Crown. And some would suspect this
Cabalistick Learning to have been very ancient among the Jews, and that
Parmenides was imbued with it, he calling God in like manner (...) or the
Crown. For which Velleius in Cicero, (representing the several Opinions of
Philosophers concerning God) perstringes him amongst the rest, Parmenides
Commentitium quiddam, Coronae similitudine efficit, Stephanem appellat,
continentem ardore lucis orbem, qui cingit Coelum, quem appellat Deum.

But all this while we seem to be to seek, What the Chief and Highest Good
Superior to Knowledge is, in which the Essence of the Deity principally
consists, and it cannot be denied, but that Plato sometimes talks too
Metaphysically and Clowdily about it; for which cause, as he lay open to the
Lash of Aristotle, so was he also Vulgarly perstringed for it, as appears by
that of Amphys the Poet in Laertius. (...)
(...),
(...)^
What Good that is, which you ex^ect from hence, I confess, I less understand,
than I do Plato' s Good. Nevertheless he plainly intimates these two Things
concerning it. First, that this Nature of Good which is also the Nature of God,
includes Benignity in it, when he gives this account of Gods both Making the
World and after such a Manner; Because he was Good, and that which is Good has
no Envy in it, and therefore he both made the World, and also made it as well,
and as like to himself as was possible. And Secondly, that it comprehends
Eminently all Virtue and Justice, the Divine Nature being the First Pattern
hereof; for which cause Virtue is defined to be, An Assimilation to the Deity.
Justice and Honesty are no Factitious things, Made by the Will and Command of
the more Powerful to the Weaker, but they are Nature and Perfection, and
descend downward to us from the Deity.

But the Holy Scripture without any Metaphysical Pomp and Obscurity, tells us
plainly, Both what is that Highest Perfection of Intellectual Beings, which is
(...), Better than Reason and Knowledge, and which is also the Source, Life and
Soul of all Morality, namely that it is Love or Charity. Though I speak with
the Tongue of Men and Angels, and have not Love, I am but (...), as Sounding
Brass or a Tinkling Cymbal, which only makes a Noise without any Inward Life.
And though I have Prophecy, and understand all Mysteries and all Knowledge, and
though I have all Faith, so that I could remove Mountains, and have not Love, I
am Nothing, that is, I have no Inward Satisfaction, Peace or True Happiness.
And though I bestow all my Goods to feed the Poor, and give my body to be
burned, and have not love, it profits me nothing; I am for all that utterly
destitute of all True Morality, Virtue and Grace. And accordingly it tells us
also in the next place, what the Nature of God is, that he is properly, neither
Power nor Knowledge (though having the Perfection of both in him) but Love. And
certainly whatever Dark Thoughts concerning the Deity, some Men in their Cells
may sit brooding on, it can never reasonably be conceived, that that which is
(...), the Most Self-sufficient and Self-happy Being, should have any Narrow
and Selfish Designs abroad, without it self, much less harbor any Malignant
and Despightful ones, toward its Creatures. Nevertheless because so many are
apt to abuse the Notion of the Divine Love and Goodness, and to frame such
Conceptions of it, as destroy that Awful and R^v^rential Fear that ought to be
had of the Deity, and make Men Presumptuous and Regardless of their Lives,
therefore we think fit here to superadd also, that God is no Soft nor Fond and
Partial Love, but that Justice is an Essential Branch of this Divine Goodness;
God being, as the Writer De Mundo well Expresses it, (...), An Impartial Law,
and as Plato, (...), the Measure of all things. In Imitation whereof, Aristotle
concludes also, that a Good Man (in a Lower and more Imperfect sense) is (...)
too, an Impartial Measure of Things and Actions.

It is evident that the Atheists themselves in those former times of Paganism,
took it for Granted, that Goodness was an Essential Attribute of the Deity
whose Existence they opposed (so that it was then generally acknowledged for
such, by the Pagan Theists) from those Argumentations of theirs before
mentioned, the 12th. and 13th. taken from the Topic of Evils, the Pretended
Ill Frame of things, and Want of Providence over Humane Affairs. Which if they
were true, would not at all disprove such an Arbitrary Deity (as is now
phancied by some) made up of Nothing but Will and Power, without any Essential
Goodness and Justice. But those Arguments of the Atheists are directly Levelled
against the Deity, according to the True Notion or Idea of it; and could they
be made Good, would do execution upon the same. For it cannot be denied, but
that the Natural Consequence of this Doctrine, That there is a God Essentially
Good, is this, that therefore the World is Well Made and Governed. But we shall
afterward declare, that though there be Evil in the Parts of the World, yet
there is none in the Whole; and that Moral Evils are not Imputable to the Deity.

And now we have proposed the Three Principal Attributes of the Deity. The
First whereof is Infinite goodness with Fecundity, the Second Infinite
Knowledge and Wisdom, and the Last Infinite Active and Perceptive Power. From
which Three Divine Attributes, the Pythagoreans and Platonists, seem to have
framed their Trinity of Archical Hypostases, such as have the Nature of
Principles in the Universe, and which though they apprehended as several
Distinct Substances, gradually subordinate to one another, yet they many times
extend the (...) so far, as to comprehend them all within it. Which Pythagorick
Trinity seems to be intimated by Aristotle in those words, (...)^ De Coel. l.
1. c. 1.
As the Pythagoreans also say, the Universe and all things, are determined and
contained by three Principles. Of which Pythagorick Trinity more afterward. But
now we may enlarge and fill up, that Compendious Idea of God premised, of A
Being Absolutely Perfect, by adding thereunto (to make it more Particular) such
as is Infinitely Good, Wise, and Powerful, necessarily Existing, and not only
the Framer of the World, but also the Cause of all things. Which Idea of the
Deity, is sufficient, in order to our present Undertaking.

Nevertheless, if we would not only attend to what is barely necessary for a
Dispute with Atheists, but also consider the Satisfaction of other Free and
Devout Minds, that are hearty and sincere Lovers of this Most Admirable and
Most Glorious Being, we might venture for their Gratification, to propose yet a
more Full, Free and Copious Description of the Deity, after this manner. God is
a Being Absolutely Perfect, Unmade or Self-originated, and Necessarily
Existing, that has an Infinite Fecundity in him, and Virtually Conteins all
things; as also an Infinite Benignity or Overflowing Love, Vninvidiously
displaying and communicating it self; together with an Impartial Rectitude, or
Nature of Justice: Who fully comprehends himself, and the Extent of his own
Fecundity; and therefore all the Possibilities of things, their several Natures
and Respects, and the Best Frame or System of the Whole: Who has also Infinite
Active and Perceptive Power: The Fountain of all things, who made all that
Could be Made, and was Fit to be made, producing them according to his Own
Nature (his Essential Goodness and Wisdom) and therefore according to the Best
Pattern, and in the Best manner Possible, for the Good of the Whole; and
reconciling all the Variety and Contrariety of things in the Universe, into One
most Admirable and Lovely Harmony. Lastly, who Conteins and Vpholds all things,
and governs them after the Best Manner also, and that without any Force or
Violence; they being all Naturally subject to his Authority, and readily
obeying his Laws. And Now we see that God is such a Being, as that if he could
be supposed Not to Be, there is Nothing, whose Existence, a Good Man could
Possibly more Wish or Desire.

X. From the Idea of God thus declared, it evidently appears, that there can be
but One such Being, and that (...), Unity, Oneliness or Singularity is
Essential to it: forasmuch as there cannot possibly be more than One Supreme,
more than One Omnipotent or Infinitely Powerful Being, and more than One Cause
of all things besides it self. And however Epicurus, endeavoring to pervert
and Adulterate the Notion of God, pretended to satisfy that Natural Prolepsis
or Anticipation in the Minds of Men, by a Feigned and Counterfeit asserting of
a Multiplicity of Coordinate Deities, Independent upon One Supreme, and such as
were also altogether unconcerned either in the Frame or Government of the
World, yet himself notwithstanding plainly took notice of this Idea of God
which we have proposed, including Unity or Onelyness in it (he professedly
opposing the Existence of such a Deity) as may sufficiently appear from that
Argumentation of his, in the Words before cited.

Quis regere Immensi summam, Quis habere Profundi Lib. 2. p 1^8. Lamb.

Indu manu validas potis est moderanter habenas?
Quis pariter coelos omnes convertere, and omnes
Ignibus aetheriis terras suffire feraces?
Omnibus inque locis esse omni tempore praesto?
Where he would conclude it to be a thing Utterly impossible, for the Deity to
Animadvert, Order and Dispose all things, and be Present every where in all the
distant places of the World at once; which could not be Pretended of a
Multitude of Coordinate Gods, sharing the Government of the World amongst them,
and therefore it must needs be levelled against a Divine Monarchy, or One
Single, Solitary Supreme Deity, ruling over all. As in like manner, when he
pursues the same Argument further in Cicero, to this purpose, that though such
a thing were supposed to be Possible, yet it would be notwithstanding
absolutely Inconsistent with the Happiness of any Being, De Not. D. l. 1.
he still procedes upon the same Hypothesis of one So^e and Single Deity: Sive
ipse Mundus Deus est, quid potest esse minus quietum, quam nullo puncto
temporis intermisso, versari circum axem Coeli admirabili celeritate? Sive in
ipso Mundo Deus inest aliquis qui regat, qui gubernet, qui cursus astrorum,
mutationes temporum, hominum commoda vitasque tueatur; nae Ille est implicatus
molestis negotiis and operosis. Whether you will suppose the World it self to
be a God, what can be more unquiet, than without intermission perpetually to
whirle round upon the Axis of the Heaven, with such admirable celerity? Or
whether you will imagine a God in the World distinct from it, who does govern
and dispose all things, keep up the Courses of the Stars, the Successive
Changes of the Seasons, and Orderly Vicissitudes of things, and contemplating
Lands and Seas, conserve the Vtilities and Lives of men; certainly He must
needs be involved in much solicitous trouble and Employment. For as Epicurus
here speaks Singularly, so the Trouble of this Theocracy could not be thought
so very great, to a Multitude of Coordinate Deities, when parcel'd out among
them, but would rather seem to be but a sportful and delightful Divertisement
to each of them. Wherefore it is manifest that such an Idea of God, as we have
declared, including Unity, Oneliness and Singularity in it, is a thing, which
the ancient Atheists, under the times of Paganism, were not unacquainted with,
but principally directed their Force against. But this may seem to be
Anticipated in this place, because it will fall in afterward more opportunely
to be discoursed of again.

XI. For this is that which lies as the Grand Prejudice and Objection against
that Idea of God, which we have proposed, Essentially including (...),
Singularity or Oneliness in it, or the Real Existence of such a Deity, as is
the Sole Monarch of the Universe; Because all the Nations of the World
heretofore (except a small and inconsiderable handful of the Jews) together
with their Wisest men and greatest Philosophers, were generally looked upon as
Polytheists, that is, such as Acknowledged and Worshipped a Multiplicity of
Gods. Now One God and Many Gods, being directly Contradictious to one another,
it is therefore concluded from hence, that this Opinion of Monarchy or of One
Supreme God, the Maker and Governor of all, has no Foundation in Nature, nor
in the genuine Idea's and Prolepses of men's minds, but is a mere Artificial
thing, owing its Original wholly to Private Phancies and Conceits, or to
Positive Laws and Institutions, amongst Jews, Christians and Mahometans.

For the assoilling of which Difficulty (seeming so formidable at first sight)
it is necessary, that we should make a Diligent Enquiry into the True and
Genuine sense of this Pagan Polytheism. For since it is impossible that any man
in his Wits, should believe a Multiplicity of Gods, according to that Idea of
God before declared, that is, a Multiplicity of Supreme, Omnipotent, or
Infinitely Powerful Beings; it is certain that the Pagan Polytheism, and
Multiplicity of Gods, must be understood according to some other Notion of the
Word Gods, or some Equivocation in the use of it. It has been already
observed, that there were sometime amongst the Pagans, such, who meaning
nothing else by Gods, but Understanding Beings Superior to men, did suppose a
Multitude of such Deities, which yet they conceived to be all (as well as Men)
Native and Mortal, Generated successively out of Matter and Corrupted again
into it, as Democritus his Idols were. But these Theogonists, who thus
Generated all things whatsoever, and therefore the Gods themselves universally,
out of Night and Chaos, the Ocean or Fluid Matter, (notwithstanding their Using
the Name Gods) are plainly condemned both by Aristotle and Plato, for
downright Atheists, they making Senseless Matter, the Only Self-existent thing,
and the Original of all things.

Wherefore there may be another Notion of the Word Gods, as taken for
Understanding Beings Superior to Men, that are not only Immortal, but also
Self-existent and Unmade; and indeed the Assertors of a Multiplicity of such
Gods as these, though they cannot be accounted Theists in a strict and proper
sense (according to that Idea of God before declared) yet they are not vulgarly
reputed Atheists neither, but looked upon as a kind of Middle thing betwixt
Both, and commonly called Polytheists. The reason whereof seems to be this,
because it is generally apprehended to be Essential to Atheism, to make
Senseless Matter the Sole Original of all things, and consequently to suppose
all Conscious Intellectual Beings to be Made or Generated; wherefore they who
on the contrary assert (not One but) Many Understanding Beings Unmade and
Self-existent, must needs be looked upon as those, who of the Two, approach
nearer to Theism than to Atheism, and so deserve rather to be called
Polytheists, than Atheists.

And there is no Question to be made, but that the Urgers of the forementioned
Objection against that Idea of God, which includes Oneliness and Singularity in
it, from the Pagan Polytheism, or Multiplicity of Gods, take it for granted,
that this is to be understood of Many Unmade Self-existent Deities, Independent
upon one Supreme, that are so many First Principles in the Universe, and
Partial Causes of the World. And certainly, if it could be made to appear, that
the Pagan Polytheists did universally acknowledge such a Multiplicity of Unmade
Self-existent Deities, then the Argument fetched from thence, against the
Naturality of that Idea of God proposed (Essentially including Singularity in
it) might seem to have no small Force or Validity in it.

XII. But First this Opinion of Many Self-existent Deities, Independent upon
One Supreme, is both Very Irrational in it self, and also plainly Repugnant to
the Phenomenon. We say First, it is Irrational in it self, because
Self-existence, and Necessary Existence being Essential to a Perfect Being and
to nothing else, it must needs be very Irrational and Absurd, to suppose a
Multitude of Imperfect Understanding Beings Self-existent, and no Perfect One.
Moreover, if Imperfect Understanding Beings were imagined to Exist of
themselves from Eternity, there could not possibly be any reason given, why
just so many of them should exist, and neither More nor Less, there being
indeed no reason why any at all should. But if it be supposed, that these Many
Self-existent Deities happened only to Exist thus from Eternity, and their
Existence notwithstanding, was not Necessary but Contingent, the Consequence
hereof will be, that they might as well happen again to cease to be, and so
could not be Incorruptible. Again, if any One Imperfect Being whatsoever, could
exist of it self from Eternity, then all might as well do so, not only Matter,
but also the Souls of Men and other Animals, and consequently there could be No
Creation by any Deity, nor those suposed Deities therefore deserve that Name.
Lastly, we might also add, that there could not be a Multitude of Intellectual
Beings Self-existent, because it is a thing which may be proved by Reason, that
all Imperfect Understanding Beings or Minds, do partake of One Perfect Mind,
and suppose also Omnipotence or Infinite Power; were it not, that this is a
Consideration too remote from Vulgar Apprehension, and therefore not so fit to
be urged in this place.

Again, as this Opinion of Many Self-existent Deities, is Irrational in it
self, so is it likewise plainly Repugnant to the Phenomenon of the World. In
which, as Macrobius writes, Omnia sunt connexa, all things conspire together
into One Harmony, and are carried on Peaceably and Quietly, Constantly and
Eavenly, without any Tumult or Hurly-burly, Confusion or Disorder, or the least
appearance of Schism and Faction; which could not possibly be supposed, were
the World Made and Governed, by a Rabble of Self-existent Deities, Coordinate,
and Independent upon One Supreme. Wherefore this kind of Polytheism was obiter
thus confuted by Origin; C^ntr. Cells. l. 1. p. 8.
(...); How much better is it, agreably to what we see in the harmonious System
of the World, to worship one only Maker of the World, which is one, and
conspiring throughout with its whole self, and therefore could not be made by
many Artificers, as neither be contained by Many Souls, Moving the Whole
Heaven? Now since this Opinion is both Irrational in it self and Repugnant to
the Phenomenon, there is the less Probability that it should have been received
and entertained by all the more Intelligent Pagans.

XIII. Who, that they did not thus Universally, look upon all their Gods as so
many Unmade Self-existent Beings, is unquestionably manifest from hence,
because ever since Hesiod's and Homer's time at least, the Greekish Pagans
generally acknowledged a Theogonia, a Generation and Temporary Production of
the Gods; which yet is not to be understood Universally neither, forasmuch as
he is no Theist, who does not acknowledge some Self-existent Deity. Concerning
this Theogonia, Herodotus writes after this manner: Euter. p. 53.
(...). Whence every one of the Gods was Generated, or whether they all of them
ever were, and what are their forms, is a thing that was not known till very
lately; for Hesiod and Homer, were (as I suppose) not above four hundred years
my Seniors. And these were they who introduced the Theogonia among the Greeks,
and gave the Gods their several Names: that is, settled the Pagan Theology. Now
if before Hesiod's and Homer's time, it were a thing not known or determined
amongst the Greeks, whether their Gods were Generated, or all of them Existed
from Eternity; then it was not Universally concluded by them, that they were
all Unmade and Self-existent. And though perhaps some might in those ancient
times believe one way, and some another, concerning the Generation and Eternity
of their Gods, yet it does not follow, that they who thought them to be all
Eternal, must therefore needs suppose them to be also Unmade or Self-existent.
For Aristotle, who asserted the Eternity of the World, and consequently also,
of those Gods of his, the Heavenly Body, did not for all that, suppose them to
be Self-existent or First Principles, but all to depend upon One Principle or
Original Deity. And indeed the true meaning of that Question in Herodotus,
Whether the Gods were Generated or Existed all of them from Eternity, is (as we
suppose) really no other than that of Plato's, (...)^ Whether the World were
Made or Unmade; and whether it had a Temporary beginning, or existed such as it
is from Eternity; which will be more fully declared afterward. But ever since
Hesiod's and Homer's time, that the Theogonia or Generation of the Gods, was
settled, and generally believed amongst the Greeks, it is certain that they
could not possibly think, all their Gods Eternal, and therefore much less,
Unmade and Self-existent.

But though we have thus clearly proved that all the Pagan Gods were not
Universally accounted by them, so many Unmade Self-existent Deities, they
acknowledging a Theogonia or a Generation of Gods, yet it may be suspected
notwithstanding, that they might suppose a Multitude of them also (and not only
One) to have been Unmade from Eternity and Self-existent. Wherefore we add in
the next place, that no such thing does at all appear neither, as that the
Pagans or any others, did ever publicly or professedly assert a Multitude of
Unmade Self-existent Deities. For First, it is plain concerning the Hesiodian
Gods, which were all the Gods of the Greekish Pagans, that either there was but
One of them only Self-existent, or else None at all. Because Hesiods Gods were
either all of them derived from Chaos (or the Floting Water) Love it self being
Generated likewise out of it (according to that Aristophanick Tradition before
mentioned) or else Love was supposed to be a distinct Principle from Chaos,
namely the Active Principle of the Universe, from whence together with Chaos,
all the Theogonia and Cosmogonia was derived. Now if the Former of these were
true, that Hesiod supposed all his Gods Universally, to have been Generated and
sprung Originally from Chaos or the Ocean, then it is plain that
notwithstanding all that Rabble of Gods mustered up by him, he could be no
other than One of those Atheisti^k Theogonists beforementioned, and really
acknowledged no God at all, according to the True Idea of him; he being not a
Theist, who admits of no Self-existent Deity. But if the Latter be true, that
Hesiod supposed Love to be a Principle distinct from Chaos, namely the Active
Principle of the Universe, and derived all his other Gods from thence, he was
then a right Paganick Theist, such as acknowledged indeed Many Gods, but only
One of them Unmade and Self-existent, all the rest being Generated or Created
by that One. Indeed it appears from those Passages of Aristotle before cited by
us, P. 116.112.
that that Philosopher had been sometimes divided in his Judgment concerning
Hesiod, where he should (...) rank him, whether among the Atheists or the
Theists. For in his Book de Coelo, he ranks him amongst those, who made all
things to be Generated and Corrupted, besides the Bare Substance of the Matter,
that is amongst the Absolute Atheists, and looked upon him as a Ringleader of
them: but in his Metaphysics, upon further thoughts, suspects that many of
those who made Love the Ch^^fest of the Gods, were Theists, they supposing it
to be a First Principle in the Universe, or the Active Cause of things, and
that not only Parmenides, but also Hesiod was such. Which Latter Opinion of his
is by far the more probable, and therefore embraced by Plutarch, who somewhere
determines Hesiod to have asserted One (...), or Unmade Deity, as also by the
ancient Scholiast^^^ upon him, writ thus, that Hesiods Love was (...)^ The
Heavenly Love, which is also God, that other Love that was born of Venus, being
Junior. But Joannes Diaconus; (...). By Love here (says he) we must not
understand Venus her Son, whose Mother was as yet Unborn, but another more
ancient Love, which I take to be the Active Cause or Principle of Motion,
Naturally inserted into things. Where though he do not seem to suppose this
Love to be God himself, yet he conceives it to be an Active Principle in the
Universe derived from God, and not from Matter. But this Opinion will be
further confirmed afterward.

The next considerable appearance of a Multitude of Self-existent Deities,
seems to be in the Valentinian Thirty Gods and Aeons, which have been taken by
some for such; but it is certain that these were all of them save One,
Generated; they being derived by that Fantastic Devizer of them, from One
Self-originated Deity, called Bythus. For thus Epiphanius informs us, Har. 31.
(...)^ This (Valentinus) would also introduce Thirty Gods and Aeons, and
Heavens, the first of which is Bythus; he meaning thereby an Unfathomable Depth
and Profundity; and therefore this Bythus, was also called by him (...), The
Highest and Ineffable Father.

We do indeed acknowledge that there have been some, who have really asserted a
Duplicity of Gods, in the sense declared; that is of Animalish or Perceptive
Beings Self-existent; One as the Principle of Good, and the other of Evil. And
this Ditheism of theirs, seems to be the nearest approach, that was ever really
made to Polytheism. Unless we should here give heed to Plutarch, who seems to
make the ancient Persians, besides their Two Gods, the Good and the Evil, or
Oromasdes and Arimanius; to have asserted also a Third Middle Deity called by
them Mithras; or to some Ecclesiastic Writers, who impute a Trinity of Gods to
Marcion; (though Tertullian be yet more Liberal, and increase the Number to an
Ennead.) For those that were commonly called Tritheists, being but mistaken
Christians and Trinitarians, fall not under this Consideration. Now as for that
forementioned Ditheism, or Opinion of Two Gods, a Good and an Evil one, it is
evident that its Original sprung from nothing else, but First a Firm Persuasion
of the Essential Goodness of the Deity, together with a Conceit that the Evil
that is in the world, was altogether Inconsistent and Unreconcilable with the
same, and that therefore for the salving of this Phenomenon, it was absolutely
necessary, to suppose another Animalish Principle Self-existent, or an Evil
God. Wherefore as these Ditheists, as to all that which is Good in the World,
held a Monarchy, or one Sole Principle and Original, so it is plain, that had
it not heen for this business of Evil (which they conceived could not be salved
any other way) they would never have asserted any more Principles or Gods than
One.

The chiefest and most eminent Assertors of which Ditheistick Doctrine of Two
Self-existent Animalish Principles in the Universe, a Good God and an Evil
Demon, were the Marcionites and the Manicheans, both of which, though they
made some slight Pretenses to Christianity, yet were not by Christians owned
for such. But it is certain that besides these and before them too, some of the
Professed Pagans also, entertained the same Opinion, that famous Moralist
Plutarchus Chaeronensis, being an Undoubted Patron of it; which in his Book De
Iside and Osiride he represents, with some little difference, after this
manner; P. 371. Par.
(...). The Generation and Constitution of this World is mixed of contrary
Powers or Principles (the one Good, the other Evil) yet so as that they are not
both of equal force, but the Better of them more prevalent: notwithstanding
standing which, it is also absolutely impossible, for the Worser Power or
Principle to be ever Utterly destroyed, much of it being always intermingled in
the Soul, and much in the Body of the Universe, there perpetually tugging
against the Better Principle.

Indeed learned men of later times, have for the most part looked upon Plutarch
here, but either as a bare Relater of the Opinion of other Philosophers; or
else as a Follower only, and not a Leader in it. Notwithstanding which, it is
evident, that Plutarch was himself heartily Engaged in this Opinion, he
discovering no small fondn^ss for it, in sundry of his other Writings: as for
Example in his Platonic Questions, where he thus declares himself concerning
it, P. 1003. Part
(...), Or else that which is often affirmed by us is true, that a Mad
Irrational soul, and an unformed disorderly Body did coexist with one another
from Eternity, neither of them having any Generation or Beginning. And in his
Timaean Psychogonia, he does at large industriosly maintain the same, there and
elsewhere endeavoring to establish this Doctrine, as much as possibly he
could, upon Rational Foundations. As First, that Nothing can be Made or
Produced without a Cause, and therefore there must of necessity, be some Cause
of Evil also, and that a Positive one too; he representing the Opinion of those
as very ridiculous, who would make the Nature of Evil, to be but (...) an
Accidental Appendix to the World, and all that Evil which is in it, to have
come in only by the by, and by Consequence, without any Positive Cause.
Secondly, that God being Essentially Good could not possibly be the Cause of
Evil, where he highly applauds Plato for removing God to the greatest distance
imaginable from being the Cause of Evil. Thirdly, that as God could not, so
neither could (...), Matter in it self devoid of all form and Quality, be the
Cause of Evil, noting this to have been the Subterfuge of the Stoics. Upon
which account, he often condemns them, but uncertainly, sometimes as such, who
affigned No Cause at all of Evils, and sometimes again as those who made God
the Cause of them. For in his Psychogonia he concludes that unless we
acknowledge a Substantial Evil Principle, (...), The Stoical Difficulties will
of necessity overtake and involve us, who introduce Evil into the World from
Nothing, or Without a Cause, since neither that which is Essentially Good (as
God) nor yet that which is devoid of all Quality (as Matter) could possibly
give being or Generation to it. But in his Book against the Stoics, he accuses
them as those, who made God, Essentially Good the Cause of Evil. (...).
Themselves make God being Good, the Principle and cause of Evil, since Matter
which is devoid of Quality, and recieves all its Differences from the Active
Principle, that moves and forms it, could not possibly be the Cause thereof.
Wherefore Evil must of necessity, eithercome from Nothing, or else it must come
from the Active and Moving Principle, which is God. Now from all these Premises
joined together, Plutarch concludes, that the Phenomenon of Evil, could no
otherwise possibly be salved, than by supposing a Substantial Principle for it,
and a certain Irrational and Maleficent Soul or Demon, Unmade, and Coexisting
with God and Matter from Eternity to have been the Cause thereof. And
accordingly he resolves, that as whatsoever is Good in the Soul and Body of the
Universe, and likewise in the Souls of Men and Demons, is to be ascribed to
God as its only Original, so whatsoever is Evil, Irregular and Disorderly in
them, ought to be imputed to this other Substantial Principle, a (...), an
Irrational and Maleficent Soul or Demon, which insinuating it self every where
throughout the World, is all along intermingled with the Better Principle:
(...), So that neither the Soul of the Universe, nor that of Men and Demons,
was wholly the Workmanship of God, but the Lower, Brutish and Disorderly part
of them, the Effect of the Evil Principle.

But besides all this, it is evident that Plutarch was also strongly possessed
with a Conceit, that nothing Substantial could be Created (no not by Divine
Power) out of Nothing Preexisting; and therefore that all the Substance of
whatsoever is in the World did Exist from Eternity Unmade: so that God was only
the Orderer, or the Methodizer and Harmonizer thereof. Wherefore as he
concluded that the Corporeal World was not Created by God out of Nothing, as to
the Substance of it, but only the Preexisting Matter, which before moved
Disorderly, was brought into this Regular Order and Harmony by him: In like
manner he resolved that the Soul of the World (for such a thing is always
supposed by him) was not made by God out of Nothing neither, nor out of any
thing Inanimate and Soulless Preexisting, but out of a Preexisting Disorderly
Soul, was brought into an Orderly and Regular Frame; (...), De Psychog. p.
1014. Par.
etc. There was Unformed Matter, before this Orderly World was made, which
Matter was not Incorporeal, nor Vnmoved or Inanimate, but Body discomposed and
acted by a Furious and Irrational Mover, the Deformity whereof was the
Disharmony of a Soul in it, devoid of Reason. For God neither made Body out of
that which was Nobody, nor Soul out of No-soul. But as the Musician who
neither makes Voice nor Motion, does by ordering of them notwithstanding,
produce Harmony; so God, though he neither made the Tangible and Resisting
Substance of Body, nor the Fantastic and Self-moving Power of Soul, yet
taking both those Principles preexisting (the one of which was Dark and
Obscure, the other Turbulent and Irrational) and orderly disposing and
Harmonizing of them, he did by that means produce this most beautiful and
perfect Animal of the World. And further to the same purpose; (...) (...)^ God
was not the Cause or Maker of Body simply, that is, neither of Bulk nor Matter,
but only of that Symmetry and Pulchritude which is in Body, and that likeness
which it has to himself. Which same ought to be concluded also, concerning the
Soul of the World, that the Substance of it was not made by God neither; nor
yet that it was always the Soul of this World, but at first a certain
Self-moving Substance, endowed with a Fantastic Power, Irrational and
Disorderly, Existing such of it self from Eternity, which God by Harmonizing,
and introducing into it fitting Numbers and Proportions, Made to be the Soul
and Prince of this Generated World. According to which Doctrine of Plutarch's,
in the supposed Soul of the World, though it had a Temporary beginning, yet was
it never Created out of Nothing, but only that which preexisted disorderly,
being acted by the Deity, was brought into a Regular Frame. And therefore he
concludes, (...). Soul partaking of Mind, Reason and Harmony, is not only the
Work of God, but also a Part of him, nor is it a thing so much made by him, as
from him and existing out of him. And the same must he likewise affirm
concerning all other Souls, as those of Men and Demons, that they are either
all of them the Substance of God himself, together with that of the Evil Demon,
or else certain Delibations from both, (if any one could understand it) blended
and confounded together: He not allowing any new Substance at all to be created
by God out of nothing preexistent. It was observed in the beginning of this
Chapter, that Plutarch was an Assertor of two (...) or Self-existent Principles
in the Universe, God and Matter, but now we understand, that he was an Earnest
Propugnor of another Third Principle (as himself calls it) besides them both,
viz. a (...), a Mad Irrational and Maleficent Soul or Demon: So that Plutarch
was both a Triarchist, and a Ditheist, an Assertor of Three Principles, but of
Two Gods; according to that forementioned Notion of a God, as it is taken, for
an Animalish or Perceptive Being Self-existent.

We are not ignorant, that Plutarch endeavors with all his might to persuade,
this to have been the constant Belief of all the Pagan Nations, and of all the
Wisest men and Philosophers that ever were amongst them. For this (says he, in
his Book De Iside and Osiride) is a most ancient Opinion, that has been
delivered down from Theologers and Lawmakers, all along to Poets and
Philosophers; and though the first Author thereof be Unknown, yet has it been
so firmly believed every where, that the Footsteps of it have been imprinted
upon the Sacrifices and Mysteries or Religious Rites, both of Barbarians and
Greeks, Namely, That the World is neither wholly Vngoverned by any Mind or
Reasan, as if all things floated in the streams of Chance and Fortune, nor yet
that there is any one Principle steering and guiding all, without Resistance or
Control: because there is a Confused Mixture of Good and Evil in every thing,
and nothing is Produced by Nature sincere. Wherefore it is not one only
Dispenser of things, who as it were out of several Vessels distributeth those
several Liquors of Good and Evil, mingling them together and dashing them as he
pleases. But there are two Distinct and Contrary Powers or Principles in the
World, One of them always leading as it were to the Right hand, but the other
tugging a Contrary way. Insomuch that our whole Life and the whole World is a
certain Mixture and Confusion of these Two: at least this Terrestrial World
below the Moon is such, all being every where full of Irregularity and
Disorder. For if nothing can be Made without a Cause, and that which is Good
cannot be the Cause of Evil, there must needs be a distinct Principle in Nature
for the Production of Evil as well as Good. And this has been the Opinion of
the Most and Wisest Men, some of them affirming (...), that there are Two Gods
as it were of Contrary Crafts and Trades, one whereof is the Maker of all Good,
and the other of all Evil; but others calling the Good Principle only a God,
and the Evil Principle a Demon, as Zoroaster the Magician. Besides which
Zoroaster and the Persian Magi, Plutarch pretends that the Footsteps of this
Opinion were to be found also in the Astrology of the Chaldeans, and in the
Mysteries and Religious Rites, not only of the Egyptians, but also of the
Grecians themselves; and lastly he particularly imputes the same, to all the
most famous of the Greek Philosophers, as Pythagoras, Empedocles, Heraclitus,
Anaxagoras, Plato and Aristotle; though his chiefest endeavor of all be to
prove, that Plato was an Undoubted Champion for it; De Ps^chog* p. 1015. Ed.
(...). But Plato was not guilty of that Miscarriage of Later Philosophers, in
overlooking the Third Power which is between the Matter and God, and thereby
falling into the Grossest of all Absurdities, That the Nature of Evils was but
an Accidental Appendix to the World, and came into it merely by chance, no body
knows how. So that those very Philosophers who will by no means allow to
Epicurus, the Smallest Declension of his Atoms from the Perpendicular,
alleging that this would be to introduce a Motion without a Cause, and to
bring something out of Nothing; themselves do notwithstanding, suppose all that
Vice and Misery which is in the World, besides innumerable other Absurdities
and Inconveniences about Body, to have come into it, merely by Accidental
Consequence, and without having any Cause in the First Principles. But Plato
did not so, but devesting Matter of all Qualities and Differences, by means
whereof, it could not possibly be made the Cause of Evils, and then placing God
at the greatest distance from being the Cause thereof; he consequently resolved
it into a Third Unmade Principle between God and the Matter, an Irrational Soul
or Demon, moving the Matter disorderly.

Now because Plutarch's Authority passes so uncontrolled, and his Testimony in
this particular seems to be of late generally received as an Oracle, and
consequently the thing taken for an Unquestionable Truth, that the Ditheistick
Doctrine of a Good and Evil Principle, was the Catholic or Universal Doctrine
of the Pagan Theists, and particularly that Plato, above all the rest, was a
Professed Champion for the same; we shall therefore make bold to examine
Plutarch's Grounds for this so confident Assertion of his; and principally
concerning Plato. And his Grounds for imputing this Opinion to Plato, are only
these Three which follow. First, because that Philosopher in his Politicus,
speaks of a Necessary and Innate Appetite, that may sometimes turn the Heavens
a contrary way, and by that means cause Disorder and Confusion; Secondly
because in his Tenth De Legibus, he speaks of Two kinds of Souls, whereof One
is Beneficent, but the other Contrary; And Lastly, because in his Timaeus he
supposes, the Matter to have been Moved disorderly before the World was made,
which implies that there was a Disorderly and Irrational Soul consisting with
it as the Mover of it, Matter being unable ^o move it self. But as to the First
of these Allegations out of Plato's Politicus, we shall only observe, that that
Philosopher, as if it had been purposely to prevent such an Interpretation of
his meaning there as this of Plutarch's inserts these very words; (...)^
Neither must any such thing be supposed, as if there were two Gods, contrarily
minded to one another, turning the Heavens sometimes one way and sometimes
another. Which plain declaration of Plato's Sense, being directly contrary to
Plutarch's Interpretation, and this Ditheistick Opinion, might serve also for a
sufficient Confutation of His Second Ground from the Tenth De Legibus, as if
Plato had there affirmed, that there were Two Souls moving the Heavens, the One
Beneficent, but the other Contrary; because this would be all one as to assert
Two Gods, contrarily minded to one another. Notwithstanding which, for a fuller
Answer thereunto, we shall further add, that this Philosopher, did there,
First, only distribute Souls in General into Good and Evil, those Moral
Differences Properly belonging to that rank of Beings called by him Souls, and
first emerging in them, according to this Premised Doctrine, (...)^ Soul is the
Cause of Good and Evil, Honest and Dishonest, Just and Unjust. But then
afterward, making Enquiry concerning the Soul of the World or Heaven, what
kind of Soul that was, he positively concludes, that it was no other than a
Soul endued with all Virtue. P. 898. Steph.
(...). Ath. Hosp. Since it is Soul that moves all things, we must of necessity
affirm, that the Heaven or World is moved by some Soul or other, adorning and
disposing of it, whether it be the Best Soul, or the Contrary. Clin. O Hospes,
it is certainly not Holy nor pious to conclude otherwise, than that a Soul
endued with all Virtue, One or More, moves the World. And as for the last thing
urged by Plutarch, that before the World was made, the Matter is said by Plato,
to have been Moved disorderly, we conceive that that Philosopher did therein
only adhere to that Vulgarly received Tradition, which was Originally Mosaical,
that the First beginning of the Cosmopoeia, was from a Chaos, or Matter
confusedly moved, afterward brought into Order. And now we think it plainly
appears, that there is no strength at all in any of Plutarch's forementioned
Allegations, nor any such Monster to be found any where in Plato, as this
Substantial Evil Principle or God, a Wicked Soul or Demon, Unmade and
Self-existent from Eternity, Opposite and Inimicous to the Good God, sharing
the Empire and Dominion of the World with him. Which Opinion is really nothing
else but the Deifying of the Devil, or Prince of Evil Spirits, making him a
Corrival with God, and entitling him to a Right of receiving Divine Honor and
Worship.

And it is observable, that Plutarch himself confesses this Interpretation
which he makes of Plato, to be New and Paradoxical, or an Invention of his own,
(...), Psychog. p. 1012.
Such as because it was contrary to the Generally received Opinion of
Platonists, himself thought to stand in need of some Apology and Defense. To
which purpose therefore he adds again, (...)^ P. 1014.
I will (says he) declare mine own Opinion first concerning these things,
confirming it with Probabilities, and as much as possibly I can, aiding and
assisting the Truth and Paradoxicalness thereof. Moreover Proclus upon the
Timaeus takes notice of no other Philosophers, that ever imputed this Doctrine
to Plato, or indeed maintained any such Opinion, of Two Substantial Principles
of Good and Evil, but only Plutarch and Atticus; (though I confess Chalcidius
cites Numenius also to the same purpose) Proclus his words are these: (...). P.
116.
Plutarchus Cheronensis and Atticus maintain, that before the Generation and
Formation of the World, there was Unformed and disorderly Matter existing (from
Eternity) together with a Maleficent Soul; for whence, say they, could that
Motion of the Matter, in Plato 's Timaeus, proceed, but from a Soul? and if it
were a Disorderly Motion, it must then needs come from a Disorderly Soul. And
as Proclus tells us, that this Opinion of theirs had been before confuted by
Porphyrius and Jamblychus, as that which was both Irrational and Impious, so
does he there likewise himself briefly refel it in these Two Propositions;
First, that (...), Every Soul is the Offspring of God, and there can be no
Soul nor any thing else, besides God Self-existing; and Secondly, (...)^ It is
absurd to make Evil alike Eternal with Good, for that which is Godless cannot
be of like honor with God, and equally Unmade, nor indeed can there be any
thing at all, positively opposite to God.

But because it may probably be here demanded, What Account it was then
possible for Plato to give, of the Original of Evils, so as not to impute them
to God himself, if he neither derived them from (...), Vnqualified Matter
(which Plutarch has plainly proved to be absurd) nor yet from a (...), an
Irrational and Maleficent Soul of the World or Demon, Self-existent from
Eternity; we shall therefore hereunto briefly reply: That though that
Philosopher derived not the Original of Evils, from Vnqualified Matter, nor
from a Wicked Soul or Demon Unmade, yet did he not therefore impute them to God
neither, but as it seems, to the Necessity of Imperfect Beings. For as
Timaeus Locrus had before Plato determined, that the World was made by God and
Necessity, so does Plato himself accordingly declare in his Timaeus, (...)^
That the Generation of this World is mixed and made up of a certain composition
of Mind and Necessity both together, yet so as that Mind, does also (in some
sense) rule over Necessity. Wherefore though according to Plato, God be
properly and directly the Cause of nothing else but Good, yet the Necessity of
these Lower Imperfect things, does unavoidably give Being and Birth to Evils.
For First, as to Moral Evils, (which are the Chiefest) there is a Necessity
that there should be Higher and Lower Inclinations in all Rational Beings
Vitally United to Bodies, and that as Autexousious or Free-willed, they should
have a Power of determining themselves more or less, either way; as there is
also a Necessity, that the same Liberty of Will (essential to Rational
Creatures) which makes them capable of Praise and Reward, should likewise put
them in a Possibility of deserving Blame and Punishment. Again, as to the Evils
of Pain and Inconvenience; there seems to be a Necessity, that Imperfect
Terrestrial Animals, which are capable of the Sense of Pleasure, should in
contrary Circumstances (which will also sometimes happen, by reason of the
Inconsistency and Incompossibility of things) be obnoxious to Displeasure and
Pain. And Lastly, for the Evils of Corruptions and Dissolutions; there is a
plain Necessity, that if there be Natural Generations in the World, there
should be also Corruptions; according to that of Lucretius before cited, Quando
alid ex alio reficit Natura, nec ullam
Rem gigni patitur, nisi Morte adjutam aliena.
To all which may be added, according to the Opinion of many, That there is a
kind of Necessity of some Evils in the World, for a Condiment (as it were) to
give a Relish and Haut-goust to Good; since the Nature of Imperfect Animals is
such, that they are apt to have but a Dull and Sluggish Sense, a Flat and
Insipid Taste of Good, unless it be quickened and stimulated, heightened and
invigorated, by being compared with the Contrary Evil. As also, that there
seems to be a Necessary Use in the World of the (...), those Involuntary Evils
of Pain and Suffering, both for the Exercise of Virtue, and the Quickening and
Exciting the Activity of the World, as also for the Repressing, Chastising and
Punishing of those (...), those Voluntary Evils of Vice and Action. Upon which
several accounts, probably, Plato concluded, that Evils could not be u^terly
destroyed, at least in this Lower World, which according to him, is the Region
of Lapsed Souls: In Thiae^^ p. 1^6. S^^p^.
(...). But it is neither possible (O Theodorus) That Evils should be quite
destroyed (for there must be something always Contrary to Good) nor yet that
they should be seated amongst the Gods, but they will of necessity infest this
Lower Mortal Region and Nature. Wherefore we ought to endeavor to flee from
hence, with all possible speed, and our flight from hence is this, to
assimilate our selves to God as much as may be. Which Assimilation to God
consists in being Just and Holy with Wisdom. Thus, according to the Sense of
Plato, though God be the Original of all things, yet he is not to be accounted
properly the Cause of Evils, at least Moral ones, (they being only Defects) but
they are to be imputed to the Necessity of Imperfect Beings, which is that
(...), That Necessity which does often resist God, and as it were shake off his
Bridle. Rational Creatures being by means thereof, in a Capability of acting
contrary to God's Will and Law, as well as their own true Nature and Good; and
other things hindered of that Perfection, which the Divine Goodness would else
have imparted to them. Notwithstanding which, Mind, that is, God, is said also
by Plato, to Rule over Necessity, because those Evils, occasioned by the
Necessity of Imperfect Beings, are Overruled by the Divine Art, Wisdom and
Providence, for Good; Typhon and Arimanius (if we may use that Language) being
as it were Outwitted, by Osiris and Oromasdes, and the worst of all Evils made,
in spite of their own Nature, to contribute subserviently to the Good and
Perfection of the Whole; (...), and this must needs be acknowledged to be the
greatest Art of all, to be able to Bonifie Evils, or Tincture them with Good.

And now we have made it to appear (as we conceive) that Plutarch had no
sufficient Grounds to impute this Opinion, of Two Active Perceptive Principles
in the World, (one the Cause of Good and the other of Evil) to Plato. And as
for the other Greek Philosophers, his Pretenses to make them Assertors of the
same Doctrine, seem to be yet more slight and frivolous. For he concludes the
(...)^ The Pythagorians no where admitted Evil amongst the Principles. Syrianus
in Aristot. Metaphys. MS. p. 218.
Pythagoreans to have held Two such Substantial Principles of Good and Evil,
merely because they sometimes talked of the (...) and (...), The Contrarieties
and Conjugations of things, such as Finite and Infinite, Dextrous and
Sinistrous, Eaven and Odd, and the like. As also that Heraclitus entertained
the same Opinion. because he spoke of a (...), A Versatil Harmony of the World,
whereby things reciprocate forwards and backwards, as when a Bow is
successively Intended and Remitted; as likewise because he affirmed, All things
to flow, and War to be the Father and Lord of all. Moreover he resolves that
Empedocles his Friendship and Contention could be no other than a Good and Evil
God; though we have rendered it probable, that nothing else was understood
thereby, but an Active Spermatick Power in this Corporeal World, causing
Vicissitudes of Generation and Corruption. Again Anaxagoras is entitled by him
to the same Philosophy, for no other reason, but only because he made Mind and
Infinite Matter, Two Principles of the Universe. And Lastly, Aristotle himself
cannot escape him from being made an Assertor of a Good and Evil God too, merely
because he concluded Form and Privation, to be Two Principles of Natural
Bodies. Neither does Plutarch acquit himself any thing better, as to the Sense
of Whole Nations, when this Doctrine is therefore imputed by him to the
Chaldeans, because their Astrologers supposed Two of the Planets to be
Beneficent, Two Maleficent, and Three of a Middle Nature: and to the ancient
Greeks, because they sacrificed, not only to Jupiter Olympius, but also to
Hades or Pluto, who was sometimes called by them the Infernal Jupiter. We
confess that his Interpretation of the Traditions and Mysteries of the ancient
Egyptians is ingenious, but yet there is no necessity for all that, that by
their Typhon should be understood a Substantial Evil Principle, or God
Self-existent, as he contends. For it being the manner of the ancient Pagans,
(as shall be more fully declared afterward) to Physiologize in their Theology,
and to Personate all the several Things in Nature; it seems more likely, that
these Egyptians did after that manner, only (...), Personate that Evil and
Confusion, Tumult and Hurliburly, Constant Alternation and Vicissitude of
Generations and Corruptions, which is in this Lower World, (though not without
a Divine Providence) by Typhon.

Wherefore the only Probability now left, is that of the Persian Magi, that
they might indeed assert Two such Active Principles of Good and Evil, as
Plutarch and the Manicheans afterward did; and we must confess, that there is
some Probability of this, because besides Plutarch, Laertius affirms the same
of them, (...), That there are Two Principles according to the Persian Magi, a
Good Demon and an Evil one; he seeming to Vouch it also from the Autorities of
Hermippus, Eudoxus and Theopompus. Notwithstanding which, it may very well be
Questioned, whether the meaning of those Magi, were not herein misunderstood,
they perhaps intending nothing more by their Evil Demon, than such a Satanical
Power as we acknowledge, that is, not a Substantial Evil-Principle, unmade and
Independent upon God, but only a Polity of Evil Demons in the World, united
together under One Head or Prince. And this not only because Theodorus in
Photius, calls the Persian Arimanius, by that very name, Satanas; but also
because those very Traditions of theirs, recorded by Plutarch himself, seem
very much to favor this Opinion, they running after this manner; De Is. and
Osir. 370. Par.
(...) (...)^ That there is a Fatal time at hand, in which Arimanius, the
Introducer of Plagues and Famines, must of necessity be utterly destroyed, and
when, the Earth being made plain and equal, there shall be but one Life, and
one Polity of men, all happy and speaking the same Language. Or else as
Theopompus himself represented their sense, (...), That in conclusion, Hades
shall be utterly abolished, and then men shall be perfectly happy, their Bodies
neither needing food, nor casting any shadow. That God, which contrived this
whole Scene of things, resting only for the present a certain season, which is
not long to him, but like the intermission of sleep to men. For since an Unmade
and Self-existent Evil Demon, such as that of Plutarch's and the Manicheans,
could never be utterly abolished or destroyed; it seems rather probable, that
these Persian Magi did, in their Arimanius, either (...), personate Evil only,
as we suppose the Egyptians to have done in Typhon; or else understand a
Satanical Power by it: notwithstanding which, they might possibly sacrifice
thereunto (as the Greeks did to Evil Demons) for its Appeasement and
Mitigation; or else as worshipping the Deity it self, in the Ministers of its
Wrath and Vengeance.

However, from what has been declared, we conceive it does sufficiently
appear, that this Ditheistick Doctrine of a Good and Evil God, (or a Good God
and Evil Demon both Self-existent) asserted by Plutarch and the Manicheans, was
never so universally received amongst the Pagans, as the same Plutarch
pretends. Which thing may be yet further evidenced from hence, because the
Manicheans professed themselves not to have derived this Opinion from the
Pagans, nor to be a Subdivision under them, or Schism from them, but a quite
different Sect by themselves. Contra Faust* Lib. 20. c. 3.
Thus Faustus in St. Augustine: Pagani Bona and Mila, Tetra and Splendida,
Perpetua and Caduca, Mutabilia and Certa, Corporalia and Divina, Vnum habere
Principium dogmatizant. His ego valde contraria censeo, qui Bonis omnibus
Principium fateor Deum, Contrariis vero Hylen (sic enim Mali Principium and
Naturam Theologus noster appellat.) The Pagans dogmatize, that Good and Evil
things, Foul and Splendid, Perishing and Perpetual, Corporeal and Divine, do
all alike proceed from the same Principle. Whereas we think far otherwise, that
God is the Principle of all Good, but Hyle (or the Evil Demon) of the contrary,
which names our Theologer (Manes) confounds together. And afterward Faustus
there again determines, that there were indeed but Two Sects of Religion in the
World, really distinct from one another, viz. Paganism and Manicheism. From
whence it may be concluded, that this Doctrine, of Two Active Principles of
Good and Evil, was not then looked upon, as the Generally received Doctrine of
the Pagans. Wherefore it seems reasonable to think, that Plutarch's imputing it
so Universally to them, was either out of Design, thereby to gain the better
countenance and authority, to a Conceit which himself was fond of; or else
because he being deeply tinctured, as it were, with the Suffusions of it, every
thing which he looked upon, seemed to him colored with it. And indeed for
ought we can yet learn, this Plutarchus Chaeronensis, Numenius and Atticus were
the only Greek Philosophers, who ever in Public Writings positively asserted
any such Opinion.

And probably S. Athanasius, is to be understood of These, when in his Oration
Contra Gentes, he writes thus concerning this Opinion, (...). Some of the
Greeks, wandering out of the right way, and ignorant of Christ, have determined
Evil to be a Real Entity by it self, erring upon two accounts, because they
must of necessity, either suppose God not to be the Maker of all Things, if
Evil have a Nature and Essence by it self, and yet be not made by him; or else
that he is the Maker and Cause of Evil, whereas it is impossible, that he who
is Essentially Good, should produce the Contrary. After which that Father
speaks also of some degenerate Christians, who fell into the same Error; (...)^
Some Heretics, forsaking the Ecclesiastical Doctrine, and making shipwrak of
the Faith, have in like manner, fasly attributed a Real Nature and Essence to
Evil. Of which Heretics there were several Sects before the Manicheans,
sometime taken notice of and censured by Pagan Philosophers themselves; as by
Celsus, where he charges Christians with holding this Opinion, that there is
(...), An Execrable God contrary to the Great God, and by Plotinus, writing a
whole Book against such Christians, the 9th of his Second Ennead, which by
Porphyrius was inscribed (...), Against the Gnostics.

But if notwithstanding all that we have hitherto said to the contrary, that
which Plutarch so much contends for, should be granted to be true, that the
Pagan Theologers generally asserted Two Self-existent Principles (a Good God,
and an Evil Soul or Demon) and no more, it would unavoidably follow from
thence, that all those other Gods which they worshipped, were not looked upon
by them, as so Many Unmade Self-existent Beings, because then they should have
acknowledged so many First Principles. However it is certain, that if Plutarch
believed his own Writings, he must of necessity take it for granted, that none
of the Pagan Gods (those Two Principles of Good and Evil only excepted) were by
their Theologers accounted Unmade or Self-existent Beings. And as to Plutarch
himself, it is unquestionably manifest, that though he were a Pagan, and a
Worshipper of all those Many Gods of theirs, but especially amongst the rest,
of the Delian Apollo (whose Priest he declares himself to have been) yet he
supposed them all (except only one Good God, and another Evil Soul of the
World) to be no Selfexistent Deities, but (...), Generated or Created Gods
only. And the same is to be affirmed of all his Pagan Followers, as also of the
Manicheans, forasmuch as they, besides their Good and Evil God (the only Unmade
Self-existent Beings acknowledged by them) worshipped also Innumerable other
Deities.

Hitherto we have not been able to find amongst the Pagans, any who asserted a
Multitude of Unmade Self-existent Deities, but on the contrary we shall now
find One, who took notice of this Opinion of (...), Many Principles, so far
forth as to confute it, and that is Aristotle, who was not occasioned to do
that neither, because it was a Doctrine then Generally Received, but only
because he had a mind, odiously to impute such a thing to the Pythagoreans and
Platonists, they making Idea's (sometimes called also Numbers) in a certain
sense, the Principles of things. Nevertheless the Opinion it self is well
confuted by that Philosopher, from the Phenomenon after this manner; (...)^
Arist Met. L. 14. c. 10.
They who say that Mathematical Number is the First, and suppose one Principle
of one thing, and another of another, would make the whole World to be like an
incoherent and disagreeing Poem, where things do not all mutually contribute to
one another, nor conspire together to make up one Sense and Harmony; But the
contrary (says he) is most evident in the World; and therefore their cannot be
Many Principles, but only One. From whence it is manifest, that though
Aristotle were a Worshipper of Many Gods, as well as the other Pagans, (he
somewhere representing it as very absurd to Sacrifice to none but Jupiter) yet
he was no Polytheist, in the sense before declared, of many Unmade
Self-existent Deities, nor indeed any Ditheist neither, no assertor of Two
Understanding Principles, a Good and Evil God, (as Plutarch pretended him to
be) he not only here exploding that Opinion of (...), Many Principles, but also
expressly deriving all from One, and in that very Chapter affirming, that Good
is a Principle, but not Evil. But as for the Platonists and Pythagoreans there
perstringed by him, though it be true that they made Idea's in some sense
Principles, as the Paradigms of things, yet according to Aristotle's own
Confession, even in that same Chapter, they declared also, that there was
(...), another Principle more excellent or Superior, which is indeed that that
was called by them the (...), or (...), Unity it self or a Monad, that is, One
most Simple Deity.

Though we did before demonstrate, that the Pagan Gods were not all supposed by
them to be Unmade Self-existent Beings, because they acknowledged a Theogonia,
a Generation and Temporary Production of Gods; yet forasmuch as it might be
suspected, that they held notwithstanding a Multitude of Unmade Deities, we
have now made the best Enquiry that we could concerning this, and the utmost
that we have been able yet to discover is, that some few of the Professed
Pagans, as well as of pretended Christians, have indeed asserted a Duplicity of
such Gods (viz. Understanding Beings Unmade) one Good and the other Evil, but
no more. Whereas on the contrary we have found, that Aristotle did professedly
oppose, this Opinion of Many Principles, or Unmade Gods, which certainly he
durst never have done, had it then been the Generally received Opinion of the
Pagans. And though it be true, that several of the Ancient Christians, in their
Disputes with Pagans, do confute that Opinion of Many Unmade Deities, yet we do
not find for all that, that any of them seriously charge the Pagans with it,
they only doing it occasionally and ex abundanti. But we should be the better
enabled, to make a clear Judgment concerning this Controversy, whether there
were not amongst the Pagan Deities, a Multitude of Supposed Unmade Beings; if
we did but take a short survey of their Religion, and consider all the several
kinds of Gods worshipped by them; which may, as we conceive, be reduced to
these following Heads. In the First place therefore it is certain, that Many of
the Pagan Gods, were nothing else but Dead Men (or the Souls of Men Deceased)
called by the Greeks Heroes, and the Latins Manes, such as Hercules, Liber,
Aesculapius, Castor, Pollux, Quirinus, and the like. Neither was this only true
of the Greeks and Romans, but also of the Egyptians, Syrians and Babylonians.
For which cause the Pagan Sacrifices, are by way of contempt in the Scripture
called, the Sacrifices of the Dead, that is, not of Dead or Lifeless Statues,
as some would put it off, but of Dead Men. which was the reason, why many of
the Religious Rites and Solemnities, observed by the Pagan Priests, were
Mournful and Funeral; accordingly as it is expressed in Baruch concerning the
Babylonians, Chap. 6. v. 31.
The^r Piests sit in their Temples having their clothes rent, and their heads
and beards shaven, and nothing upon their heads; They rore and cry before their
Gods, as men do at the Feast, when one is dead. (Some of which Rites, are
therefore thought to have been Interdicted to the Israelitish Priests.) And the
same thing is noted likewise by the Poet concerning the Egyptians, Et quem tu
plangens, Hominem testaris, Osirin: And intimated by Xenophanes the
Colophonian, when he reprehensively admonished the Egyptians after this manner,
(...), That if they thought those to be Gods, they should not so lament them,
but if they would lament them, they should no longer think them Gods. Moreover
it is well known, that this Humor of Deifying Men, was afterward carried on
further, and that Living Men (as Emperors) had also Temples and Altars, erected
to them; Nay Humane Polities and Cities, were also sometimes Deified by the
Pagans, Rome it self being made a Goddess. Now no man can imagine that those
Men-gods and City-gods, were looked upon by them, as so many Unmade
Self-existent Deities, they being not indeed so much as (...), Gods Made or
Generated by Nature, but rather Artificially Made, by Humane Will and Pleasure.
Again, Another sort of the Pagan Deities, were all the Greater Parts of the
Visible Mundane System, or Corporeal World, as supposed to be Animated, The
Sun, the Moon and the Stars, and even the Earth it self, under the Names of
Vesta, and Cybele, the Mother of the Gods, and the like. Now it is certain
also, that none of these could be taken for Unmade Self-existent Deities
neither, by those who supposed the whole World it self to have been Generated,
or had a Beginning, which as Aristotle tells us, was the Generally received
Opinion before his time. There was also a Third Sort of Pagan Deities, Ethereal
and Aerial Animals Invisible, called Demons, Genii and Lares, Superior indeed
to Men, but Inferior to the Celestial or Mundane Gods before mentioned.
Wherefore these must needs be looked upon also by them but as (...), Generated
or Created Gods, they being but certain Inferior Parts of the whole Generated
World.

Besides all these, the Pagans had yet another Sort of Gods, that were nothing
but mere Accidents or Affections of Substances, which therefore could not be
supposed by them to be Self-existent Deities, because they could not so much as
Subsist by themselves. Such as were, Virtue, Piety, Felicity, Truth, Faith,
Hope, Justice, Clemency, Love, Desire, Health, Peace, Honor, Fame, Liberty,
Memory, Sleep, Night, and the like; all which had their Temples or Altars
erected to them. Now this kind of Pagan Gods, cannot well be conceived to have
been any thing else, but the Several and Various Manifestations of that One
Divine Force, Power and Providence that runs through the Whole World (as
respecting the Good and Evil of Men) Fictitiously Personated, and so
represented as so Many Gods and Goddesses.

Lastly, There is still Another kind of Pagan Gods behind, having Substantial
and Personal Names, which yet cannot be conceived neither to be so many
Understanding Beings, Unmade, and Independent upon any Supreme, were it for no
other reason but only this, because they have all of them their Particular
Places and Provinces, Offices and Functions severally (as it were) assigned to
them, and to which they are confined; so as not to enterfere and clash with one
another, but agreeably to make up one Orderly and Harmonious System of the
Whole; One of those Gods ruling only in the Heavens, Another in the Air,
Another in the Sea, and Another in the Earth and Hell; One being the God or
Goddess of Learning and Wisdom, Another of Speech and Eloquence, Another of
Justice and Political Order; One the God of War, Another the God of Pleasure,
One the God of Corn, and Another the God of Wine, and the like. For how can it
be conceived, that a Multitude of Understanding Beings Self-existent and
Independent, could thus of themselves have fallen into such a Uniform Order and
Harmony, and without any clashing, peaceably and quietly sharing the Government
of the whole World amongst them, should carry it on with such a Constant
Regularity? For which Cause we conclude also, that neither those Dii Majorum
Gentium, whether the Twenty Selecti, or the Twelve Consentes, nor yet that
Triumvirate of Gods, amongst whom Homer shares the Government of the whole
World, according to that of Maximus Tyrius, Diss. 16.
(...), (...), The Sea being assigned to Neptune, the Dark and Subterraneous
Parts to Pluto, but the Heaven to Jupiter, which Three are sometimes called
also the Celestial, Marine, and Terrestrial Jupiter; Nor lastly, that other
Roman and Samothracian Trinity of Gods, worshipped all together in the Capitol,
Jupiter, Minerva and Juno; I say, that none of all these could reasonably be
thought by the Pagans themselves, to be so many really distinct, Unmade, and
Self-existent Deities.

Wherefore the Truth of this whole business seems to be this, that the ancient
Pagans did Physiologize in their Theology, and whether looking upon the Whole
World Animated, as the Supreme God, and consequently the Several Parts of it,
as his Living Members, or else apprehending it at least to be a Mirror, or
Visible Image of the Invisible Deity, and consequently all its Several Parts,
and Things of Nature, but so many Several Manifestations of the Divine Power
and Providence, they pretended, that all their Devotion toward the Deity,
ought not to be Hudled up in one General and Confused Acknowledgment, of a
Supreme Invisible Being, the Creator and Governor of all, but that all the
Several Manifestations of the Deity in the World, considered singly and apart
by themselves, should be made so many Distinct Objects of their Devout
Veneration; and therefore in order hereunto did they (...), speak of the things
in Nature, and the Parts of the World, as Persons, and consequently as so many
Gods and Goddesses; yet so, as that the Intelligent might easily understand the
Meaning, that these were all really nothing else, but so many Several Names and
Notions, of that One Numen, Divine Force and Power, which runs through the
whole World, multiformly displaying it self therein. To this purpose Balbus in
Cicero, Videtisne ut a Physicis rebus, tracta Ratio sit ad Commentitios and
Fictos Deos? See you not how from the Things of Nature, Fictitious Gods have
been made? And Origin seems to insist upon this very thing, (where Celsus
upbraids the Jews and Christians for worshipping One only God) showing that all
that seeming Multiplicity of Pagan Gods, could not be understood of so Many
Distinct Substantial Independent Deities; (...). L. 1. p. 18. C.
To this Sense; Let Celsus therefore himself show, how he is able to make out a
Multiplicity of Gods (Substantial and Self-existent) according to the Greeks
and other Barbarian Pagans; let him declare the Essence and Substantial
Personality of that Memory which by Jupiter generated the Muses, or of that
Themis which brought forth the Hours; Or let him show how the Graces always
Naked do subsist by themselves. But he will never be able to do this, nor to
make it appear that those Figments of the Greeks (which seem to be really
nothing else but the Things of Nature turned into Persons) are so many distinct
(Self-existent) Deities. Where the latter Words are thus rendered in a Late
Edition; Sed nunquam poterit (Celsus) Graecorum Figmenta, quae validiora fieri
videntur, ex rebus ipsis Deos esse arguere, which we confess we cannot
understand; but we conceive the word (...), there turned Validiora fieri, is
here used by Origin in the same sense with (...), so that his meaning is as we
have declared, that those Figments of the Greeks and other Barbarian Pagans,
(which are the same with Balbus his Commentitii and Ficti Dii) are really
nothing else but the Things of Nature, Figuratively and Fictitiously
Personated, and consequently not so many Distinct Substantial Deities, but only
several Notions and Considerations of One God, or Supreme Numen, in the World.

Now this Fictitious Personating, and Deifying of Things, by the Pagan
Theologers, was done Two manner of ways; One, when those Things in Nature, were
themselves without any more ado or Change of Names, spoken of as Persons, and
so made Gods and Goddesses, as in the many instances before proposed. Another,
when there were distinct Proper and Personal Names accommodated severally to
those Things, as of Minerva to Wisdom, of Neptune to the Sea, of Ceres to Corn
and of Bacchus to Wine. In which Latter Case, those Personal Names Properly
signify, the Invisible Divine Powers, supposed to preside over those several
Things in Nature, and these are therefore properly those Gods and Goddesses,
which are (...), the Givers and Dispensers of the Good Things, and the Removers
of the Contrary; but they are used Improperly also, for the Things of Nature
themselves, which therefore as Manifestations of the Divine Power, Goodness and
Providence, Personated, are sometimes also Abusively, called Gods and
Goddesses. This Mystery of the Pagan Polytheism, is thus fully declared by
Moscopulus; In Hesiod. p. 1.
(...). We must know, that whatsoever the Greeks (or Pagans) saw to have any
Power, Virtue or Ability in it, they looked upon it as not acting according to
such Power, without the Providence, Presidency, or Influence of the Gods; and
they called both the Thing it self, which has the Power, and the Deity
presiding over it, by one and the same Name; whence the Ministerial Fire used
in Mechanic Arts, and the God presiding over those Arts that work by fire,
were both alike called Hephaestus or Vulcan; so the name Demetra or Ceres, was
given as well to Corn and Fruits, as to that Goddess which bestows them; Athena
or Minerva, did alike signify, Wisdom, and the Goddess which is the Dispenser
of it; Dionysus or Bacchus, Wine, and the God that gives Wine (whence Plato
etymologizes the Name from giving of Wine.) In like manner, they called both
the Childbearing of Women, and the Goddesses that superintend over the same
Eilithuia or Lucina; Coitus or Copulation, and the Deity presiding over it,
Aphrodite or Venus. And lastly, in the same manner, by the Muses, they
signified both those Rational Arts, Rhetoric, Astronomy, Poetry, and the
Goddesses which assist therein or promote the same. Now as the several Things
in Nature and Parts of the Corporeal World, are thus Metonymically and
Catacrestically, called Gods and Goddesses, it is evident, that such Deities as
these, could not be supposed to be Unmade or Self-existent, by those who
acknowledged the whole World to have been Generated and had a Beginning. But as
these Names were used more Properly, to signify Invisible and Understanding
Powers, Presiding over the Things in Nature, and Dispensing of them, however
they have an appearance of so many several distinct Deities, yet they seem to
have been all really nothing else, but as Balbus in Cicero expresses it, Deus
Pertinens per Naturam cujusque Rei, God passing through, and acting in the
Nature of every thing, and consequently, but several Names, or so many
Different Notions and Considerations of that One Supreme Numen, that Divine
Force, Power, and Providence, which runs through the whole World, as variously
Manifesting it self therein.

Wherefore, since there were no other Kinds of Gods amongst the Pagans, besides
these already enumerated, unless their Images, Statues and Symbols should be
accounted such (because they were also sometimes Abusively called Gods) which
could not be supposed by them to have been Unmade or without a Beginning, they
being the Workmanship of men's own hands; We conclude universally, that all that
Multiplicity of Pagan Gods, which makes so great a show and noise, was really
either nothing but Several Names and Notions of One Supreme Deity, according to
its different Manifestations, Gifts and Effects in the World, Personated; or
else Many Inferior Understanding Beings, Generated or Created by One Supreme:
so that One Unmade Self-existent Deity, and no more, was acknowledged by the
more Intelligent of the ancient Pagans, (for of the Sottish Vulgar no man can
pretend to give an account, in any Religion) and consequently, the Pagan
Polytheism (or Idolatry) consisted not, in worshipping a Multiplicity of Unmade
Minds, Deities and Creators Self-existent from Eternity and Independent upon
One Supreme; but in Mingling and Blending, some way or other unduly,
Creature-worship, with the Worship of the Creator.

And that the ancient Pagan Theists thus acknowledged One Supreme God, who was
the only (...), Unmade or Vnproduced Deity, (I say, Theists, because those
amongst the Pagans, who admitted of Many Gods, but none at all Unmade, were
absolute Atheists) this may be undeniably concluded from what was before
proved, that they acknowledged Omnipotence or Infinite Power, to be a Divine
Attribute. Because upon the Hypothesis of Many Unmade Self-existent Deities, it
is plain that there could be none Omnipotent, and consequently no such thing as
Omnipotence in rerum natura: and therefore Omnipotence was rightly and properly
styled by Macrobius, Summi Dei Omnipotentia, it being an Attribute Essentially
Peculiar, to One Supreme, and Sole Self-existent Deity. And Simplicius likewise
a Pagan, confuted the Manichean Hypothesis of Two Self-existent Deities from
hence also, because it destroyed Omnipotence: In. Epict. C. 4.
(...)^ For they who assert Two Principles of the Universe (One Good, the other
Evil) are necessitated to grant, that the Good Principle called by them God, is
not the Cause of all things, neither can they praise it as Omnipotent, nor
ascribe a Perfect and Whole Entire Power to it, but only the Half of a Whole
Power at most, if so much. Over and besides all which, it has been also proved
already, that the ancient Atheists under Paganism, directed themselves
principally, against the Opinion of Monarchy, or of One Supreme Deity ruling
over all; from whence it plainly appears, that it was then asserted by the
Pagan Theists.

And we think it here observable, that this was a thing so generally confessed
and acknowledged, that Faustus the Manichean, took up this Conceit, that both
the Christians and Jews Paganized in the Opinion of Monarchy, that is, derived
this Doctrine of One Deity, the Sole Principle of all things, only by Tradition
from the Pagans, and by consequence were no other than Schisms or Subdivided
Sects of Paganism. S. Aug. contr^ Faust. L. 20.
Vos desciscentes a Gentibus (says he) M^narchiae Opinionem primo vobiscum
divulsistis, id est, ut Omnia credatis ex Deo. Estis sane Schisma, necnon and
Priores vestri Judaei. De Opinione Monarchiae, in nullo-etiam ipsi dissentiunt
a Paganis. Quare constat Vos atque Jude^s, Schisma esse Gentililitatis. Sectas
autem si quaeras, non plus erunt quam Duae, Gentium and Nostra. You revolting
from the Gentiles, broke off their Opinion of Monarchy, and carried it along
with you, so as to believe all things to come from God. Wherefore you are
really nothing but a Schism of Paganism, or a Subdivided Branch of it, and so
are your Predecessors the Jews; who differ nothing from Pagans neither, in this
Opinion of Monarchy. Whence it is manifest, that both Christians and Jews are
but Schisms of Gentilism. But as for Sects of Religion, really differing from
another, there are but these Two, That of the Pagans, and That of ours, who
altogether dissent from them. Now though this be false and foolish, as to the
Christians and Jews, deriving that Opinion of Monarchy, only by way of
Tradition, from the Pagans, which is a thing founded in the Principles of
Nature; yet it sufficiently shows, this to have been the General Sense of the
Pagans, that all their Gods were derived from One Sole Self-existent Deity; so
that they neither acknowledged a Multitude of Unmade Deities, nor yet that
Duplicity of them, which Plutarch contended for, (One Good and the Other Evil)
who accordingly denied God to be the Cause of all Things, writing thus in his
Defect of Oracles, (...), They are guilty of one Extreme, who make God the
Cause of Nothing, and they of another, who make him the Cause of all things.
But this Paradox, was both late started amongst the Greeks, and quickly cried
down by the Succession of their Philosophers, and therefore prejudiceth not the
Truth of Faustus his General Assertion, concerning the Pagans. Which is again
fully confirmed, L. 20. cap. 10.
by St. Austin in his Reply; Siquis ita dividat, ut dicat eorum quae aliqua
Religione detinentur, Aliis placere Vnum Deum colendum, Aliis Multos; per hanc
differentiam and Pagani a nobis Remoti sunt, and Manichaei cum Paganis
deputantur, nos autem cum Judaeis. Hic forte dicatis, quod Multos Deos Vestros,
ex Vna Substantia perhibetis; Quasi Pagani Multos suos, non ex Vna asserant,
quamvis diversa illis Officia, and Opera, and Potestates illis attribuant;
sicut etiam apud vos, Alius Deus expugnat Gentem Tenebrarum, Alius ex ea capta
fabricat Mundum, etc. If one should make another Distribution of Religionists,
into such as Worship either One God, or Many Gods; according to this Division
the Pagans will be removed from us Christians, and joined with You Manicheans.
But perhaps you will here say, that all your Many Gods are derived from One
Substance, as if the Pagans did not also derive all their Gods from One, though
attributing several Offices, Works and Powers to them; in like manner as
amongst you, One God expugns the Nation of Darkness, Another God makes a World
out of it, etc. And again afterward he writes further to the same purpose; S.
Ang. contra Eanst. L. 20. c. 19.
Discat ergo Faustus Monarchiae Opinionem, non ex Gentibus nos habere, sed
Gentes non usque adeo ad Falsos Deos esse dilapsas, ut Opinionem amitterent
Vnius Very Dei, ex quo est Omnis qualiscunque Natura: Let Faustus therefore
know, that We Christians have not derived the Opinion of Monarchy from the
Pagans, but that the Pagans have not so far degenerated, sinking down into the
Worship of false Gods, as to have lost the Opinion of One True God, from whom
is all Whatsoever Nature.

XIV. It follows from what we have declared, that the Pagan Polytheism or
Multiplicity of Gods, is not to be understood in the sense before expressed, of
Many (...), Many Vnproduced and Self-existent Deities, but according to some
other Notion or Equivocation of the word Gods. For God is, (...), one of those
words that has been used in many different senses, the Atheists themselves
acknowledging a God and Gods, according to some Private Senses of their own,
(which yet they do not all agree in neither) and Theists not always having the
same Notion of that Word: Forasmuch as Angels in Scripture are called Gods in
one sense, that is, as Understanding Beings Superior to men, Immortal, Holy
and Happy; and the word is again sometimes carried down lower to Princes and
Magistrates; and not only so, but also to Good men as such, when they are said
to be Made Partakers of the Divine Nature. And thus that learned Philosopher
and Christian Boethius, Omnis Beatus Deus; sed Natura quidem Vnus,
Participatione vero nihil prohibet esse quamplurimos, every Good and Happy man
is a God, and though there be only One God, by Nature, yet nothing hinders but
that there may be Many by Participation. But then again all Men and Angels are
alike denied to be Gods in other Respects, and particularly, as to Religious
Worship. Thou shall Worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou Serve.
Now this is that, which seems to be Essentially included in the Pagan Notion of
the word God or Gods, when taken in general, namely, a Respect to Religious
Worship. Wherefore a God in general according to the sense of the Pagan
Theists, may be thus defined, An Understanding Being superior to Men, not
originally derived from Senseless Matter, and looked upon as an Object for men's
Religious Worship. But this general Notion of the word God, is again restrained
and limited, by Differences, in the Division of it. For such a God as this, may
be either (...), Ingenerate or Vnproduced, and consequently Self-existent; or
else (...), Generated or Produced, and Dependent on some Higher Being as its
Cause. In the former sense, the Intelligent Pagans, as we have declared,
acknowledged only One God, who was therefore called by them (...), according to
that of Thales in Laertius, (...)^ God is the oldest of all things, because he
is Unmade or Vnproduced, and the only thing that is so: but in the latter, they
admitted of Many Gods, Many Understanding Beings, which, though Generated or
Produced, yet were Superior to Men, and looked upon as Objects for their
Religious Worship. And thus the Pagan Theists were both Polytheists and
Monotheists in different Senses, they acknowledged both Many Gods and One God;
that is, Many Inferior Deities, subordinate to One Supreme. Thus Onatus the
Pythagorean in Stobaeus declares himself, (...)^ Ecl. Phys. L. 1. p. 4.
It seems to me that there is not only One God, but that there is One the
Greatest and Highest God, that governs the whole World, and that there are
Many other Gods, besides him differing as to power, that One God reigning over
them all, who surmounts them all, in Power, Greatness and Virtue. This is that
God, who conteins and comprehends the whole World; but the other Gods, are
those who together with the Revolution of the Universe, orderly follow that
First and Intelligible God. Where it is evident, that Onatus his (...) or Many
Gods, were only the Heavenly Bodies, or Animated Stars. And partly, from those
words cited, but chiefly others which follow after in the same place, (that
will be produced elsewhere) it plainly appears, that in Onatus his time, there
were some who acknowledged One Only God, denying all those other Gods, then
commonly Worshipped. And indeed Anaxagoras, seems to have been such a one;
forasmuch as asserting One Perfect Mind Ruling over all, (which is the True
Deity) he effectually degraded all those other Pagan Gods, the Sun, Moon and
Stars from their Godships, by making the Sun nothing but a Globe of Fire, and
the Moon Earth and Stones, and the like of the other Stars and Planets. And
some such there were also amongst the Ancient Egyptians, as shall be declared
in due place. Moreover Proclus upon Plato's Timaeus tells us, P. 206.
that there has been always less doubt and controversy in the World
concerning the One God, than concerning the Many Gods. Wherefore Onatus here
declares his own sense, as to this particular, viz. that besides the One
Supreme God, there were also Many other Inferior Deities, that is,
Understanding Beings, that ought to be Religiously Worshipped.

But because it is not impossible, but that there might be imagined One Supreme
Deity, though there were many other (...) Unmade made and Self-existent Gods
besides, as Plutarch supposed before, One Supreme God, together with a (...),
an Irrational Soul or Demon Unmade Inferior in power to it; therefore we add
in the next place, that the more Intelligent Pagans, did not only assert One
God that was Supreme and (...), the most Powerful of all the Gods, but also who
being Omnipotent, was the Principle and Cause of all the rest, and therefore
the only (...), the only Vnproduced and Self-existent Deity. Maximus Tyrius
affirms this to have been the general sense of all the Pagans, Diss. 1. page 5.
that there was, (...), One God the King and Father of all, and many Gods, the
Sons of God, reigning together with God. Neither did the Poets imply any thing
less, when (...) was so often called by the Greeks and Jupiter by the Latins
(...), and Hominum Pater atque Deorum, or Hominum Satorque Deorum, and the
like. And indeed the Theogonia of the ancient Pagans before mentioned, was
commonly thus declared by them universally, (...) that the Gods were Generated,
or as Herodotus expresses it, (...), that every one of the Gods was Generated
or Produced; which yet is not so to be understood, as if they had therefore
supposed, no God at all Unmade or Self-ex^stent, (which is Absolute Atheism)
but that the (...) the Gods, as distinguished from the (...) or (...), from God
or the Supreme Deity, were all of them universally, Made or Generated.

But to the end that we may now render this business, yet something more easy
to be believed, that the Intelligent Pagans did thus suppose all their Gods
save One, to have been Made or Generated, and consequently acknowledged only
One (...), One Vnproduced and Self-existent Deity, we shall in this place
further observe, that the Theogonia of those Ancient Pagans, their Genesis and
Generation of Gods, was really one and the same thing with the Cosmogonia, the
Genesis and Generation of the World, and indeed both of them understood of a
Temporary Production both of these Gods and the World. And this we shall first
prove from Plato in his Timaeus; where he being to treat of the Cosmogonia,
premiseth this Distinction, concerning Two Heads of Being; That Some were
Eternal and never Made, and Some again Made or Generated, the former whereof he
calls (...) or Essence, the latter (...) or Generation: adding also this
difference betwixt them, that the Eternal and Immutable things, were the proper
Objects of Science and Demonstration, but the other Generated things of Faith
and Opinion only; Page 29.
(...), For what Essence is to Generation, the same is certain^y of Truth or
Knowledge to Faith. And thereupon he declares that his Reader was not to expect
the same Evidence and Certainty of Truth from him, where he was now to treat of
things Generated (namely the Gods and the Visible World) as if he had been to
discourse about things Immutable and Eternal, Page 29.
in these words, (...), etc. If therefore, O Socrates, many things having been
spoken by many men, concerning the Gods, and the Generation of the Universe, we
be not able to discourse Demonstratively concerning the same, you ought not at
all to wonder at it, or be displeased with us, but on the contrary, to rest
well satisfied with our performance, if upon this Argument we do but deliver
Probabilities. Where the Gods are by Plato plainly referred to (...) and not to
(...), to Generation and not to Eternal or Immutable Essence, as they are also
joined with the Generation of the World, as being but a Part thereof. Neither
is this at all to be wondered at in Plato, since first the whole Visible World,
was no less to him, than it was to the other Pagans, a God; he calling it
(...), a Happy God, and before it was yet Made, (...), a God about to be Made.
Not as if Plato accounted the Senseless Matter of this Corporeal World, whether
as perfectly Dead and Stupid, or as endued with a Plastic Nature only, to be a
God, (for no Inanimate thing was a God to Plato) but because he supposed the
World to be an Animal, endued with an Intellectual Soul, and indeed the best of
all Animals compounded of Soul and Body, P. 30.
(...)^ Wherefore we are thus according to Probability to conclude, that this
World was really made by the Providence of God, an Intellectual Animal; whence
from an Animal forthwith it became a God. So that here we are to take notice,
of Two Gods in Plato, very different from one another, One a Generated God,
this whole World Animated, and another that God, by whose Providence this World
was Generated, and thus made an Animal and a God; which latter must needs be an
Unmade, Self-existent Deity, and not belong to (...) but to (...), not to
Generation but to Immutable Essence. Again those greater Parts of the World,
the Sun, the Moon and the Stars, (as supposed also to be Animated with
Particular Souls of their own) were as well accounted by Plato, as by the other
Pagans, Gods, he plainly calling them there (...), Visible and Generated Gods.
Besides which Celestial Gods, the Earth it self also is supposed by him, to be
either a God or Goddess, according to those Ancient Copies of the Timaeus, used
both by Cicero and Proclus: (...). God Fabricated the Earth also, which is our
Nurse, turning round upon the Axis of the World, and thereby causing and
maintaining the Succession of Day and Night, the First and Oldest of all the
Gods, Generated within the Heavens. Where since that Philosopher seems the
rather to make the Earth an Animal and a God, because of its Diurnal
Circumgyration upon its own Axis, we may conclude that afterward when in his
old age, (as Plutarch records from Theophrastus) he gave entertainment also to
that other part of the Pythagorick Hypothesis, and attributed to the Earth a
Planetary Annual Motion likewise about the Sun, (from whence it would follow,
that as Plotinus expresses it, the Earth was (...), one of the Stars) he was
therefore still so much the more inclined, to think the Earth to be a God as
well as the other Planets, or at least as the Moon; that having been formerly
represented in the Orphick Tradition, but as another Habitable Earth. For these
Verses of Orpheus, are recorded by Proclus, to that purpose; (...)
(...),
(...).
The sense whereof is this; That God in the Cosmogonia or Cosmopoeia, besides
this Earth of ours, fabricated also another Vast Earth, which the Immortal Gods
call Selene, but mortal men Mean, or the Moon; that has many Hills and
Valleys, many Cities and Houses in it. From whence Proclus, though as it seems
a Stranger to the Pythagorick System, yet being much addicted to these Orphick
Traditions, See Ma^rob. Some. Scip. L. 1. c. 11.
concluded the Moon to be, (...), an Ethereal Earth.

After all this, Plato, that he might be thought to omit nothing in his Timaean
Cosmogonia, speaks also of the Genesis, Ortus or Generation of the Poetic
Gods, under the name of Demons, such as Tethys and Phorcys, Saturn and Rhea,
Jupiter and Juno, and the like; which seem to be really nothing else, but the
other Inanimate Parts of the World and Things of Nature (...), that is,
Fictitiously Personated and Deified (as is elsewhere declared.) Which whole
business was a Thing set off by those Poets with much Fiction and Physiological
Allegory. And though Plato, out of a seeming compliance with the Laws of his
City, pretends here to give credit to this Poetic Theogonia, as Tradition
delivered down from the Sons of the Gods, who must not be supposed to have been
ignorant of their Parents; yet as Eusebius well observes, he does but all the
while slily jear it, plainly insinuating the Fabulosity thereof, when he
affirms it to have been introduced not only (...) without necessary
Demonstrations, but also (...), without so much as Probabilities. Nevertheless
Proclus suspecting no such matter, but taking Plato in all this, to have been
in very good earnest, interprets these Poetic Gods or Demons mentioned by him,
to be the Gods below the Moon, (notwithstanding that the Earth was mentioned
before by Plato) calling them (...), the Gods that cause Generation, and
seeming to understand thereby the Animated Elements; Jupiter being here not
taken, as he is often elsewhere, for the Supreme God, but only for the Animated
Either, as Juno for the Animated Air. And upon this occasion, he runs out into a
long Dispute, to prove, that not only the Stars were Animated, but also all the
other Sublunary Bodies or Elements: p. 28^*
(...)^ For if the whole World be a Happy God, then none of the Parts of it are
Godless, or devoid of Providence; but if all things partake of God and
Providence, then are they not unfurnisht of the Divine Nature, and if so, there
must be some peculiar Orders of Gods presiding over them. For if the Heavens by
reason of particular Souls and Minds, partake of that one Soul and one Mind;
why should we not conclude the same, concerning the Elements, that they also by
certain intermedious Orders of Gods, partake of that One Divinity of the whole
World. Wherefore a little before, the same Proclus highly condemns, certain
Ancient Physiologers, whom he supposes Aristotle to have followed: (...)^ P.
286.
The Elements were thought by most of the Ancient Physiologers to be Inanimate,
and to be moved Fortuitously without Providence. For though they acknowledged
the Heavenly Bodies, by reason of that Order that appears in them, to partake
of Mind and Gods; yet they left this Sublunary World (or Genesis) to Float up
and down without Providence. And these Aristotle afterward followed,
appointing immovable Intelligences to preside over the Celestial Spears only,
(whether Eight or more) but leaving all the lower Elements Dead and Inanimate

Lastly, besides all those other Mundane Gods before mentioned, as Generated
together with the World, though Proclus seem to be of another Opinion, yet it
is manifest that Plato does not there in his Timaeus, P. 41.
altogether forget those properly called Demons (elsewhere so much insisted
upon by him) but in the very next following words, he plainly insinuates them,
after this manner; (...), the Gods which appear visibly to us as often as they
please, or which can appear and disappear at pleasure, speaking also of their
Genesis or Generation as part of the Cosmogonia; and then again afterward
calling them (...), Junior Gods, he describes them as those, P. 42.
whose particular Office it was, to superintend and preside over Humane
Affairs, (...), and to govern this mortal Animal, Man, after the best manner
possible, so that he should no otherwise fail of doing well or being happy,
than as he became a cause of Evil and Misery to himself, by the abuse of his
own Liberty.

And thus much out of Plato's Timaeus; but the same thing might be proved also
out of his other Writings, as particularly from that Passage in his Tenth Book
of Laws, where he takes notice again of the Theogonia of the Ancients, and that
as it had been depraved and corrupted by a great mixture of Impious and Immoral
Fables. (...)^ There are, says he, extant amongst us Athenians, certain
stories and traditions, very ancient, concerning the Gods, written partly in
Meter and partly in Prose, declaring how the Heaven, and the other Gods were at
first made, or Generated, and then carrying on their fabulous Theogonia
farther, how these Generated Gods, afterward conversed with one another, and
ingendring after the manner of men, begat other Gods. Where that Philosopher
taking off his vizard, plainly discovers his great dislike of that whole
Fabulous Theogonia (however he acknowledges elsewhere that it did contain
(...), that is, Physiological Allegories under it) as a thing that was
destructive of all Piety and Virtue, by reason of its attributing all Humane
Passions and Vices to the Gods. However it plainly appears from hence, that the
Theogonia and the Cosmogonia were one and the same thing, the Generation of the
Gods being here, the Generation of the Heaven, and of the Sun, Moon, and Stars,
and the like.

Moreover this same thing is sufficiently manifest also, even from Hesiod's own
Theogonia, which doubtless was that which Plato principally aimed at, and if it
were not absolutely the First, yet is it the most ancient Writing now extant,
in that kind. For there in the beginning of that Poem, Hesiod invokes his Muses
after this manner; (...)^
(...),
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
Salvete natae Jovis, date vero amabilem cantilenam:
Celebrate quoque immortalium divinum genus semper existentium,
Qui Tellure prognati sunt, Coelo stellato,
Nocteque caliginosa, quos item salsus nutrivit Pontus.
Dicite insuper, ut primum Dii and Terra facti fuerint,
Et Flumina, and Pontus immensus aestu fervens,
Astraque sulgentia, and Caelum latum superne,
Et qui ex his nati sunt Dii datores bonorum.


Where we see plainly, that the Generation of the Gods, is the Generation of
the Earth, Heaven, Stars, Seas, Rivers, and other things begotten from them (as
probably amongst the rest Demons and Nymphs which the same Hesiod speaks of
elsewhere.) But immediately after this Invocation of the Muses, the Poet begins
with Chaos and Tartara and Love, as the First Principles, and then procedes to
the Production of the Earth, and of Night out of Chaos; of the Either and of Day
from Night; of the Starry Heavens, Mountains and Seas, etc. All which Genesis
or Generation of Gods is really nothing but a Poetical Description of the
Cosmogonia: as throughout the Sequel of that whole Poem, all seems to be
Physiology, veiled under Fiction and Allegories. And thus the Ancient Scholia
upon that Book begin, (...), we must know, that the whole Doctrine of the
Theogonia, contains under it, in way of Allegory, a Physiological Declaration
of things. Hesiod's Gods being not only the Animated Parts of the World, but
also all the other Things of Nature, fictitiously Personated and Deified, or
Abusively called Gods and Goddesses.

Neither was this only the Doctrine of the Greeks, that the World was thus Made
or Generated, and that the Generation of the World, was a Theogonia or a
Generation of Gods (the World it self and its several Parts being accounted
such by them) but also in like manner of the other Barbarian Pagans. For
Diogenes Laertius has recorded, In Proam. p. 2.
concerning the Persian Magi, (...), That they did both assert the Being and
Generation of Gods, and also that these Gods were Fire and Earth and Water,
that is, That the Animated Elements were Gods, (as Proclus also before
declared) and that these together with the World, were Generated, or had a
Beginning. In the Persia^s Sacrifices, (...), ou^ of the Mag^ standing by sung
the Theogonia (i.e. The Cosmogonia) Herod. in Olio. n. 132.
And both Laertius and Diodorus represent it as the Opinion of the ancient
Egyptians, that the World was Generated or had a Temporary Production; as also
that the Sun and Moon and other Parts of the World, were Gods. But whereas the
same Diodorus writes of certain Egyptian Gods, (...), which had an Eternal
Generation, he seems to mean thereby, only the Celestial Gods the Sun, Moon and
Stars, as distinct from those other Hero's and Men-Gods, which are again thus
described by him, (...), who though naturally Mortal, yet by reason of their
Wisdom, Virtue and Beneficence toward Mankind, had been advanced to Immortality.

And by this time we think it does sufficiently appear, that the Theogonia of
the Ancients, is not to be understood merely of their Heroes and Men-gods, or
of all their Gods, as supposed to have been nothing else but Mortal Men, (Dii
Mortalibus nati Matribus, as Cotta in Cicero speaks) who according to the more
Vulgar signification of the Word, had been Generated, ( Humano More) as some,
otherwise Learned Men, have seemed to suppose; but that it extends to all the
Inferior Pagan Gods, some whereof were Parts of the Visible World Animated, as
the Sun, Moon, Stars, and Earth; so that their Theogonia, was the very same
thing with the Cosmogonia, or at least a Part thereof. Notwithstanding which,
we deny not but that there was also in the Paganick Fables of the Gods, a
certain Mixture of History and Herology interserted, and complicated all along
together with Physiology.

We are in the next place to observe, that both this Theogonia and Cosmogonia
of the Ancient Pagans, their Generation of the World and Gods, is to be
understood of a Temporary Production of them, whereby they were Made (...), or
from an Antecedent Nonexistence brought into Being. For this was the General
Tradition amongst the Pagans, that the World was made out of an antecedent
Chaos, as shall be afterward further declared. And Aristotle affirms, that
before his time, this Genesis and Temporary Production of the World had been
Universally entertained by all, and particularly that Plato was an Assertor of
the same. Nevertheless, the generality of the latter Platonists, endeavor with
all their might, to force a contrary sense upon his Timaeus. Which is a thing
that Plutarch, long since observed, after this manner; (...) (...)^ De Psychog.
Plat. P. 1013. P.
The most of Plato 's Followers, being infinitely troubled and perplexed in
their minds, turn themselves every way, using all manner of Arts, and offering
all kind of violence to his Text, as conceiving, that they ought by all means
possible, to hide and conceal that Opinion (as infand and detestable) of the
Generation of the World, and of the Soul of it, so as not to have continued
from Eternity, or through a succession of Infinite Time. Notwithstanding which,
we conceive it to be undeniably evident, that Plato in his Timaeus, does assert
the Genesis of the World in this sense, to wit of a Temporary Production of it,
and as not having existed from Eternity or without Beginning. First, because in
the entrance of that Discourse, he opposes these Two things to one another,
(...), that which always is, and (...), that which is Generated or Made, and
therefore in affirming the World to have been Generated, he must needs deny the
Eternity thereof. Again, the Question is so punctually stated by him
afterward, as that there is no possibility of any Subterfuge left, (...)^
Whether the World always were, having no Beginning or Generation, or whether it
was Made or Generated, having commenced from a certain Epoch? To which the
Answer is, (...), that it was Made or had a Beginning. Moreover this
Philosopher, there plainly affirms also, that Time it self was Made, or had a
Beginning, (...)^ Time was made together with the Heaven, that being both
Generated together, they might be both dissolved together likewise, if at least
there should ever be any dissolution of them. Besides which, he plainly
declares that before this Orderly World was produced, the Matter of it did move
disorderly, (...)^ God taking all that Matter, which was, (not then resting,
but moving confusedly and disorderly) he brought it into Order, out of
Confusion. Which is no more than if he should have said, God made this World,
out of an antecedent Chaos; which, as we said before, was the constant
Tradition of the Ancient Pagans. Now as to Authority, we may well conclude,
that Aristotle was better able to understand both Plato's Philosophy, and
Greek, than any of those Juniour Platonists, who lived hundreds of years after.
And yet we are not quite destitute of other Suffrages besides Aristotle's
neither, not only Philo the Jew, but also Plutarch and Atticus, who were both
of them Platonic Pagans, voting on this side, besides Alexander Aphrodisius a
judicious Peripatetick. The only Objection considerable, is from what Plato
himself writes in his Third and Sixth Book of Laws. In the former whereof
Clinias, and the Athenian Hospes, discourse together after this manner,
concerning the Original or First Beginning of Commonwealths: P. 676. Steph.
(...) (...)^ Ath. What beginning shall we say there was of Commonwealths? Cl.
Whence would your self derive them? Ath. I suppose from a great length and
Infinity of time, through Successive Changes. Cl. I understand not well what
you mean. Ath. Thus therefore, Do you think that you are able to determine,
what Length or Quantity of Time there has been since Cities and Polities of
Men first began? Cl. This is by no means easy to be done Ath. Wherefore there
is a kind of Infinity and Inestimability of this time. Cl. It is very true.
Ath. Have there not then been Innumerable Cities constituted within this time,
and as many again destroyed, of all several Forms; they being changed from
Greater to Lesser, and from Lesser to Greater, from Better to Worser and from
Worser to Better? Now we say that if Plato intended here, to assert an Absolute
Infinity of Time Past, then it must needs be granted, that in his old age, when
he wrote his Book of Laws, he changed his Opinion from what it was before when
he wrote his Timaeus; and if so, he ought in all reason to have retracted the
same, which he does not here do. But in very truth, the meaning of this
Philosopher, in those words cited, seems to be this; not that there was an
Absolute Infinity of Time past (as Proclus contends, taking advantage of that
word (...)) but only that the World had lasted such a Length of Time, as was in
a manner inestimable to us, or uncomputable by us, there having happened, as he
adds, in the mean time, several Successive Destructions and Consumptions of
Mankind, by means of various Accidents, as particularly, One most remarkable
Deluge and Inundation of Waters. The Latter place, in his Sixth Book of Laws,
runs thus; P. 781.
(...). Either the Generation of Men had no Beginning at all, and will have no
End, but always was and always will be, or else, there has been an Inestimable
Length of Time, from the Beginning of it. Which place affords still more
light to the former, for we may well conclude that by (...) there, was not
meant an Absolute Infinity of Time, but only such as had a very remote or
distant Beginning, because (...) here, is plainly taken in that sense. We
conceive therefore, that this was Platos Opinion in his Old Age, when he wrote
his Book of Laws, that though the World had a Beginning, yet it had continued a
very long Time, not computable by us; or at least, he thought fit to declare
himself after that manner, perhaps by reason of the Clamours of Aristotle, or
some others against his Timaeus, that so he might thereby somewhat mollify
that Opinion of the Novity of the World, by removing the Epoch and Date
thereof to so great a distance.

Now it is very true, what we have several times before suggested, that there
have been amongst the Pagans, both Theogonists and Cosmogonists too, that were
Atheists. They abusing the word Gods several ways; Some of them, as
Anaximander, understanding thereby Inanimate Worlds successively Generated out
of Senseless Matter, and Corrupted again into it; others, as Anaximenes and
Democritus, allowing that there were certain Animals and Understanding Beings
Superior to Men, but such only as were Native and Mortal, in like manner as
Men, and calling these by the Name of Gods. Of the former of which Two
Philosophers, St. Austin gives us this account; Anaximenes omnes rerum causas
Infinito Aeri dedit, nec Deos negavit aut tacuit, non tamen ab ipsis Aerem
factum, sed ipsos ex Aere ortos credidit: Anaximenes made Infinite Air, to be
the first Original and Cause of all things, and yet was he not therefore silent
concerning the Gods, much less did he deny them; nevertheless he did not
believe the Air to have been Made by the Gods, but the Gods to have been all
generated out of the Air. These were therefore such Theogonists, as supposed
all the Gods without exception, to be Generable and Corruptible, and acknowed
no (...) at all, no Understanding Being Unmade and Self-existent, but concluded
Senseless Matter to be the only (...) and Original of all things, which is
Absolute Atheism. Notwithstanding which, it is certain that all the Pagan
Theogonists were not Atheists, (no more than all their Cosmogonists Theists)
but that there was another sort of Theogonists amongst them, who supposed
indeed all the Inferior Mundane Gods to have been Made or Generated in one
Sense or other, but asserted One (...), One Supreme Unmade Self-existent Deity,
who was the Cause of them all, Which Theogonists for distinction sake, from
those other Atheistick ones; may be called Divine.

And that Plato was such a Divine Theogonist, is a thing as we conconceive out
of question. But if there had been any doubt concerning it, it would have been
sufficiently removed from those Passages before-cited out of his Timaeus. To
which nevertheless, for fuller satisfaction sake, may be added these Two which
follow. The first, page 34. (...)^ For thus it ought to be read (...), as it is
also in Aldus his Edition, and not (...), as in Stevens, following an error in
that of Ficinus. And accordingly the words are thus rendered by Cicero, Haec
Deus is qui Semper erat, de Aliquando Futuro Deo ^ogitans, laevem eum effecit,
and undique aequabilem, etc. This was the Ratiocination or Resolution of that
God, which Always Is, concerning that God which was sometime about to be made;
that he should be Smooth and Spherical, etc. Where again, it presently follows
in Cicero's Version, Sic Deus ille Aeternus, Hunc Perfect Beatum Deum
procreavit, Thus that Eternal God, procreated this perfectly Happy God, the
World. Where there is plainly mention made, of Two Gods, one a Generated God,
the Animated World, called elsewhere in Plato (...), and another Eternal and
Unmade God, Innatus and Infectus Deus, who was the Cause of the Worlds
Generation or Production. Or to keep close to Plato's own Language, One God who
belonged to Genesis, or that head of Being which he calls Generation, and
therefore must needs have an Antecedent Cause of his Existence; since nothing
can be Made without a Cause; and another God, that was truly and properly
(...), Immutable Essence, who was the Cause of that Generated God, the
Universe, and therefore of All things. The other Passage of Plato's is page 41.
of his Timaeus, (...)^ When therefore all the Gods, both those which move
visibly about the Heavens, and those which appear to us as often as they please
(that is both the Stars and Demons) were Generated or Created; that God which
made this whole Universe, bespake these Generated Gods, after this manner, Ye
Gods of Gods (whom I my self am the Maker and Father of) attend. Where the
words (...), notwithstanding Proclus his other differing conjectures, seem to
have been very well rendered by Cicero, Dii qui Deorum Satu orti estis, Ye Gods
which are the Progeny or Offspring of the Gods. And the Gods whose Offspring
these Generated Gods (the Animated Stars and Demons) are said to be, must needs
be those (...), those Eternal Gods, elsewhere mentioned in the same Timaeus, as
where the Philosopher calls the World, (...), a Generated or Created Image of
the Eternal Gods; as Cicero also is to be understood of these, when he speaks
of the Worlds being Made by The Gods, and by the Counsel of The Gods. Now these
Eternal Gods of Plato, called by his Followers (...), the Supramundane Gods,
though according to that stricter Notion of the word (...), as it is used both
in Plato and Aristotle, for a Temporary Production of things (...), they were
indeed all (...), because they never were not, and had no beginning of their
Existence: yet notwithstanding were they not therefore supposed by that
Philosopher, to be all (...) and (...) so many Self-originated and
Self-subsistent Beings, or First Principles, but only One of them such; and the
rest derived from that One: it being very true, as we conceive, what Proclus
affirms, In Tima. p. 11^
(...), That Plato reduces all things to One Principle, even Matter it self;
but unquestionable, that he deriveth all his Gods from One. Wherefore all those
Eternal Gods of Plato (One only excepted) though they were not (...) or
Generated in one sense, that is (...), as to a Temporary beginning, yet were
they notwithstanding as Proclus distinguishes, (...), Generated in another
sense, as produced from a Superior Cause, there being only One such (...) One
Ingenerate or Vnproduced Deity. Thus according to Plato, there were Two sorts
of Secundary or Inferior and Derivative Gods, First the (...) or Mundane Gods,
such as had all of them a Temporary Generation with the World, and of whom
Plato's Theogonia and (...) is properly to be understood; And Secondly the
(...) and (...), the Supramundane and Eternal Gods, which were all of them
also, save only One, produced from that One, and dependent on it as their
Cause. But of these Inferior Eternal Gods, of the Platonists and Pythagoreans,
we are to speak again afterward. In the mean time it is evident, that in that
Passage of Plato's before-cited, there is plain mention made, both of (...), of
Dii Orti, Gods who were made or Generated with the World, and of (...), of One
God who was the maker of them, and of the Whole Universe, who therefore is
himself every way (...) Unmade or Vnproduced. And accordingly he afterward
subjoyns, (...)^ which Cicero thus renders, Atque is quidem (Deus) qui cuncta
composuit, constanter in suo manebat statu, qui autem erant ab eo creati (Dii)
cum Parentis ordinem cognovissent, hunc sequebantur, etc. Then that God who
framed all things, remained constantly in his former State; and his Sons, or
the Gods that were Created by him, observed his Order and Appointment.

Neither was Plato singular in this, but the Generality of the other Pagan
Theists who were more Intelligent, all along agreed with him herein, as to the
Generation of the Mundane Gods, and so were both Theists and Theogonists, they
indeed understanding nothing else by their Theogonia or Generation of Gods,
than a Divine Cosmogonia or Creation of the World by God; forasmuch as they
supposed the World it self as Animated, and its several Parts, to be Gods. So
that they asserted these Three Things, First a Cosmogonia the Generation of the
World, that it was not from Eternity, but had a Novity or Beginning. Secondly,
that this Cosmogonia or Generation of the World, was also a Theogonia or
Generation of Gods, the World it self and several of its Parts Animated being
esteemed such. And Lastly, that both these Gods and the World, were Made and
Produced by One (...), One Vnproduced and Self-originated Deity. All which
Particulars, we may here briefly exemplify in P. Ovidius Naso, whose Paganity
sufficiently appears, from his Fastorum and all his other Writings, and who
also went off the Stage, before Christianity appeared on it, and may well be
presumed, to represent the then generally received Doctrine of the Pagans.
First therefore, as for the Generation and Novity of the World, and its First
Production out of a Chaos, we have it fully acknowledged by him in these
following Verses. Metam. l. 1.
Ante Mare and Terras, and, quod tegit omnia, Coelum,
Vnus erat toto Naturae Vultus in orb,
Quem dixere Chaos; rudis indigestaque moles,
Nec quicquam nisi pondus iners, congestaque eodem
Non been junctarum discordia semina rerum.
Nullus adhuc mundo praebebat Lumina Titan,
Nec nova crescendo reparabat cornua Phoebe,
Nec circumfuso pendebat in aere Tellus,
Ponderibus librata suis; nec brachia longo
Margin terrarum porrexerat Amphitrite.
Quaque erat and Tellus, etc.
Which in Mr. Sandys his English, with some little alteration, speaks thus:
Before that Sea and Earth and Heaven was framed,
One face had Nature which they Chaos named.
No Titan yet the World with Light adorns,
Nor waxing Phebe fills her wained Horns;
Nor hung the self-poiz'd Earth in thin Air placed,
Nor Amphitrite the vast shore embraced;
Earth, Air and Sea Confounded, etc.
In the next place, when there was a World made out of this Chaos, that this
Cosmogonia or Generation of the World, was also a Theogonia or Generation of
Gods, is plainly intimated in these Verses. Neu Regio foret ulla suis
Animalibus orba,
Astra tenent coeleste solum, Formaeque Deorum.
To this sense, That naught of Animals might unfurnished lie,
The Gods, in Form of Stars, possess the Sky.
And that all this was effected, and this Orderly Mundane System produced out
of a disorderly confused Chaos, not by a Fortuitous Motion of Matter, or the
Jumbling of Atoms, but by the Providence and Command of One Unmade Deity, which
was also that that furnished all the several Parts of the World with respective
Animals; the Sea with Fishes, the Earth with Men, and the Heaven with Gods; is
thus declared also by the Poet; Hanc Deus and Melior litem Natura diremit,
Nam Coelo Terras, and Terris abscidit Vndas:
Et liquidum spisso secrevit ab Aere Coelum, etc.
Sic ubi dispositam, Quisquis fuit Ille Deorum,
Congeriem secuit, sectamque in membra redegit;
Principio terram, ne non aequalis ab omni
Part foret, magni speciem glomeravit in orbis:
Tum freta diffudit, rapidisque tumescere ventis
Jussit, etc.
Sic onus inclusum, numero distinxit eodem
Cura Dei, etc.
This Strife (with Better Nature) God decides,
He Earth from Heaven, the Sea from Earth divides:
He Either pure extracts from Grosser Air.
All which unfolded by His Prudent Care,
From that blind Mass; the happily disjoined
With strifeless peace, He to their seats confined, etc.
What God soever this Division wrought,
And every part to due proportion brought,
First lest the Earth unequal should appear,
He turned it round in figure of a Sphere.
Then Seas diffused, Commanding them to roar
With ruffling Winds, and give the Land a shore.
To those he added Springs, Ponds, Lakes immense,
And Rivers whom their winding borders fence.
Where though that learned Paraphrast, supposed (and not without some
probability neither) that Deus and Melior Natura, God and the Better Nature,
were one and the self same thing, yet we rather conceived them to be distinct,
but one of them subordinate to the other as its Instrument, God and the
Plastic Nature, accordingly as Aristotle writes in his Physics, (...), That
Mind and Nature, were both together, the Cause of this Universe.

Nevertheless we cannot but observe in this place, that though that Poet speak
more than once of God Singularly, as also calls him Mundi Fabricator, and Ille
Opifex Rerum, and Mundi melioris Origo, yet notwithstanding, where he writes of
the making of Man, Pagan-like, he affirms him, though to have been made by God,
yet according to the Image or Likeness of The Gods, which govern all things.
Sanctius his Animal, mentisque capacius altae
Deer at adhuc, and quod dominari in caetera posset:
Natus homo est: sive hunc divino semine fecit,
Ille Opifex rerum, mundi melioris Origo:
Sive recens tellus, seductaque nuper ab alto
Aethere, cognati retinebat semina coeli.
Quam satus Iapeto, mistam fluvialibus undis,
Finxit in effigiem Moderantum cuncta Deorum.
The Nobler Being, with a Mind possessed,
Was wanting yet, that should command the rest.
That Maker, the best Worlds Original,
Either him framed of seed Celestial;
Or Earth which late he did from Heaven divide,
Some sacred seeds retained to Heaven allied:
Which with the living stream Prometheus mixed,
And in that Artificial Structure fixed,
The Form of all the All-ruling Deities.
And because some may probably be puzzled with this seeming Contradiction, that
One God should be said to be the Maker of the whole World and of Man, and yet
the Government of all should be attributed to Gods, Plurally; and Man said to
be made in the Image and Likeness of the Gods; we shall therefore add here,
that according to the tenor of the Pagan Theology, the Inferior and Minor Gods
were supposed also, to have all of them, their several share in the Government
of things below them: For which cause they are called not only by Maximus
Tyrius (...), Co-rulers with God, but also by Plato himself, (...), the
Co-governours and Co-reigners with the Supreme God. So that the Government of
this Inferior World, was by the Pagans often attributed to them jointly, the
Supreme and Inferior Gods both together, under that one general name of Gods.
But the chief of those Inferior Deities, in whose Image Man is also said to
have been made, as well as in the Likeness of the Supreme, were either those
Celestial Gods and Animated Stars, before mentioned by the Poet, or else the
Eternal Gods of Plato, which were looked upon likewise as Co-makers of the
World subordinate.

Besides Ovid, we might instance here in many more of the Pagan Theogonists,
clearly acknowledging in like manner One Unmade Deity, which Generated both the
World, and all the other Gods in it; as for example, Strabo, who affirming that
the World was (...), L. 17. p. 809.
The joint work both of Nature and Providence, as it was before ascribed by
Ovid, to Deus and Melior Natura; adds concerning Providence or the Deity in
this manner: (...)^ That having a multiform Fecundity in it, and delighting in
variety of works, it designed principally to make Animals, as the most
excellent things, and amongst them chiefly those Two Noblest kinds of Animals,
Gods and Men; for whose sakes the other things were made; and then assigned
Heaven to the Gods, and Earth to Men, the Two extreme parts of the World, for
their respective Habitations. Thus also Seneca in Lactantius, speaking
concerning God, Hic cum prima Fundamenta molis pulcherrimae jaceret, and hoc
ordiretur quo neque majus quicquam novit Natura nec melius; ut omnia sub
Ducibus irent, quamvis ipse per totum se corpus intenderat, tamen Ministros
regni sui Deos genuit. God when he laid the Foundations of this most beautiful
Fabric, and began to erect that Structure, than which Nature knows nothing
greater or more excellent; to the end that all things might be carried on under
their respective Governors orderly, though he intended Himself through the
whole, as to preside in chief over all, yet did he Generate Gods also; as
subordinate Ministers of his Kingdom under him. We shall forbear to mention the
Testimonies of others here, because they may be more opportunely inserted
elsewere, only we shall add, as to Hesiod and Homer, that though they seem to
have been sometimes suspected, both by Plato and Aristotle, for Atheistick
Theogonists, yet as Aristotle did upon maturer thoughts, afterward change his
Opinion concerning both of them, so is it most probable that they were no
Atheists but Divine Theogonists, such as supposed indeed Many Generated Gods,
but One Supreme Unmade Deity, the Maker both of the World and Them. And this
not only for the Grounds before alleged concerning Hesiod, and because both of
them do every where affirm, even their Generated Gods to be Immortal, (which no
Atheists did) but also for sundry other Reasons, some of which may be more
conveniently inserted elsewhere. Moreover it has been already intimated, that
the Generated Gods of Hesiod and Homer, extend farther than those of Plato's,
they being not only the Animated Parts of the World, but also all the other
Things of Nature Fictitiously Personated, and Improperly or Abusively called
Gods and Goddesses, whereof a farther account will be afterward given.

Neither ought it at all to be wondered at, if these Divine Theogonists amongst
the Pagans, did many times as well as those other Atheistick ones, make Chaos
and the Ocean, Seniour to the Gods, and Night the Mother of them. The former of
these being not only done by Hesiod and Homer, but also by the Generality of
the ancient Pagan Theists in Epicharmus: and the Latter by Orpheus an undoubted
Theist, in his Hymn of the Night, (...)^ Noctem concelebro Genetricem
Hominumque Deumque. They not understanding this Absolutely and Universally, of
all the Gods without exception, as the other Atheistick Theogonists did, as if
there had been no Unmade Deity at all, but Chaos and Night, (that is, Senseless
Matter, blindly and fortuitously moved) had been the Sole Original of all
things, but only of the (...), The Gods, so called by way of Distinction from
God or the Supreme Deity, that is, the Inferior Mundane Gods Generated
together with the World. The Reason whereof was, because it was a most ancient
and in a manner Universally received Tradition amongst the Pagans, as has been
often intimated, that the Cosmogonia or Generation of the World took its first
Beginning from a Chaos, (the Divine Cosmogonists agreeing herein with the
Atheistick ones;) this Tradition having been delivered down, from Orpheus and
Linus (amongst the Greeks) by Hesiod and Homer and others; acknowledged by
Epicharmus; and embraced by Thales, Anaxagoras, Plato, and other Philosophers,
who were Theists: The Antiquity whereof was thus declared by Euripides; (...),
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...)^
Non hic Meus, sed Matris est sermo meae,
Figura ut Vna fuerit and Coeli and Soli,
Secreta quae mox ut receperunt Statum,
Cuncta ediderunt haec in oras Luminis;
Feras, Volucres, Arbores, Ponti Gregem,
Homines quoque ipsos.
Neither can it reasonably be doubted, but that it was Originally Mosaical, and
indeed at first a Divine Revelation, since no man could otherwise pretend to
know, what was done before Mankind had any Being. Wherefore those Pagan
Cosmogonists who were Theists, being Polytheists and Theogonists also, and
asserting besides the One Supreme Unmade Deity, other Inferior Mundane Gods,
Generated together with the World (the Chief whereof were the Animated Stars)
they must needs according to the Tenor of that Tradition, suppose them as to
their Corporeal Parts at least, to have been Juniors to Night and Chaos, and
the Offspring of them, because they were all made out of an Antecedent Dark
Chaos. Sympos. L. 4. Qu. 5.
(...) (says Plutarch) (...)^ The Mus Araneus being blind, is said to have
been deified by the Egyptians, because they thought, that Darkness was older
than Light. And the Case was the same concerning their Demons likewise, they
being conceived to have their Corporeal Vehicula also; for which Cause as
Porphyrius from Numenius writes, the ancient Egyptians pictured them in Ships
or Boats floating upon the Water: (...)^ The Egyptians therefore represented
all their Demons, as not standing upon firm Land, but in Ships upon the Water.
But as for the Incorporeal Part or Souls of those Inferior Gods, though these
Divine Theogonists could not derive their Original from Chaos or Matter, but
rather from that other Principle called Love, as being Divinely Created, and so
having God for their Father, yet might they notwithstanding, in another sense,
fancy Night to have been their Mother too, inasmuch as they were all made
(...), from an antecedent Nonexistence or Nothing, brought forth into Being.
For which Cause there seems to have been in Orpheus, a Dialogue betwixt the
Maker of the World and Night. For that this ancient Cabala, which derived the
Cosmogonia from Chaos and Love, was at first Religious and not Atheistical, and
Love understood in it not to be the Offspring of Chaos; may be concluded from
hence, because this Love as well as Chaos, was of a Mosaical Extraction also,
and plainly derived from that Spirit of God, which is said in the Scripture, To
have moved upon the waters, that is, upon the Chaos: whether by this Spirit be
to be meant God Himself, as acting immediately upon the Matter, or some other
Active Principle derived from God and not from Matter (as a Mundane Soul or
Plastic Nature.) From whence also it came, that as Porphyrius testifies, the
ancient Pagans thought the Water to be Divinely inspired, De Aut. Nymph. p. 266.
(...)^ They thought that Souls attended upon the Water or resorted thereunto,
as being Divinely Inspired, as Numenius writes, adding the Prophet also,
therefore to have said, That the Spirit of God moved upon the Water.

And that this Cabala was thus understood by some of the ancient Pagan
Cosmogonists themselves, appears plainly, not only from Simmias Rhodius and
Parmenides, but also from these following Verses of Orpheus, or whoever was the
Writer of those Argonauticks, undoubtedly ancient, where Chaos and Love are
thus brought in together; (...), P. 17. Ed. Steph.

(...),
(...),
(...),
(...)^
To this Sense; We will first sing a pleasant and delightful Song, concerning
the ancient Chaos, how Heaven, Earth and Seas, were framed out of it, as also
concerning that Much-wise and Sagacious Love, The Oldest of all, and
Self-perfect, which actively produced all these things, separating one thing
from another. Where this Love is not only called (...) of Much-counsel or
Sagaciousness, which implies it to have been a Substantial and Intellectual
Thing, but also (...) the Oldest of all, and therefore Senior to Chaos, as
likewise (...), Self-perfect or Self-originated. From whence it is manifest,
that according to the Orphick Tradition, this Love which the Cosmogonia was
derived from, was no other than the Eternal Unmade Deity (or an Active
Principle depending on it) which produced this whole Orderly World, and all the
Generated Gods in it, as to their Material part, out of Chaos and Night.
Accordingly as Aristotle determines in his Metaphysics, not only in the place
before-cited, Lib. 1. c. 6. p. 849.
but also afterward; (...)^ Others, besides the Material Cause of the World,
assign an Efficient, or Cause of Motion, namely whosoever make, either Mind (
and Intellect) or Love a Principle. Wherefore we conclude that that other
Atheistick Cabala, or Aristophanick Tradition beforementioned, which
accordingly as Aristotle also, elsewhere declares concerning it, did (...),
Generate all things whatsoever, even the Gods themselves universally out of
Night and Chaos, making Love it self likewise, to have been produced from an
Egg of the Night. I say, that this was nothing else but a mere Depravation of
the ancient Mosaic Cabala, as also an Absolutely Impossible Hypothesis, it
deriving all things whatsoever in the Universe, besides the Bare Substance of
Senseless Matter, in another Sense then that beforementioned, out of Nonentity
or Nothing; as shall be also farther manifested afterward.

We have now represented the Sense and generally received Doctrine of the
ancient Pagan Theologers, that there was indeed a Multiplicity of Gods, but yet
so that One of them only was (...), Ingenerate or Unmade, by whom all the other
Gods together with the World were Made, so as to have had a Novity of Being or
a Temporary Beginning of their Existence. Plato and the Pythagoreans here only
differing from the rest in this, that though they acknowledged the World and
all the Mundane Gods, to have been Generated together in Time, yet they
supposed certain other Intelligible and Supramundane Gods also, which however
produced from one Original Deity, were nevertheless Eternal or without
Beginning. But now we must acknowledge, that there were amongst the Pagan
Theists some of a different persuasion from the rest, who therefore did did not
admit of any Theogonia in the sense before declared, that is, any Temporary
Generation of Gods, because they acknowledged no Cosmogonia, no Temporary
Production of the World, but concluded it to have been from Eternity.

That Aristotle was one of these, is sufficiently known, whose Inferior Gods
therefore, the Sun, Moon and Stars, must needs be (...) or Ingenerate, in this
sense, so as to have had no Temporary Production, because the Whole World to
him was such. And if that Philosopher be to be believed, himself was the very
First, at least, of all the Greeks, who asserted this Ingenerateness or
Eternity of the World, he affirming that all before him, did (...), and (...),
Generate or Make the World, that is attribute a Temporary Production to it, and
consequently to all those Gods also, which were a Part thereof. Notwithstanding
which, the Writer de Placitis Philosophorum, and Stobaeus, impute this Dogma of
the Worlds Eternity, to certain others of the Greek Philosophers before
Aristotle, (besides Ocellus Lucanus, who is also acknowledged by Philo to have
been an assertor thereof.) And indeed Epicharmus, though a Theist, seems
plainly to have been of this Persuasion, that the World was Unmade, as also
that there was no Theogonia nor Temporary Production of the Inferior Gods,
from these Verses of his, according to Grotius his Correction.

(...)^ Excerp p. 478.

(...)^
(...)^
(...)^
(...),
(...).
Nempe Di semper fuerunt, atque nunquam intercident:
Haec quae dico semper nobis rebus in iisdem se exhibent.
Extitisse sed Deorum Primum perhibetur Chaos:
Quinam vero? nam de nihilo nil pote primum existere.
Ergo nec Primum profecto quicquam, nec fuit Alterum:
Sed quae nunc sic appellantur, alia fient postmodum.
Where, though he acknowledges this to have been the General Tradition of the
ancient Theists, That Chaos was before the Gods, and that the Inferior Mundane
Gods, had a Temporary Generation or Production with the World, yet
notwithstanding does he conclude against it, from this Ground of Reason,
because Nothing could proceed from Nothing, and therefore, both the Gods, and
indeed whatsoever else is Substantial in the World, was from Eternity Unmade,
only the Fashion of things having been altered.

Moreover Diodorus Siculus affirms, the Chaldeans likewise to have asserted
this Dogma of the Worlds Eternity, L. 2. p. 82.
(...)^ The Chaldeans affirm, the Nature of the World to be Eternal, and that
it was neither Generated from any Beginning, nor will ever admit Corruption.
Who, that they were not Atheists for all that (no more than Aristotle) appears
from those following words of that Historiographer, (...)^ They believe also,
that the Order and Disposition of the World, is by a certain Divine Providence,
and that every One of those things which come to pass in the Heavens, happens
not by chance, but by a certain determinate and firmly ratified Judgment of the
Gods. However, it is a thing known to all, that the Generality of the later
Platonists stiffly adhered to Aristotle in this, neither did they only assert
the Corporeal World, with all the Inferior Mundane Gods in it, to be (...), or
Ingenerate, and to have existed from Eternity, but also maintained the same
concerning the Souls of Men and all other Animals; (They concluding that no
Souls were Younger than Body or the World;) and because they would not seem to
depart from their Master Plato, therefore did they endeavor, violently to
force this same sense upon Plato's words also.

Notwithstanding which, concerning these Latter Platonists, it is here
observable, that though they thus asserted, the World, and all Inferior Gods
and Souls, to have been (...), according to that stricter sense of the Word
declared, that is, to have had no Temporary Generation or Beginning, but to
have Existed from Eternity, yet by no means did they therefore conceive them to
be (...), Self-originated, and Self-existing, but concluded them to have been
all derived from one sole Self-existent Deity as their Cause, which therefore,
though not in order of Time, yet of Nature, was before them. En. 3. l. 2. c. 1.
To this purpose Plotinus, (...)^ Mind or God, was before the World, not as if
it existed before it in Time, but because the World proceeded from it, and that
was in order of Nature First, as the cause thereof, and its Archetype or
Paradigm; the World also always subsisting, by it and from it. And again
elsewhere to the same purpose, En. 2. l. 9. c. 3.
(...)^ The things which are said to have been made or Generated, were not so
Made, as that they ever had a Beginning of their Existence, but yet they were
Made and will be always Made, (in another sense;) nor will they ever be
destroyed, otherwise than as being dissolved into those Simple Principles, out
of which some of them were compounded. Where though the World be said never to
have been Made, as to a Temporary beginning, yet in another sense, is it said
to be always Made, as depending upon God perpetually, as the Emanative Cause
thereof. Agreeably whereunto, the Manner of the Worlds Production from God, is
thus declared by that Philosopher; En. 5. l. 8. c. 12.
(...)^ They do not rightly, who Corrupt and Generate the World, for they will
not understand what Manner of Making or Production the World had, to wit, by
way of Effulgency or Eradiation from the Deity. From whence it follows, that
the World must needs have been so long as there was a God, as the Light was
coeve with the Sun. So likewise Proclus concludes, that the World was (...),
always Generated or Eradiated from God, and therefore must needs be Eternal,
God being so. Wherefore these Latter Platonists, supposed the same thing
concerning the Corporeal World, and the Lower Mundane Gods, which their Master
Plato did, concerning his Higher Eternal Gods; that though they had no
Temporary Production, yet they all depended no less upon one Supreme Deity,
than if they had been made out of Nothing by Him. From whence it is manifest,
that none of these Philosophers apprehended any Repugnancy at all, betwixt
these Two Things; Existence from Eternity, and Being Caused or produced by
Another. Nor can we make any great Doubt, but that if the Latter Platonists,
had been fully convinced of any Contradictious Inconsistency here, they would
readily have disclaimed, that their so beloved Hypothesis, of the Worlds
Eternity; it being so far from Truth what some have supposed, that the
Assertors of the Worlds Eternity, were all Atheists, that these Latter
Platonists, were led into this Opinion no otherwise than from the sole
Consideration of the Deity; to wit, its (...), its Essential Goodness, and
Generative Power, or Emanative Fecundity, as Proclus plainly declares upon the
Timaeus. Page 116.


Now though Aristotle were not Acted with any such Divine Enthusiasm, as these
Platonists seem to have been, yet did he notwithstanding, after his sober
Manner, really maintain the same thing; That though the World and Inferior
Mundane Gods, had no Temporary Generation, yet were they nevertheless, all
Produced from One Supreme Deity as their Cause. Thus Simplicius represents that
Philosopher's Sense. (...)^ In Arist. Phys. L. 8.
Aristotle would not have the World to have been made (so as to have had a
Beginning) but yet nevertheless to have been produced from God after some other
manner. And again afterward; (...). Aristotle though making God the Cause of
the Heaven and its Eternal Motion, yet concludes it notwithstanding to have
been Ingenerate or Unmade, that is, without Beginning. However, we think sit
here to observe, that though Aristotle do for the most part express, a great
deal of Zeal and Confidence, for that Opinion of the Worlds Eternity, yet does
he sometimes for all that, seem to flag a little, and speak more Languidly and
Sceptically about it; as for Example, in his Book De Partibus Animalium, where
he treats concerning an Artificial Nature, (...)^ L. 1. C. 1.
It is more likely that the Heaven was made by such a Cause as this (if it were
Made) and that it is maintained by such a Cause, than that Mortal Animals
should be so; which yet is a thing more generally acknowledged. Now it was
before declared, that Aristotle's Artificial Nature, was nothing but the mere
Executioner or Opificer of a Perfect Mind, that is, of the Deity, which Two
therefore he sometimes joins together in the Cosmopoeia, affirming that Mind
and Nature, that is, God and Nature, were the Cause of this Universe.

And now we see plainly, that though there was a Real Controversy amongst the
Pagan Theologers, (especially from Aristotle's time downward) concerning the
Cosmogonia and Theogonia, according to the Stricter notion of those words, the
Temporary Generation or Production of the World and Inferior Gods; or whether
they had any Beginning or no; yet was there no Controversy at all, concerning
the Self-existency of them, but it was Universally agreed upon amongst them,
That the World and the Inferior Gods, however supposed by some to have existed
from Eternity, yet were nevertheless all derived, from one Sole Self-existent
Deity, as their Cause; (...), being either Eradiated or Produced from God.
Wherefore it is observable, that these Pagan Theists, who asserted the Worlds
Eternity, did themselves distinguish concerning the word (...) Orium, Natum,
and Factum, as that which was Equivocal, and though in one sense of it, they
denied that the World and Inferior Gods were (...), yet notwithstanding did
they in another sense clearly affirm the same. For the word (...) (say they)
strictly and properly taken, Simplic. in Arist. Phys. fol. 265.
is (...), that which in respect of time, passed out of Nonexistence into
Being, or (...), that which being not before, afterward was. Nevertheless they
acknowledge, that in a larger sense, this Word (...) may be taken also for
(...), that which does any way depend upon a Superior Being as its Cause. And
there must needs be the same Equivocation in the word (...), so that this in
like manner may be taken also, either (...), for that which is Ingenerate in
respect of Time, as having no Temporary Beginning; or else for that which is,
(...), Ingenerate or Vnproduced from any Cause; in which latter sense, that
word (...) or Unmade is of equal force and extent, with (...) or (...), that
which is Self-subsistent or Selforiginated; and accordingly it was used by
those Pagan Theists, who concluded (...), i. e. That Matter was Unmade, that
is, not only existed from Eternity without Beginning, but also was
Self-existent, and Independent upon any Superior Cause. Now as to the Former of
these two senses of those words, (...) and (...), the Generality of the ancient
Pagans, and together with them Plato, affirmed, the World and all the Inferior
Gods to be (...), to have been Made in Time, or to have had a Beginning; (for
whatever the Latter Platonists pretend, this was undoubtedly Plato's Notion of
that word and no other, when he concluded the World to be (...), forasmuch as
himself expressly opposes it to (...), that which is Eternal.) But on the
contrary, Aristotle and the Later Platonists, determined the World and all the
Inferior Gods, to be in this sense (...), such as had no Temporary Beginning,
but were from Eternity. However according to the later Sense of those words,
all the Pagan Theologers agreed together, that the World and all the Inferior
Gods,, whether having a Beginning, or Existing from Eternity, were
notwithstanding (...), produced or derived from a Superior Cause; and that
thus, there was only One (...), One Vnproduced and Self-existent Deity, who is
said by them to be (...), Superior to a Cause and Older than any Cause, he
being the Cause of all things besides himself. Thus Crantor and his Followers
in Proclus, In Timae. page 85.
zealous Assertors of the Worlds Eternity, determined, (...)^ that the World
(with all the Inferior Mundane Gods in it) notwithstanding their Being from
Eternity, might be said to be (...) that is orti or made, as being produced
from another Cause, and not Self-originated or Self-existing. In like manner
Proclus himself, that grand Champion for the Worlds Eternity, plainly
acknowledged notwithstanding, the Generation of the Gods and World in this
sense, as being produced from a Superior Cause, (...)^ We call it the
Generations of the Gods, meaning thereby, not any Temporary Production of them,
but their Ineffable Procession, from a Superior First Cause. Thus also
Salustius, in his Book de Diis and Mundo, where he contends the World to have
been from Eternity or without Beginning, yet concludes both it, and the other
Inferior Gods to have been made by One Supreme Deity, who is called by him,
(...), the First God. For says he, (...)^ God or the First Cause, having the
greatest power or being Omnipotent, ought therefore to make, not only Men, and
other Animals, but also Gods and Demons. And accordingly this is the Title of
his 13. Chapter, (...), How Eternal things may be said to be Made or Generated.
It is true indeed (as we have often declared) that some of the Pagan Theists
asserted, God not to be the only (...), the only Unmade and Self-existent
Being, but that Matter also was such; nevertheless, this Opinion was not so
generally received amongst them, as is commonly supposed: and though some of
the ancient Fathers confidently impute it to Plato, yet there seems to be no
sufficient ground for their so doing; and Porphyrius, Jamblychus, Proclus, and
other Platonists, do not only professedly oppose the same, as false, but also
as that which was dissonant from Plato's Principles. Wherefore according to
that larger Notion of the Word (...), as taken synonymously with (...) and
(...), there were Very many of the Pagan Theologers who agreed with Christians
in this, (...), That God is the only Ingenerate or Unmade Being, and that his
very Essence is Ingenerability or Innascibility; all other things, even Matter
it self, being made by him. But all the rest of them (only a few Ditheists
excepted) though they supposed Matter to be Self-existent yet did they
conclude, that there was only, (...), only One Unmade or Vnproduced God, and
that all their other Gods, were (...), in One sense or other, if not as Made in
Time, yet at least as Produced from a Superior Cause.

Nothing now remains, but only that we show, how the Pagans did distinguish,
and put a difference, betwixt the One Supreme Unmade Deity, and all their other
Inferior Generated Gods. Which we are the rather concerned to do; because it is
notorious that they did many times also confound them together, attributing the
Government of the Whole World to the Gods promiscuously, and without putting
any due Discrimination, betwixt the Supreme, and Inferior; (the true reason
whereof seems to have been this, because the supposed the Supreme God, not to
do all immediately, in the Government of the World, but to permit much to his
Inferior Ministers) One Instance of which we had before in Ovid, and
innumerable such others might be cited out of their most sober Writers. As for
Example Cicero, in his First Book of Laws; Deorum Immortalium vi, ratione,
potestate, mente, numine, Natura omnis regitur, The Whole Nature, or Universe,
is governed by the Force, Reason, Power, Mind, and Divinity of the Immortal
Gods. And again in his Second Book, Deos esse Dominos ac Moderatores omnium
rerum, eaque quae geruntur, eorum geri Judicio atque Numine, eosdemque optime
de genere hominum mereri, and qualis quisque sit, quid agat, quid in se
admittat, qua mente, qua pietate Religiones colat, intueri; piorumque and
impiorum habere Rationem; a Principio Civibus suasum esse debet: The Minds of
Citizens, ought to be first of all embued with a firm persuasion, that the Gods
are the Lords and Moderators of all things, and that the Conduct and Management
of the whole World is directed and overruled by their Judgment and Divine
Power; that they deserve the best of mankind, that they behold and consider
what every man is, what he does and takes upon himself, with what Mind, Piety
and Sincerity he observes the Duties of Religion; and Lastly, that these Gods
have a very different regard to the Pious and the Impious. Now such Passages as
these, abounding every where in Pagan Writings, it is no wonder if many,
considering their Theology but slightly and superficially, have been led into
an Error, and occasioned thereby to conclude, the Pagans not to have asserted a
Divine Monarchy, but to have imputed both the making and Governing of the World
to an Aristocracy or Democracy of Coordinate Gods, not only all Eternal, but
also Self-existent and Unmade. The contrary whereunto, though it be already
sufficiently proved, yet it will not be amiss for us here in the Close, to show
how the Pagans, who sometimes jumble and confound the Supreme and Inferior Gods
all together, do notwithstanding at other times, many ways distinguish, betwixt
the One Supreme God, and their other Many Inferior Gods.

First therefore, as the Pagans had Many Proper Names for One and the same
Supreme God, according to several Particular Considerations of him, in respect
of his several different Manifestations and Effects in the World; which are
oftentimes mistaken for so many Distinct Deities; (some supposing them
Independent, others Subordinate;) so had they also besides these, other Proper
Names of God, according to that more full and comprehensive notion of him, as
the Maker of the Whole World, and its Supreme Governor, or the Sole Monarch of
the Universe. For thus the Greeks called him (...) and (...), etc. the Latins
Jupiter and Jovis, the Babylonians Belus and Bell, the Persians Mithras and
Oromasdes, the Egyptians and Scythians (according to Herodotus) Ammoun and
Pappaeus. And Celsus in Origin, concludes it to be a Matter of pure
Indifferency, to call the Supreme God by any of all these Names, either (...)
or Ammoun or Pappaeus or the like, Lib. 5. C. Celsum.
(...)^ Celsus thinks it to be a matter of no moment, whether we call the
Highest and Supreme God, Adonai and Sabbath, as the Jews do; or Dia and Zena,
as the Greeks; or as the Egyptians Ammoun; or as the Scythians Pappaeus.
Notwithstanding which, that Pious and Jealous Father expresses a great deal of
Zeal, against Christians then using any of those Pagan Names. But we will
rather endure any torment (says he) than confess Zeus, ( or Jupiter) to be
God; being well assured that the Greeks often really worship, under that Name,
an Evil Demon, who is an enemy both to God and Men. And we will rather suffer
death, than call the Supreme God Ammoun, whom the Egyptian Enchanters thus
Invoke; (...) (...)^ And though the Scythians call the Supreme God Pappaeus,
yet we acknowledging a Supreme God, L. 5. p. 262.
will never be persuaded, to call him by that name, Which it pleased that
Demon (who ruled over the Scythian Desert, People and Language) to impose.
Nevertheless he that shall use the Appellative name for God, either in the
Scythian, Egyptian, or any other Language, which he has been brought up in,
will not offend. Where Origin plainly affirms, the Scythians to have
acknowledged One Supreme God, called by them Pappaeus, and Intimates that the
Egyptians did the like, calling him Ammoun. Neither could it possibly be his
intent, to deny the same of the Greeks and their Zeus, however his great
Jealousy, made him to call him here a Demon, it being true in a certain sense,
which shall be declared afterward, that the Pagans did oftentimes, really
worship an Evil Demon, under those very Names, of Zeus, and Jupiter, as they
did likewise under those of Hammon and Pappaeus.

In the mean time we deny not, but that both the Greeks used that word Zeus,
and the Latins Jupiter, sometimes (...), for the Ether, Fire, or Air, some
accordingly etymologizing (...) from (...), others (...) from (...): Whence
came those Forms of Speech, Sub Jove, and Sub Dio. And thus Cicero, Jovem
Ennius nuncupat ita dicens, De not. D. l. ^.223. Lamb.
Aspice hoc sublime candens, quem invocant omnes Jovem. Hunc etiam Augures
nostri cum dicunt, Jove Fulgente, Jove Tonante; dicunt enim in Coelo Fulgente,
Tonante, etc. The reason of which speeches seems to have been this, because in
ancient times, some had supposed the Animated Heaven, Either and Air, to be the
Supreme Deity. We grant moreover, that the same words have been sometimes used
(...) also, for an Hero or Deified Man, said by some to have been born in
Crete, by others in Arcadia. And Callimachus though he were very angry with the
Cretians, for affirming Jupiter's Sepulchral Monument, to have been with them
in Crete, as thereby making him Mortal, (...),
(...)^
Cretes semper mendaces, tuum enim, Rex, Sepulchrum
Extruxerunt: Tu vero non es mortuus, semper enim es.
Himself nevertheless (as Athenagoras and Origin observe) attributed the
beginning of death to him, when he affirmed him to have been born in Arcadia;
(...), because a Terrene Nativity is the Beginning of Death. Wherefore this may
pass for a general Observation here, that the Pagan Theology, was all along
Confounded with a certain Mixture, of Physiology and Herology or History
blended together. Nevertheless it is unquestionable, that the more intelligent
of the Greekish Pagans, did frequently understand by Zeus, that Supreme Unmade
Deity, who was the Maker of the World, and of all the Inferior Gods.
Porphyrius in Eusebius thus declares their sense, Praep. Ev. L. 3.
(...)^ By Zeus, the Greeks understand that Mind of the World which framed all
things in it, and contains the whole World. Agreeable whereunto is that of
Maximus Tyrius, (...)^ By Jupiter you are to understand, that most Ancient and
Princely Mind, which all things follow and obey. And Eusebius himself, though
not forward to grant any more than needs he must to Pagans, concludes with this
acknowledgment hereof, Praep. Ev. L. 3. c. 13.
(...)^ Let Jupiter therefore be no longer, that Fiery and Ethereal Substance,
which the ancient Pagans according to Plutarch supposed him to be; but that
Highest Mind, which was the Maker of all things. But Phornutus by Jupiter
understands the Soul of the World, he writing thus concerning him; (...)^ As we
our selves are governed by a Soul, so has the World in like manner a Soul that
contains it; and this is called Zeus, being the Cause of Life to all things
that live; and therefore Zeus or Jupiter, is said to reign over all things.
However, though these were two different Conceptions amongst the Pagans
concerning God, some apprehending him to be an Abstract Mind separate from the
World and Matter, but others to be a Soul of the World only, yet nevertheless
they all agreed in this, that (...) or Jupiter was the Supreme Moderator or
Governor of all. And accordingly Plato in his Cratylus taking these Two Words,
P. 396. Steph.
(...) and (...), both together, etymologizeth them as one, after this manner:
(...)^ These Two words compounded together, declare the Nature of God; for
there is nothing, which is more the Cause of Life both to our selves and all
other Animals, than He who is the Prince and King of all things, so that God is
rightly thus called; He being that by whom all things Live. And these are
really but one Name of God, though divided into Two Words. But because it was
very obvious, then to object against this Position of Plato's, that Zeus or
Jupiter could not be the Prince of all things, and First Original of Life, from
the Theogonia of Hesiod and other ancient Pagans, in which himself was made to
have been the Son of (...) or Saturn; therefore this Objection is thus
preoccupated by Plato, (...)^ Whosoever shall hear this, (says he) will
presently conclude it, to be contumelious to this Zeus or Jupiter (as he has
been described by us) to be accounted the Son of Cronos or Saturn. And in
answer hereunto, that Philosopher stretches his Wits, to salve that Poetic
Theogonia, and reconcile it with his own Theological Hypothesis; and thereupon
he interprets that Hesiodian (...) or Jupiter, into a Compliance with the Third
Hypostasis of his Divine Triad, so as properly to signify the Superior Soul
of the World; (...)^ Nevertheless it is reasonable to suppose, Zeus or Jupiter
to be the Offspring of some Great Mind: and Chronos or Saturn signifies a pure
and Perfect Mind Eternal; who again is said to be the Son of Uranus or Coelius.
Where it is manifest, that Plato endeavors to accommodate this Poetic Trinity
of Gods, Vranus, Chronos and Zeus; or Coelius, Saturn and Jupiter, to his own
Trinity of Divine Hypostases, (...) and (...), the First Good, a Perfect
Intellect, and the Highest Soul. Which Accommodation, is accordingly further
pursued by Plotinus in several places, as Enn. 5. l. 1. c. 4. and Enn. 5. l. 8.
c. 13. Nevertheless these Three Archical Hypostases of the Platonic Trinity,
though looked upon as Substances distinct from each other, and Subordinate; yet
are they frequently taken all together by them for the Whole Supreme Deity.
However the Word (...) is by Plato severally attributed, to each of them; P.
298.
which Proclus thus observed upon the Timaeus: (...)^ We say therefore, that
there are several Orders, Ranks or Degrees of Zeus or Jupiter in Plato; for
sometimes he is taken for the Demiurgus or Opificer of the World, as in
Cratylus, sometimes for the First of the Saturnian Triad, as in Gorgias,
sometimes for the Superior Soul of the World, as in Phaedrus, and lastly
sometimes for the Lower Soul of the Heaven. Though by Proclus his lieve, that
Zeus or Jupiter which is mentioned in Plato's Cratylus (being plainly the
Superior Psyche or Soul of the World) is not properly the Demiurgus or
Opificer, according to him, that Title rather belonging to (...) or Intellect,
which is the Second Hypostasis in his Trinity.

As for the Vulgar of the Greekish Pagans, whether they apprehended God to be
(...), a Mind or Intellect separate from the World, or else to be a Soul of the
World only; it cannot be doubted, but that by the word Zeus, they commonly
understood the Supreme Deity in one or other of those senses, the Father and
King of Gods: he being frequently thus styled in their solemn Nuncupations of
Vows, (...), O Jupiter Father, and O Jupiter King. As he was invoked also
(...), in that excellent Prayer of an ancient Poet, not without cause commended
in Plato's Alcibiades. (...)
(...)^
O Jupiter King, give us good things whether we pray or pray not for them, but
withold evil things from us, though we should pray never so earnestly for
them. But the Instances of this kind being innumerable, we shall forbear to
mention any more of them. Only we shall observe, that Zeus Sabazius was a name
for the Supreme God, sometime introduced amongst the Greeks, and derived in all
probability, from the Hebrew Sabbath, or Adonai Tsebaoth, the Lord of Hosts,
(that is of the Heavenly Hosts) or the Supreme Governor of the World. Which
therefore Aristophanes took notice of, as a strange and foreign God, lately
crept in amongst them, that ought to be banished out of Greece: these several
Names of God being then vulgarly spoken of, as so many distinct Deities; as
shall be more fully declared afterward. We shall likewise elsewhere show, that
besides (...) also was used by the Greeks, as a Name for that God, who is the
supreme Moderator and Governor of the whole World.

That the Latins did in like manner, by Jupiter and Jovis, frequently denote
the Supreme Deity, and Monarch of the Universe, is a thing unquestionable; and
which does sufficiently appear from those Epithets that were commonly given to
him, of Optimus and Maximus, the Best and the Greatest, as also of Omnipotens
frequently bestowed upon him by Virgil and others. Which word Jupiter or Jovis,
though Cicero etymologize it a Juvando, or from Juvans Pater, as not knowing
how to do it otherwise, yet we may rather conclude it to have been of an
Hebraical Extraction, and derived from that Tetragrammaton or Name of God,
consisting of Four Consonants; whose Vowels (which it was to be pronounced
with) though they be not now certainly known, yet must it needs have some such
sound as this, either Jovah, or Jahvoh, or (...) or (...), or the like: and the
abbrebreviation of this Name was Jah. For as the Pagan Nations, had besides
Appellatives, their several Proper Names for God, so also had the H^brews
theirs, and such as being given by God himself, was most expressive of his
Nature, it signifying Eternal and Necessary Existence.

But in the next place we shall suggest, that the Pagans did not only signify
the Supreme God, by these Proper Names, but also frequently by the Appellatives
themselves, when used not for a God in General, but for The God, or God (...),
and by way of eminency. And thus (...) and (...) are often taken by the Greeks,
not for (...), a God, or one of the Gods, but for God, or the Supreme Deity. We
have several Examples hereof, in Passages before-cited occasionally in this
very Chapter, as in that of Aristotle's, (...); What is there therefore, that
can be better than Knowledge, but only God: As also that other of his, that
Happiness consists principally in Virtue, (...), it is a thing that ought to
be acknowledged by us from the Nature of God. So likewise in that of Thales,
(...), God is the oldest of all things, because he is Unmade, and that of
Maximus Tyrius, (...), Many Gods the Sons of God and Co-reigners together with
God. Besides which, there have been others also mentioned, which we shall not
here repeat. And innumerable more Instances of this kind might be added, as
that of Antiphanes, (...), God is like to nothing, for which cause he cannot be
learnt by any, from an Image: This of Socrates, (...), If God will have it so,
let it be so. And that of Epictetus, (...); Do thou only remember, these
Catholic and Universal Principles; What is Mine and what is not Mine? What
would God have me now to do? and what would he have me not to do? But we shall
mention no more of these, because they occurr so frequently in all manner of
Greek Writers, both Metrical and Prosaical.

Wherefore we shall here only add, that as the Singular (...), was thus often
used by the Greeks for God (...) or in way of Eminency, that is, for the
Supreme Deity, so was likewise the Plural (...) frequently used by them, for
the Inferior Gods by way of Distinction from the Supreme. As in that usual
Form of Prayer and Exclamation (...), O Jupiter and the Gods, and that Form of
Obtestation, (...), By Jupiter and the Gods. So in this of Euripedes, (...),
(...)^
Est, (sint licet qui rideant) est Jupiter,
Superique; Casus qui vident Mortalium.


In which Passages, as Jupiter is put for the Supreme God, so is (...) likewise
put, for the Inferior Gods, in way of distinction from him. Thus also (...)
and (...) are taken both together, in Plato's Phaedo, (...) for the Supreme,
Unmade and Incorruptible Deity, P. 106.
and (...) for the Inferior Gods only, (...). I suppose, said Socrates, that
God and the very Species, Essence or Idea of Life, will be granted by all to be
Incorruptible. Plato de R^p. (...).

He will never be neglected of the Gods, who endeavors, as much as it is
possible for a man, to be like to God. p. 613.


Doubtless by all men (said Cebes) but much more as I conceive, by the Gods.
But a further Instance will be propounded afterward, of the word (...) thus
used by way of distinction, for the Inferior Gods only; as it was before
declared, that the Theogonia or Generation of Gods was accordingly understood
by the Greeks universally, of the (...), that is, the Inferior Gods.

Moreover as the word (...) was taken (...), or by way of eminency, for the
Supreme God, so was (...) likewise. As for example, in this Passage of
Callimachus before cited imperfectly, -- (...),
(...)^
-- Si Deus est tibi notus,
Hoc etiam noris, omnia posse Deum.
Where (...) and (...) are used both alike signanter, for the Supreme God. And
thus also in that famous Passage of another Poet, -- (...),
(...).
Homer likewise, in one and the same place, seems to use (...) and (...) both
together, after the same manner, for the Supreme God, (...),
(...)^
Quoties homo vult, adverso Numine, cum viro pugnare
Quem Deus honorat, mox in eum magna clades devolvitur.


Again we conceive, that Jupiter or the Supreme God, was sometimes signified
amongst the Pagans, by that expression, (...) Deus Ipse, as in that of Homer's
Ninth Iliad, -- (...),
(...)^
-- Neque si mihi promitteret Deus Ipse,
Senectutem abradens, effecturum me Juvenem pubescentem.
And thus St. Cyril of Alexandria interprets Homer here, (...), Contra Jul. L.
1.
etc. (...)^ So Justin. Mart. Ad Grae. coh. p. 22.
Homer does not say, If any of the Gods would promise me freedom from old Age
and restitution of Youth, but he reserves the matter only to the Supreme God;
neither does he refer it to any of the Fictitious Poetic Gods, but to the true
God alone. The same Language was also spoken, in the Laws of the Twelve Tables;
Deos adeunto cast, Opes amovento: Si secus faxint, Deus ipse vindex erit: Let
the Gods be worshipped chastely, superfluity of Riches and Pomp being removed:
If men do otherwise, God Himself will be the Avenger. Where though the word
Gods be used generally, so as to comprehend both the Supreme and Inferior Gods
under it, yet Deus Ipse, God himself, denotes the Supreme God only. In like
manner (...) also seems to be taken for the Supreme God in that of Euripedes,
(...), Which was thus rendered by Horace, -- Ipse Deus, simulatque volet, me
solvet.

Notwithstanding which, (...) and (...), are often distinguished from (...) and
(...), they being put for an Inferior rank of Beings below the Gods, vulgarly
called Demons, which word in a large sense comprehends also Heroes under it.
For though these Demons be sometimes called Gods too, yet were they rather
accounted (...), Demigods, than Gods. And thus (...), Gods and Demons, are
frequently joined together, as things distinct from one another: which Notion
of the word Plato refers to, when he concludes, Love not to be a God, but a
Demon only. But of these Demons we are to speak more afterward.

Furthermore, the Pagan Writers frequently understand the Supreme God by the
(...), when the word is used Substantively. As for example, in this of
Epicharmus, (...)^
(...).
Res nulla est Deum quae lateat, scire quod te convenit:
Ipse est noster Introspector, tum Deus nil non potest.
So likewise in this of Plato's, (...), God is far removed both from Pleasure
and Grief. And Plotinus calls the Supreme God, (...), The Divinity that is in
the Universe. But because the Instances hereof are also innumerable, we shall
decline the mentioning of any more, and instead of them, only set down the
Judgment of that diligent and impartial Observer of the Force of words,
Henricus Stephanus, concerning it; Redditur etiam (...) saepe Deus, sed ita
tamen ut intelligendum sit, non de quolibet Deo, ab ipsis etiam profanis
Scriptoribus dici, verum de eo quem intelligerent, cum (...) dicebant quasi
(...), ad differentiam eorum, qui multi, appellatione (...) includebantur,
summum videlicet Supremumque Numen, and quasi dicas (...), ut loquitur de Jove
Homerus.

Lastly, as (...) so likewise was (...) used by the Greeks, for the Supreme
Numen, or that Divinity which governs the whole World. Thus whereas it was
commonly said (according to Herodotus) (...), That God was envious; the meaning
whereof was, that he did not commonly suffer any great Humane Prosperity, to
continue long, without some check or counterbuff; the same Proverbial speech is
expressed in Aristotle, (...). And in this sense the word seems to be used in
Isocrates ad Demonicum, (...), Worship God always, but especially with the
City, in her Public Sacrifices. And doubtless it was thus taken by Epictetus
in this Passage of his, Arr. Lib. 4. c. 4. p. 387.
(...)^ There is but one way to Tranquillity of Mind and Happiness, Let this
therefore be always ready at hand with thee, both when thou wakest early in the
morning, and all the day long, and when thou go late to sleep; to account no
external things thine own, but to commit all these to God and Fortune. And
there is a very remarkable Passage in Demosthenes (observed by Budeus) that
must not be here omitted; in which we have (...) plainly for the Inferior or
Minor Gods only, and (...) for the Supreme God, both together; (...)^ The Gods
and the Deity will know or take notice of him that gives not a righteous
sentence; that is, both the Inferior Gods and the Supreme God himself.
Wherefore we see, that the word (...), as to its Grammatical Form, is not a
Diminitive, as some have conceived, but an Adjective Substantiv'd; as well as
(...) is. Nevertheless in Pagan Writings, (...) also, as well as (...) from
whence it is derived, is often used for an Inferionr Rank of Beings below the
Gods, though sometimes called Gods too; and such was Socrates his (...) so
commonly known. But the Grammar of this Word, and its proper Signification in
Pagan Writers, cannot better be manifested, P. 27. Steph.
than by citing that Passage of Socrates his own, in his Apology, as written by
Plato; who though generally supposed to have had a Demon, was notwithstanding
by Melitus accused of Atheism; (...); etc. (...); etc. Is there any one, O
Melitus, who acknowledging that there are Humane things, can yet deny that
there are any Men? or confessing that there are Equine things, can nevertheless
deny that there are any Horses? If this cannot be, then no man who acknowledges
Demonial things, can deny Demons. Wherefore I being confessed to assert (...),
must needs be granted, to hold (...), also. Now do we not all think, that
Demons are either Gods, or at least Sons of the Gods. Wherefore for any one to
conceive that there are Demons, and yet no Gods, is altogether as absurd, as
if one should think that there are Mules, but yet neither Horses nor Asses.
However, in the New Testament, according to the Judgment of Origin, Eusebius,
and others of the Ancient Fathers, both those words (...) and (...), are alike
taken, always in a Worser sense, for Evil and Impure Spirits only.

But over and besides all this; the Pagans do often characterize the Supreme
God, by such Titles, Epithets, and Descriptions, as are Incommunicably proper
to him: thereby plainly distinguishing him from all other Inferior Gods. He
being sometimes called by them, (...), the Opifex Architect or Maker of the
World, (...), the Prince and chief Ruler of the Universe; (...) and (...) (by
the Greeks) and (by the Latins) Primus Deus, the First God; (...), the First
Mind; (...), the Great God; (...), and (...), the greatest God and the greatest
of the Gods; (...), the Highest; and (...), the Supreme of the Gods; (...), the
Uppermost, or most Transcendent God; Princeps ille Deus, that Chief or
Principal God; (...), the God of Gods; and (...), the Principle of Principles;
(...), the First Cause; (...), He that Generated or Created this whole
Universe; (...), He that rules over the whole World; Summus Rector and
Dominus, The Supreme Governor and Lord of all; (...), the God over all; (...),
(...), The Ingenerate or Unmade Self-originated and Self-subsisting Deity;
(...) a Monad; (...), Unity and Goodness it self; (...), and (...), that which
is above Essence or Super-essential; (...), that which is above mind and
Understanding; Summum illud and Aeternum, neque mutabile neque interiturum,
That Supreme and Eternal Being, which is Immutable and can never perish; (...),
The Beginning, and End, and Middle of all things; (...), One and all things;
Deus Vnus and Omnes, One God and All Gods; And Lastly, to name no more, (...),
or Providence, as distinguished from (...) Nature, is often used by them also,
as a Name for the Supreme God, which because it is of the Feminine Gender, the
Impious and Atheistical Epicureans, therefore took occasion, to call God
ridiculously and jearingly, Anum fatidicam Pronoean. Now all these, and other
such like Expressions, being found in the Writings of Professed Pagans (as we
are able to show) and some of them very frequently, it cannot be denied, but
that the Pagans did put a Manifest Difference betwixt the Supreme God, and all
their other Inferior Gods.

XV. What has been now declared, might, as we conceive, be judged sufficient,
in order to our present Undertaking; which is to prove, that the more
Intelligent of the Ancient Pagans, notwithstanding that Multiplicity of Gods
worshipped by them, did generally acknowledge, One Supreme, Omnipotent, and
Only Unmade Deity. Nevertheless, since men are commonly so much prepossessed
with a contrary Persuasion; (the reason whereof seems to be no other than this,
that because the Notion of the Word God, which is now generally received
amongst us Christians, is such as does essentially include Self-existence in
it, they are therefore apt to conceit, that it must needs do so likewise
amongst the Pagans;) we shall endeavor to produce yet some further Evidence
for the Truth of our Assertion. And first we conceive, This to be no small
Confirmation thereof, because after the Publication of Christianity, and all
along during that Tugging and Contest which was betwixt it and Paganism, none
of the Professed Champions for Paganism, and Antagonists of Christianity (when
occasion was now offered them) did ever assert any such thing, as a
Multiplicity of Understanding Deities Unmade (or Creators) but on the contrary,
they all generally disclaimed it, professing to acknowledge One Supreme
Self-existent Deity, the Maker of the whole Universe.

It is a thing highly probable, if not unquestionable, that Apollonius
Tyanaeus, shortly after the Publication of the Gospel to the World, was a
Person made choice of by the Policy, and assisted by the Powers of the Kingdom
of Darkness, for the doing of some things Extraordinary; merely out of design,
to derogate from the Miracles of our Savior Christ, and to enable Paganism the
better, to bear up against the assaults of Christianity. For amongst the many
Writers of this Philosophers Life; some, and particularly Philostratus, seem to
have had no other aim in this their whole undertaking, then only to dress up
Apollonius, in such a garb and manner, as might make him best seem to be a fit
Corrival, with our Savior Christ, both in respect of Sanctity and Miracles.
Eunapius therefore telling us, that he mis-titled his Book, and that in stead
of (...), the Life of Apollonius, he should have called it (...), The Coming
down, and Converse of God with Men; forasmuch as this Apollonius (says he) was
not a bare Philosopher or Man, (...), but a certain middle thing betwixt the
Gods and Men. And that this was the use commonly made by the Pagans, of this
History of Apollonius, namely to set him up in way of opposition and Rivalry to
our Savior Christ, Ep. 4.
appears sundry ways. Marcellinus, in an Epistle of his to St. Austin, declares
this as the Grand Objection of the Pagans against Christianity, (therefore
desiring St. Austin's answer to the same;) Nihil aliud Dominum, quam alii
hominos facere potuerunt, fecisse vel egisse mentiuntur; Apollonium siquidem
suum nobis, and Apuleium, aliosque Magicae artis homines, in medium proferunt,
quorum majora contendunt extitisse miracula: The Pagans pretend, That our
Savior Christ did no more, than what other men have been able to do, they
producing their Apollonius and Apuleius, and other Magicians, whom they contend
to have done greater miracles. And it is well known that Hierocles to whom
Eusebius gives the commendation of a very Learned man, wrote a Book against the
Christians (entitled (...), or (...)) the chief design whereof was to compare
this Apollonius Tyanaeus with, and prefer him before our Savior Christ: (...)^
they are Hierocles his own words in Eusebius; The Christians (says he) keep a
great deal of stir, crying up of one Jesus, for restoring sight to the blind,
and doing some such other Wonders. And then mentioning the Thaumaturgi or
Wonder-workers amongst the Pagans, but especially Apollonius Tyanaeus, and
insisting largely upon his Miracles, he adds in the close of all, (...)^ To
what purpose now have we mentioned all these things? but only that the solid
Judgment of us (Pagans) might be compared with the Levity of the Christians;
forasmuch as we do not account him a God, who did all these Miracles, but only
a Person beloved of the Gods; whilst they declare Jesus to be a God, merely for
doing a few Wonders. Where, because Eusebius is silent, we cannot but subjoyn
an Answer out of Lactantius (which indeed he seems to have directed against
those very words of Hierocles, though not naming of him) it being both
pertinent and full; De Justi. l. 5. c. 3.
Apparet nos sapientiores esse, qui mirabilibus factis, non statim fidem
Divinitatis adjunximus, quam vos, qui ob exigua portenta Deum cr^didistis --
Disce igitur, si quid tibi cordis est, non solum idcirco a nobis Deum creditum
Christum, quia mirabilia fecit, sed quia vidimus in eo fact a esse omnia quae
nobis annunciata sunt, Vaticinia Prophetarum. Fecit mirabilia; Magum
putassemus, ut and vos nuncupatis; and Judaei tunc putaverunt; si non illa ipsa
facturum Christum, Prophetae omnes uno spiritu praedicassent. Itaque Deum
credimus, non magis ex factis, operibusque mirandis; quam ex illa ipsa Cruce,
quam vos sicut Canes lambitis; quoniam simul and illa praedicta est. Non igitur
Suo Testimonio, (cui enim de se dicenti potest credi?) sed Prophetarum
Testimonio, qui omnia quae fecit ac passus ^st, multo ante cecinerunt; fidem
Divinitatis accepit; quod neque Apollonio neque Apuleio, neque cuiquam Magorum
potest aliquando con^ingere. It is manifest that we Christians are wiser than
you Pagans, in that we do not presently attribute Divinity to a person, merely
because of his Wonders; whereas a few Portentous things, or Extraordinary
actions, will be enough with you, to make you Deifie the Doer of them; (and so
indeed did some of them, however Hierocles denies it, Deifie Apollonius.) Let
this writer against Christianity therefore learn, (if he have any Understanding
or Sense in him) that Christ was not therefore believed to be a God by us
Christians, merely because of his Miracles, but because we saw all those things
done by, and accomplished in him, which were long before predicted to us, by
the Prophets. He did miracles, and we should therefore have suspected him for a
Magician (as you now call him, and as the Jews then supposed him to be;) had
not all the Prophets, with one voice foretold, that he should do such things.
We believe him therefore to be God, no more from his Miracles, than from that
very Cross of his, which you so much quarrel with, because that was likewise
foretold. So that our Belief of Christ's Divinity, is not founded upon his own
Testimony (for who can be believed concerning himself?) but upon the Testimony
of the Prophets, who sang long before of all those things, which he both did
and suffered. Which is such a peculiar advantage and privilege of his, as that
neither Apollonius nor Apuleius, nor any other Magician, could ever share
therein. Now as for the Life and Morals of this Apollonius Tyanaeus, as it was
a thing absolutely necessary, for the carrying on of such a Diabolical Design,
that the Person made use of for an Instrument, should have some colorable and
plausible pretense to Virtue, so did Apollonius accordingly take upon him the
profession of a Pythagorean; and indeed act that part externally so well, that
even Sidonius Apollinaris, though a Christian, was so dazzled with the
glittering show and luster of his counterfeit Virtues, as if he had been
enchanted by this Magician, so long after his death. Nevertheless whosoever is
not very dim-sighted in such matters as these, or partially affected, may
easily perceive, that this Apollonius was so far from having any thing of that
Divine Spirit which manifested it self in our Savior Christ (transcending all
the Philosophers that ever were) that he fell far short of the better moralized
Pagans, as for example Socrates, there being a plain appearance of much Pride
and Vainglory (besides other Foolery) discoverable both in his Words and
Actions. And this Eusebius undertakes to evince from Philostratus his own
History (though containing many Falsehoods in it) (...), That Apollonius was so
far from deserving to be compared with our Savior Christ, that he was not fit
to be ranked amongst the moderately and indifferently Honest men. Wherefore as
to his reputed Miracles, if credit be to be given to those Relations, and such
things were really done by him, it must for this reason also be concluded, that
they were done no otherwise than by Magic and Necromancy; and that this
Apollonius was but an Archimago or grand Magician. Neither ought this to be
suspected for a mere slander cast upon him, by partially affected Christians
only, since, during his Lifetime, he was generally reputed, even amongst the
Pagans themselves, for no other than a (...), or Infamous Inchanter, and
accused of that very Crime before Domitian the Emperor; as he was also
represented such, Con. Cells. L. 6. p. 302.
by one of the Pagan Writers of his Life, Moeragenes, senior to Philostratus;
as we learn from Origin; (...)^ As concerning the Infamous and Diabolical
Magic, he that would know whether or no a Philosopher be temptable by it, or
illaqueable into it, let him read the Writings of Moeragenes, concerning the
memorable things of Apollonius Tyanaeus, the Magician and Philosopher; in which
he that was no Christian, but a Pagan Philosopher himself, affirms, some not
ignoble Philosophers to have been taken, with Apollonius his Magic, including
(as I suppose) in that number Euphrates and a certain Epicurean. And no doubt
but this was the reason why Phil^stratus derogates so much from the authority
of this Moeragenes, affirming him to have been ignorant of many things
concerning Apollonius ((...), etc.) Because Moeragenes had thus represented
Apollonius in his true colors, as a Magician; whereas Philostratus his whole
business and design was, on the contrary, to vindicate him from that
Imputation: the Truth whereof of notwithstanding, may be sufficiently evinced,
even from those very things that are recorded by Philostratus himself. And here
by the way we shall observe, that it is reported by good Historians, that
Miracles were also done by Vespasian at Alexandria, Per eos menses (they are
the words of Tacitus) multa miracula even^re, H^st. l. 4. p. 111.
quis coelestis favor, and quaedam in Vespasianum inclinatio numinum
ostenderetur. Ex plebe Alexandrina quidam, oculorum tabe notus, genua ejus
advolvitur, remedium caecitatis exposcens gemitu; monitu Serapidis Dei, quem
dedita superstitionibus gens ante alios colit; precabaturque Principem, ut
genas and oculorum orbs dignaretur respergere oris excr^mento. Alius manu
aeger, eodem Deo auctore, ut pede ac vestigio Caesaris calcaretur orabat. At
that time many Miracles happened at Alexandria, by which was manif^sted the
Heavenly Favor, and Inclination of the Divine Powers toward Vespasian. A
Plebeian Alexandrian, that had been known to be blind, casts himself at the
feet of Vespasian, begging with tears from him a remedy for his sight (and that
according to the suggestion of the God Serapis) that he would deign but to spit
upon his Eyes and Face. Another having a Lame hand (directed by the same
Oracle) beseeches him but to tread upon it with his foot. And after some debate
concerning this business, both these things being done by Vespasian, statim
conversa ad usum manus, and caeco reluxit dies, the Lame hand presently was
restored to its former usefulness, and the Blind man recovered his sight: Both
which things (says the Historian) some who were Eyewitnesses, do to this very
day testify, when it can be no advantage to any one to lie concerning it. And
that there seems to be some reason to suspect, that our Archimago Apollonius
Tyanaeus, might have some Finger in this business also, because he was not only
familiarly and intimately acquainted with Vespasian, but also at that very time
(as Philostratus informs us) present with him at Alexandria, where he also
did many Miracles himself. However we may here take notice of another Stratagem
and Policy of the Devil in this, both to obscure the Miracles of our Savior
Christ, and to weaken men's Faith in the Messiah, and baffle the Notion of it;
that whereas a Fame of Prophecies had gone abroad every where, that a King was
to come out of Judea, and rule over the whole World (by which was understood no
other than the Messiah) by reason of these Miracles done by Vespasian, this
Oracle or Prediction might the rather seem to have its accomplishment in him,
who was first proclaimed Emperor in Judea, and to whom Josephus himself basely
and flatteringly had applied it. And since this business was started and
suggested by the God Serapis, that is, by the Devil; (of whose Counsel probably
Apollonius also was:) this makes it still more strongly suspicable, that it was
really a Design or Policy of the Devil, by imitating the Miracles of our
Savior Christ, both in Apollonius and Vespasian, to counter-work God Almighty
in the Plot of Christianity, and to keep up or conserve his own Usurped Tyranny
in the Pagan World still. Nevertheless we shall here show Apollonius all the
favor we can, and therefore suppose him, not to have been one of those more
foul and black Magicians, of the common sort, such as are not only grossly sunk
and debauched in their Lives, but also knowingly do Homage to Evil Spirits as
such, for the gratification of their Lusts; but rather one of those more
refined ones, who have been called by themselves Theurgists, such as being in
some measure freed from the grosser Vices, and thinking to have to do only with
good Spirits; nevertheless being Proud and Vainglorious, and affecting
Wonders,, and to transcend the Generality of Mankind, are by a Divine Nemesis,
justly exposed to the illusions of the Devil or Evil Spirits, cunningly
insinuating here, and aptly accommodating themselves to them. However
concerning this Apollonius, it is undeniable, that he was a zealous Upholder of
the Pagan Polytheism, and a stout Champion for The Gods, he professing to have
been taught by the Samian Pythagoras his Ghost how to Worship these Gods,
Invisible as well as Visible, and to have converse with them. For which cause
he is styled by Vopiscus, Amicus verus Deorum, A true Friend of the Gods, that
is, a hearty and sincere Friend, to that old Pagan Religion, now assaulted by
Christianity, in which not One only True God, but a Multiplicity of Gods, were
Worshipped. But notwithstanding all this, Apollonius himself was a clear and
undoubted Asserter of One Supreme Deity, as is evident from his Apologetick
Oration in Philostratus, prepared for Domitian, in which he calls him (...),
and (...) that God who is the Maker of the whole Universe, and of all things.
And as he elsewhere in Philostratus declares both the Indians and Egyptians to
have agreed in this Theology; insomuch that though the Egyptians condemned the
Indians for many other of their Opinions, yet did they highly applaud this
Doctrine of theirs, (...), That God was the Maker both of the Generation and
Essence of all things, and that the cause of his making them, was his Essential
Goodness: So does he himself very much commend this Philosophy of Jarchas the
Indian Brachman, Philos. P. 142.
viz. That the whole World was but One Great Animal, and might be resembled to
a Vast Ship, wherein their are many Inferior subordinate Governors, under One
Supreme, the Oldest and Wisest; as also expert Mariners of several sorts, some
to attend upon the Deck, and others to climb the Masts and order the Sails,
(...)^ In which the first and high^st seat is to be given to That God, who is
the Generatour or Creator of this great Animal, and the next under it, to those
Gods that govern the several parts of it respectively; so that the Poets were
to be approved of here, when they affirm, that there are Many Gods in the
Heavens, Many in the Seas, Many in the Rivers and Fountains, Many also upon the
Earth and some under the Earth. Wherein we have a true representation of the
old Paganick Theology, which both Indians, and Egyptians, and European Poets
(Greek and Latin) all agreed in; That there is One Supreme God, the Maker of
the Universe, and under him Many Inferior Generated Gods, or Understanding
Beings (Superior to Men) appointed to govern and preside over the several
parts thereof, who were also to be religiously honored and worshipped by Men.
And thus much for Apollonius Tyanaeus.

The first Pagan Writer against Christianity, was Celsus; who lived in the
times of Adrian, and was so professed a Polytheist, that he taxes the Jews for
having been seduced by the Frauds of Moses into this Opinion of One God, (...)^
Orig. p. 17, 18.
Those silly Shepherds and Herdsmen, following Moses their Leader, and being
seduced by his Rustic frauds, came to entertain this Belief, that there was
but One only God. Nevertheless this Celsus himself plainly acknowledged,
amongst his Many Gods, One Supreme, whom he sometimes calls (...), the First
God; sometimes (...), the Greatest God; and sometimes (...), the Supercelestial
God, and the like; and he does so zealously assert the Divine Omnipotence, that
he casts an imputation upon the Christians of derogating from the same, in that
their Hypothesis of an Adversary Power, (...). Orig. l. 6. p. 303
The Christians are erroneously led into most wicked Opinions concerning God,
by reason of their great ignorance of the Divine Enigms; whilst they make a
certain Adversary to God, whom they call the Devil, and in the Hebrew Language
Satan: And affirm, contrary to all Piety, that the Greatest God, having a mind
to do good to men, is disabled or withstood by an Adversary, resisting him.
Orig. con. Cells. l. 8. p. 419.
Lastly where he pleads most for the worship of Demons, he concludes thus
concerning the Supreme God, (...) (...)^ But God is by no means, any where to
be laid aside, or left out; neither by Day nor by Night, neither in Public nor
in Private, either in our Words or Actions; but in every thing our Mind ought
constantly to be directed toward God. A Saying that might very well become a
Christian.

The next and greatest Champion for the Pagan Cause in Books and Writings, was
that Famous Tyrian Philosopher, Malchus, called by the Greeks Porphyrius; who
published a Voluminous and elaborate Treatise (containing Fifteen Books)
against the Christians; and yet He notwithstanding was plainly as zealous an
Assertor of One Supreme Deity, and One Only (...), Unmade or Self-existent
Principle of all things; as any of the Christians themselves could be; he
strenuously opposing that forementioned Doctrine of Plutarch and Atticus,
concerning Three Unmade Principles, a Good God, an Evil Soul or Demon, and the
Matter, and endeavoring to demonstrate, that all things whatsoever, even
Matter it self, was derived from One Perfect Understanding Being, or
Self-originated Deity. The Sum of whose Argumentation to which purpose, we have
represented by Proclus upon the Timaeus, Page 119.

After Porphyrius, the next eminent Antagonist of Christianity, and Champion
for Paganism, was Hierocles the Writer of that Book entitled (in Eusebius)
(...), or a Lover of the Truth; which is noted to have been a Modester
Inscription, than that of Celsus his (...), or True Oration. For if Eusebius
Pamphili, were the Writer of that Answer to this Philalethes now Extant, as we
both read in our Copies, and as Photius also read; then must it needs be
granted, that Hierocles the Author of it, was either contemporary with
Porphyrius, or else but little his Junior. De Just. L. ^. c. 2.
Moreover this Hierocles seems plainly to be the person intended by Lactantius
in these following words, Alius eandem mat^riam mordacius scripsit; qui erat
tum e numero Judicum, and qui auctor in primis faciendae persecutionis fuit:
quo scelere non contentus, etiam scriptis eos quos afflixerat, insecutus est.
Composuit enim Libellos Duos, non Contra Christianos, ne inimice insectari
videretur, sed Ad Christianos; ut humane ac benign consulere videretur. In
quibus ita falsitatem Scripturae Sacrae arguere conatus est, tanquam sibi esset
tota contraria. -- Praecipue tamen Paulum Petrumque laceravit, caeterosque
Discipulos, tanquam fallaciae seminatores; quos eosdem tamen rudes and indoctos
fuisse testatus est. Another has handled the same matter more smartly; who was
First himself one of the Judges and a chief Author of the Persecution; but
being not contented with that wickedness, he added this afterward, to
persecute the Christians also with his Pen: He composing Two Books, not
inscribed Against the Christians (lest he should seem plainly to act the part
of an enemy) but To the Christians (that he might be thought to counsel them
humanely and benignly:) in which he so charges the holy Scripture with
Falsehood, as if it were all nothing else but contradictions: but he chiefly
lashes Paul and Peter, as divulgers of lies and deceits, whom notwithstanding
he declares to have been rude and illiterate Persons. I say, though Hierocles
for some cause or other be not named here by Lactantius in these Cited words,
or that which follows, yet it cannot be doubted, but that he was the Person
intended by him, for these Two Reasons: First, because he tells us afterward
that the main business of that Christiano-mastix, was to compare Apollonius
with our Savior Christ. Cum facta Christi mirabilia destrueret, nec tamen
negaret, voluit ostendere, Apollonium vel paria, vel etiam majora fecisse.
Mirum quod Apuleium praetermiserit, cujus solent and multa and mira memorari.
Et ex hoc insolentiam Christi voluit arguere, quod Deum se constituerit: ut
ille verecundior fuisse videretur, qui cum majora faceret (ut hic putat) tamen
id sibi non arrogaverit: That he might obscure the Miracles of our Savior
Christ, which he could not deny, he would undertake to show that Equal or
greater Miracles were done by Apollonius. And it was a wonder he did not
mention Apuleius too: of whose many and wonderful things, the Pagans use to
brag likewise. Moreover he condemns our Savior Christ of Insolency, for making
himself a God, affirming Apollonius to have been the modester Person, who
though he did (as he supposes) greater miracles, yet arrogated no such thing to
himself. The Second Reason is, because Lactantius also expressly mentions the
very Title of Hierocles his Book, viz. Philalethes. Cum talia ignorantiae suae
deliramenta fudisset, cumque Veritatem peni^us excidere connixus est, ausus est
Libros suos nefarios, ac Dei hosts, (...) annotare: Though pouring out so much
folly and madness, professedly fighting against the Truth, yet he presumed to
call these his wicked Books, and Enemies of God, Philaletheis or Friends to
Truth. From which words of Lactantius and those foregoing, where he affirms
this Christiano-mastix to have written Two Books, Dr. Pearson Bp. of Chester.
the Learned Prefacer to the late Edition of Hierocles, probably concludes,
that the whole Title of Hierocles his Book was this, (...)^ And I conceive that
the First of those Two Books of Hierocles insisted upon such things as
Porphyrius had before urged against the Christians; but then in the Second he
added this de novo of his own, to compare Apollonius with our Savior Christ:
which Eusebius only takes notice of. Wherefore Epiphanius telling us, that
there was one Hierocles a Presect or Governor of Alexandria, in those
persecuting times of Diocletian, we may probably conclude, that this was the
very Person described in Lactantius, who is said to have been First, of the
Number of the Judges, and a Principal Actor in the Persecution; and then
afterward to have written this Philalethes against the Christians, wherein,
besides other things, he ventured to compare Apollonius Tyanaeus with our
Savior Christ. Now if this Hierocles who wrote the Philalethes in defense of
the Pagan Gods, against the Christians, were the Author of those two other
Philosophic Books, the Commentary upon the Golden Verses, and that De Fato and
Providentia, it might be easily evinced from both of them, that he was
notwithstanding, an Asserter of One Supreme Deity. But Photius tells us that
that Hierocles who wrote the Book concerning Fate and Providence, did therein
make mention of Jamblichus and his Junior Plutarchus Atheniensis: from whence
Jonsius taking it for granted, that it was one and the same Hierocles, who
wrote against the Christians, and de Fato, infers, that it could not be
Eusebius Pamphili who Answered the Philalethes, but that it must needs be some
other Eusebius much Junior. But we finding Hierocles his Philalethes in
Lactantius, must needs conclude on the contrary, that Hierocles the famous
Christiano-mastix, was not the same with that Hierocles who wrote de Fato.
Which is further evident, from Aenaeas Gazeus in his Theophrastus; where first
he mentions one Hierocles an Alexandrian, P. 7.
that had been his Master, whom he highly extols, (...), But tell me, I pray
you, are there yet left amongst you in Egypt, any such Expounders of the
Arcane Mysteries of Philosophy as Hierocles our Master was? And this we suppose
to be that Hierocles, who wrote concerning Fate and Providence, (if not also
upon the Golden Verses.) But afterward upon occasion of Apollonius, the
Cappadocian, or Tyanaean, he mentions another Hierocles distinct from the
former; namely him, who had so boasted of Apollonius his Miracles, in these
words, (...), P. 24.
Thus Apollonius is convinced of falsehood; but Hierocles ( not our Master) but
he that boasts of the Miracles (of Apollonius) adds another incredible thing.
And though it be probable, that one of these was the Author of that Commentary
upon the Golden Verses, (for that it should be written by a Christian is but a
dream) yet we cannot certainly determine which of them it was. However that
this Hierocles, who was the Mastix of Christianity and Champion for The Gods,
was notwithstanding, a professed asserter of one Supreme Deity, is clearly
manifest also from Lactantius, in these following words, Quam tandem nobis
attulisti Veritatem? nisi quod Assertor Deorum, eos ipsos ad ultimum
prodidisti: Prosecutus enim Summi Dei lauds, quem Regem, quem Maximum, quem
Opificem rerum, quem Fontem bonorum, quem Parentem omnium, quem Factorem
Altoremque viventium confessus es; ademisti Jovi tuo Regnum; eumque Summa
potestate depulsum, in Ministrorum numerum redigisti. Epilogus ergo te tuus
arguit Stultitiae, Vanitatis, Erroris. Affirmas Deos esse; and illos tamen
subjicis and mancipas ei Deo, cujus Religionem conaris evertere. Though you
have entitled your Book Philalethes, yet what Truth have you brought us
therein, unless only this, that being an Asserter of the Gods (contradicting
your self) you have at last betrayed those very Gods. For in the close of your
Book, prosecuting the praises of the Supreme God, and confessing him to be the
King, the Greatest, the Opifex of the World, the Fountain of Good, the Parent
of all things, the Maker and Conserver of all Living beings, you have by this
means dethroned your Jupiter, and degrading him from his Sovereign Power,
reduced him into the rank of Inferior Ministers. Wherefore your Epilogue
argues you guilty of Folly, Vanity and Error, in that you both assert Gods, and
yet subject and mancipate them under that one God, whose Religion you endeavor
to overthrow. Where we must confess we understand not well Lactantius his
Logic; forasmuch as Hierocles his Zeus or Jupiter, was one and the same with
his Supreme God (as is also here intimated) and though he acknowledged all the
other Gods to be but his Inferior Ministers yet nevertheless did he contend,
that these ought to be Religiously Worshipped, which was the thing that
Lactantius should have confuted. But that which we here take notice of, is
this, that Hierocles a grand Persecutor of the Christians, and the Author of
that bitter Invective against them, called Philalethes, though he were so
strenuous an asserter of Polytheism and Champion for The Gods, yet did he
nevertheless at the same time, clearly acknowledge one Supreme Deity, calling
him the King (that is the Monarch of the Universe) the Greatest, the Opifex of
the World, the Fountain of Good, the Parent of all things, and the Maker and
Conserver of all Life.

But the greatest Opposer of Christianity every way, was Julian the Emperor;
who cannot reasonably be suspected to have disguised or blanched Paganism,
because he was an Emperor, and had so great an Animosity against Christianity,
and was so superstitiously or bigotically zealous for the Worship of the Gods;
and yet this very Julian notwithstanding, was an unquestionable Assertor of One
Supreme Deity. Cyril. cont. Jul. 4. p. 115.
In his Book written against the Christians, he declares the general sense of
the Pagans, after this manner; (...), etc. Our Theologers affirm, the Maker of
all to be a common Father, and King, but that the Nations, as to particular
things, are distributed by him to other Inferior Gods, that are appointed to
be Governors over Countries and Cities, every one of which administers in his
own Province agreeably to himself. For whereas in the Common Father, all things
are Perfect, and One is All, in the Particular or Partial Deities, one excels
in one Power, and another in another. Afterward in the same Book he contends,
that the Pagans did entertain righter Opinions concerning the Supreme God, than
the Jews themselves; (...)^ P. 146.
If that God who is so much spoken of by Moses, be the Immediate Opificer of
the whole World, we Pagans entertain better Opinions of him; who suppose him to
be the common Lord of all; but that there are other Governors of Nations and
Countries under him, as Prefects or Presidents appointed by a King; we not
ranking him, amongst those Partial Governors of Particular Countries and
Cities, as the Jews do. From both which places, it is evident, that according
to Julian's Theology, all those other Gods, whose Worship he contended so much
for, were but the Subordinate Ministers of that One Supreme God, the Maker of
all.

The same thing might be further manifested from Julian's Oration made in
praise of the Sun as a Great God in this visible World; he therein plainly
acknowledging another far more Glorious Deity, which was the Cause of all
things, P. 262.
(...)^ There is One God the Maker of all things, but besides him there are
many other Demiurgical Gods moving round the Heavens, in the midst of which is
the Sun. Where we have a clear acknowledgement of One Supreme God, and of Many
Inferior Deities both together. Moreover in the same Oration, he declares
that the Ancient Poets, making the Sun to have been the Offspring of Hyperion,
did by this Hyperion understand nothing else, but the Supreme Deity, (...), Him
who is above all things, and about whom, and for whose sake, are all things.
Which Supreme Deity is thus more largely described by him in the same Oration
(where he calls him the King of all things;) (...), P. 248*
etc. This God, whether ^e ought to be called, that which is above Mind and
Understanding, or the Idea of all things, or The One (since Unity seems to be
the old^st of all things;) or else as Plato was wont to call him, The Good; I
say, this Uniform Cause of all things, which is the Original of all Pulchritude
and Perfection, Unity and Power; produced from himself a certain Intelligible
Sun, every way like himself, of which the Sensible Sun is but an Image. For
thus Dionysius Petavius rightly declares the sense of Julian in this Oration;
P. 2^4.
Vanissimae hujus and loquacissimae disputationis mysterium est; a Principe ac
Primario Deo, (...) quendam, and archetypum Solemn editum fuisse; qui eandem
prorsus (...) and (...) in genere (...) habeat, quam in (...) ille quem
videmus, Solaris Globus obtinet. Tria itaque discernenda sunt, Princeps ille
Deus, qui (...) a Platone dicitur, (...). The mystery of this most vain and
loquacious Disputation is this, That from the First and Chief Deity, was
produced a certain Intelligible and Archetypal Sun, which has the same place
or order, in the rank of Intelligible Things, that the Sensible Sun has in the
rank of Sensibles. So that here are Three things to be distinguished from one
another, First the Supreme Deity which Plato calls, The Good, Secondly the
Intelligible Sun or Eternal Intellect, and Lastly the Corporeal or Sensible Sun
(Animated.) Where notwithstanding, we may take notice, how near this Pagan
Philosopher and Emperor, Julian, approached to Christianity, though so much
opposed by him; in that he also supposed an Eternal Mind or Intellect, as the
Immediate Offspring of the First Fountain of all things; which seems to differ
but a little from the Christian (...). However it is plain that this devout
Restorer of Paganism, and zealous Contender for the Worship of The Gods,
asserted no Multiplicity of Independent, Self-existent Deities, but derived all
his Gods from One.

As for those other Philosophers and Learned men, who in those latter times of
the Declining of Paganism, after Constantine, still stood out in opposition
against Christianity, such as Jamblichus, Syrianus, Proclus, Simplicius, and
many others, it is unquestionably evident concerning them all, that they
clearly acknowledged One Supreme Deity, as the Original of all things. Maximus
Madaurensis, a confident and resolved Pagan in St. Austin's time, Ep. 43.
expressed both his own and the general sense of Pagans after this manner;
Equidem Vnum esse Deum Summum, sine initio, Naturae ceu Patrem Magnum atque
Magnificum, quis tam demens tam mente captus neget esse certissimum? Hujus nos
virtutes per Mundanum opus diffusas, multis vocabulis invocamus, quoniam nomen
ejus cuncti proprium videlicet ignoramus. Ita sit, ut dum ejus quasi quaedam
Membra carptim, variis supplicationibus prosequimur, Totum colere profecto
videamur. Truly that there is One Supreme God, without beginning, as the Great
and Magnificent Father of Nature; who is so mad or devoid of sense as not to
acknowledge it to be most certain? His Virtues diffused throughout the whole
World (because we know not what his proper name is) we invoke under many
different names. Whence it comes to pass, that whilst we prosecute with our
supplications, his as it were divided Members severally, we must needs be
judged to worship the whole Deity. And then he concludes his Epistle thus; Dii
te servent, per quos and Eorum, atque cunctorum mortalium, Communem Patrem,
universi mortales quos terra sustinet, mill modis, concordi discordia
venerantur: The Gods keep thee, by and through whom, we Pagans, dispersed over
the whole World, do worship the common Father, both of those Gods, and all
Mortals, after a thousand different manners, nevertheless with an agreeing
discord. Ep. 21.
Longimanus likewise, another more modest Pagan Philosopher, upon the request
of the same St. Austin, declares his sense concerning the way of worshipping
God and arriving to happiness to this purpose. Per Minores Deos perveniri ad
Summum Deum non sine Sacris Purificatoriis, That we are to come to the Supreme
God, by the Minor or Inferior Gods, and that not without Purifying Rites and
Expiations; he supposing that besides a virtuous and holy Life, certain
Religious Rites and Purifications, were necessary to be observed, in order to
that end. In which Epistle, the Supreme God is also styled by him, Vnus,
Vniversus, Incomprehensibilis, Ineffabilis and Infatigabilis Creator.

Moreover, that the Pagans generally disclaimed this Opinion of Many Unmade
Self-existent Deities, appears plainly from Arnobius, where he brings them in
complaining, Lib. 1. p. 19.
that they were falsely and maliciously accused by some Christians, as guilty
thereof, after this manner; Frustra nos falso and calumnioso incessitis and
appetitis crimine, tanquam inficias eamus Deum esse Majorem; cum a nobis and
Jupiter nominetur, and Optimus habeatur and Maximus: cumque illi augustissimas
seeds, and Capitolia constituerimus immania; In vain do you Christians
calumniate us, Pagans, and accuse us as if we denied, One Supreme Omnipotent
God; though we both call him Jupiter, and account him the Best and the
Greatest; having dedicated the most august seats to him, the vast Capitols.
Where Arnobius in way of opposition, shows first how perplexed and entangled a
thing the Pagans Theology was, their Poetic Fables of the Gods, nonsensically
confounding Herology together with Theology; and that it was impossible that
that Jupiter of theirs, which had a Father and a Mother, a Grandfather and a
Grandmother, should be the Omnipotent God. Nam Deus Omnipotens, mente una
omnium, and communi mortalitatis assensu, neque Genitus scitur, neque novam in
lucem aliquando esse prolatus; nec ex aliquo tempore coepisse esse, vel
saeculo. Ipse enim est Fons rerum, Sator saeculorum ac temporum. Non enim ipsa
per se sunt, sed ex ejus perpetuitate perpetua, and infinita semper
continuatione procedunt. At vero Jupiter (ut vos fertis) and Patrem habet and
Matrem, Avos and Avias, nunc nuper in utero matris suae formatus, etc. You
Pagans confound your selves with Contradictions; for the Omnipotent God,
according to the natural sense of all mankind, was neither begotten or made,
nor ever had a Beginning in time, he being the Fountain and Original of all
things. But Jupiter (as you say) had both Father and Mother, Grandfathers and
Grandmothers, and was but lately formed in the womb; and therefore he cannot be
the Eternal Omnipotent God. Nevertheless Arnobius afterward considering (as we
suppose) that these Poetic Fables, were, by the wiser Pagans, either totally
rejected, or else some way or other Allegorized, he heartily dismisseth this
advantage which he had against them, and grants their Jupiter to be the true
Omnipotent Deity, and consequently that same God which the Christians
worshipped; but from thence infers, that the Pagans therefore must needs be
highly guilty, whilst worshipping the same God with the Christians, they did
hate and persecute them after that manner. Sed sint, ut vultis, unum, nec in
aliquo, vi numinis, and majestate distantes; ecquid ergo injustis persequimini
nos odiis? Quid, ut ominis pessimi, nostri nominis inhorrescitis mentione, st,
quem Deum colitis, eum and nos? ant quid in eadem causa vobis esse contenditis
familiares Deos, inimicos atque infestissimos nobis? Etenim, si una religio est
nobis vobisque communis, cessat ira coelestium. But let it be granted that (as
you affirm) your Jupiter and the Eternal Omnipotent God, are one and the same;
Why then do you prosecute us with unjust hatreds? abominating the very mention
of our names, if the same God that you worship be worshipped by us? or if your
Religion and ours be the same, why do you pretend that the Gods are propitious
to you, but most highly provoked and incensed against us? Where the Pagans
defense and reply is, Sed non idcirco Dii vobis infesti sunt, quod Omnipotentem
colatis Deum: sed quod hominem natum, and quod personis infame est vilibus,
crucis supplicio interemptum, and Deum fuisse contenditis, and superesse adhuc
creditis, and quotidianis supplicationibus adoratis: But we do not say that the
Gods are therefore displeased with you Christians, because you worship the
Omnipotent God, but because you contend him to be a God, who was not only born
a mortal man, but also died an ignominious death, suffering as a Malefactor;
believing him still to survive, and adoring him with your daily prayers. To
which Arnobius retorts in this manner: Tell us, now I pray you, who these Gods
are, who take it as so great an injury and indignity done to themselves, that
Christ should be worshipped? Are they not Janus and Saturn, Aesculapius and
Liber, Mercurius the son of Maia, and the Theban or Tyrian Hercules, Castor and
Pollux, and the like? Hice ergo Christum coli and a nobis accipi and existimari
pro Numine, vulneratis acipiunt auribus? and obliti paulo ante sortis and
conditionis suae, id quod sibi concessum est, impertiri alteri nolunt? Haec est
Justititia Coelitum? hoc Deorum judicium sanctum? Nonne istud livoris est and
avaritiae genus? non obtrectatio quaedam sordens, suas eminere solummodo velle
fortunas, aliorum res premi and in contempta humilitate calcari? Natum hominem
colimus; Quid enim, Vos hominem nullum colitis natum? non unum and alium? non
innumeros alios? quinimo non omnes quos jam templis habetis vestris, mortalium
sustulistis ex numero, and coelo sideribusque donastis? Concedamus interdum
manum vestris opinationibus dantes, unum Christum fuisse de nobis, mentis,
animae, corporis, fragilitatis and conditionis unius; nonne dignus a nobis est
tantorum ob munerum gratiam, Deus dici Deusque sentiri? Si enim vos Liberum
quod reperit usum vini; si quod panis, Cererem; si Aesculapium, quod herbarum;
si Minervam, quod oleae; si Triptolemum, quod aratri; si denique Herculem, quod
feras, quod fures, quod multiplicium capitum superavit compescuitque natrices,
divorum retulistis in coelum: honoribus quantis afficiendus est nobis, qui ab
erroribus nos magnis insinuata veritate traduxit? etc. Are these the Gods who
are so much offended, with Christ's being worshipped, and accounted a God by
us? they who being forgetful of their former condition, would not have the same
bestowed upon another, which has been granted to themselves? Is this the
Justice of the Heavenly Powers? This the righteous judgment of Gods? or is it
not rather base Envy and Covetousness, for them thus to ingross all to
themselves? We worship indeed one that was born a man, What then? Do you
worship no such? not one, and another, and innumerable? And are not almos^ all
^our Gods, such as were taken from out of the rank of men, and placed among the
Stars? And will you account that damnable in us, which you your selves
practice? Let us for the present yield thus much to your Infideity, and grant,
that Christ was but an ordinary man, of the same rank and condition with other
mortals, yet might we not for all that (according to your Principles) think him
worthy, by reason of the great benefits we received from him to be accounted a
God? For if you have advanced into the number of your Divi, Bacchus or Liber
for inventing the use of Wine, Ceres of Corn, Aesculapius of Herbs, Minerva of
the Olive, Triptolemus of the Plow, and Hercules for subduing Beasts, Thieves
and Monsters; With how great honors ought he to be affected by us, who by the
insinuation of divine truth has delivered us from such great Errors of mind,
etc. Which Argumentation of Arnobius though it were good enough ad homines, to
stop the mouths of the Pagans, there being more reason, that Christ should be
made a God, for the Benefits that mankind receive from him, than that Bacchus
or Ceres or Hercules should be so; yet as the same Arnobius himself seems to
intimate, it is not sufficient without something else superadded to it, for the
Justification of Christianity. Neither indeed was that the chief quarrel which
the Pagans had with the Christians, That they had deified one who was crucified
(though the Cross of Christ was also a great offense to them) but that they
condemning the Pagans, for worshipping others besides the Supreme Omnipotent
God, and decrying all those Gods of theirs, did themselves notwithstanding
worship one Mortal man for a God. Lib. 8. p. 385.
This Celsus urges in Origin, (...)^ If these Christians themselves worshipped
no other but One God, or the pure Divinty, then might they perhaps seem to have
some just pretense of censuring us; but now they themselves give divine Honor,
to one that lately rose up and they persuade themselves, that they do not at
all offend God in worshipping that supposed Minister of his. Which as Origin
makes there a reply to it, so shall it be further considered by us afterward.

As for the Judgment of the Fathers in this Particular, Clemens Alexandrinus,
was not only of this Opinion, that the Pagans (at least the Greekish) did
worship the true God, and the same God with the Christians (though not after a
right manner) but also endeavors to confirm it from the Authority of St.
Peter: Strom. 6. p. 635.
That the Greeks knew God Peter intimates in his Predication. There is One God,
says he, who made the Beginning of all things, and has power over their End,
etc. Worship this God, not as the Greeks do. Wherein he seems to suppose, the
Greeks to worship the same God, with us, though not according to the right
Tradition received by his Son. He does not enjoin us not to worship that God,
which the Greeks worship; but to worship him otherwise than they do; altering
only the manner of the worship, but not the Object, or preaching another God.
And what that is, not to worship God as the Greeks do, the same Peter intimated
in those words, They worship him in images of wood and stone, brass and Iron,
gold and silver, and sacrifice to the Dead also, as to Gods. Where he adds
further out of St. Peter's Predication, Neither worship God as the Jews do,
etc. The one and only God (says Clemens) is worshipped by the Greeks
Paganically, by the Jews Judaically, but by Us newly and Spiritually. For the
same God who gave the two Testaments to the Jews and Christians, gave
Philosophy to the Greeks, (...), by which the Omnipotent God, is glorified
amongst the Greeks.

Lactantius Firmianus also, in many places affirms, De J. D. p. 727.
the Pagans to have acknowledged One Supreme Deity; Summum Deum and Philosophi
and Poetae, and ipsi denique qui Deos colunt, saepe fatentur, That there is One
Supreme Deity, both Philosophers and Poets, and even the vulgar Worshippers of
the Gods themselves, frequently acknowledge. From whence he concludes, that all
the other Pagan Gods, were nothing but the Ministers of this One Supreme, and
Creatures made by him, (he then only blaming them, for calling them Gods, and
giving them religious Worship) Lib. 1. When he had declared that it was
altogether as absurd to suppose, the World to be governed by many Independent
Gods, Lib. 1. p. 16.
as to suppose the Body of a man to be governed by many Minds or Souls
Independent; he adds, Quod quia intelligunt isti assertores Deorum, ita eos
praeesse singulis rebus ac partibus dicunt, ut tantum Vnus sit Rector eximius.
Jam ergo caeteri non Dii erunt, sed Satellites ac Ministri, Quos ille Vnus,
Maximus and Potens omnium, officiis his praefecit, ut ipsi ejus imperio and
nutibus serviant. Si universi pares non sunt; non igitur Dii omnes sunt. Nec
enim potest hoc idem esse, quod servit and quod dominatur. Nam si Deus est
nomen summae potestatis, Incorruptibilis esse debet, Perfectus, Impassibilis,
nulli rei subjectus. Ergo Dii non sunt quos parere Vni Maximo Deo necessitas
cogit. Which because the Assertors of Gods well understand, they affirm these
Gods of theirs so to preside over the several parts of the World, as that there
is only One chief Rectour or Governor. Whence it follows, that all their other
Gods, can be no other thing than Ministers and Officers, which one Greatest
God, who is Omnipotent, has variously appointed and constituted, so as to
serve his command and beck. Now if all the Pagan Gods be not equal, then can
they not be all Gods; since that which rules, and that which serves cannot be
the same. God is a name of absolute Power, and implies Incorrubtibility,
Perfection, Impassibility and Subjection to nothing. Wherefore these ought not
to be called Gods, P. 28.
whom necessity compels, to obey one Greatest God. Again in the same Book, Nunc
satis est, Demonstrare, summo ingenio viros attigisse veritatem ac prope
tenuisse; nisi eos retrorsum infatuata pravis opinionibus consuetudo rapuisset,
qua and Deos alios esse opinabantur, and ea quae in usum hominis Deus fecit,
tanquam sensu praedita essent, pro Diis habenda and colenda credebant. It is
now sufficient to have shown, that the more ingenious and intelligent Pagans,
came very near to the truth, and would have fully reached it, had not a certain
customary Infatuation of Evil Opinions, snatched them away, to an
acknowledgment of other Gods; and to a belief that those things which God made
for the use of men, as endued with sense (or animated) ought to be accounted
Gods and Worshipped; namely, the Stars. And afterward, Quod si Cultores Deorum,
P. 39.
eos ipsos se colere putant, quos summi Dei Ministros appellamus, nihil est
quod nobis faciant invidiam, qui Vnum Deum dicamus, Multos negemus; If the
Worshippers of the Gods think that they worship no other than the Ministers of
the one Supreme God, then there is no cause, why they should render us as
hateful, who say, that there is one God and deny Many Gods.

Praep. Evang. Lib. 3. cap. 13.
Eusebius Caesariensis likewise gives us this account of the Pagans Creed or
the Tenor of their Theology, as it was then held forth by them, (...)^ The
Pagans declare themselves in this manner, That there is One God, who with his
various Powers fills all things, and passes through all things, and
presideth over all things; but being incorporeally and invisibly present in all
things, and pervading them, he is reasonably worshipped By or In those things
that are manifest and visible. Which Passage of Eusebius will be further
considered afterward, when we come to give a more particular account of
Paganism.

What St. Austin's sense was, concerning the Theology of the Pagans, has been
already declared, namely, That they had not so far degenerated as to have lost
the knowledge of One Supreme God, from whom is all whatsoever Nature; and That
they derived all their Gods from One. We shall now in the last place conclude
with the Judgment of Paulus Orosius, His. lib. 6. c. 1.
who was his Contemporary, Philosophi dum intento mentis studio quaerunt
scrutanturque omnia, Vnum Deum, Authorem omnium repererunt, ad quem Vnum omnia
referrentur; unde etiam nunc Pagani, quos jam declarata Veritas de contumacia
magis quam de ignorantia convincit, cum a nobis discutiuntur, non se Plures
sequi, sed sub Vno Deo Magno, Plures Ministros venerari fatentur. Restat ig^tur
de intelligentia very Dei, per multas intelligendi suspiciones, Confusa
dissensio, quia de Vno Deo, omnium pene una est opinio. The Philosophers of the
Gentiles, whilst with intent study of mind, they enquired and searched after
things, found that there was One God, the Author of all things, and to which
One, all things should be referred. Whence also the Pagans at this very day,
whom the declared truth rather convinces of Contumacy, than of Ignorance; when
they are urged by us, confess themselves, not to follow Many Gods, but only
under One God to worship Many Ministers. So that there remains only a
confused dissension concerning the manner of understanding the true God,
because about One God, there is almost one and the same opinion of all.

And by this time we think it is sufficiently evident; that the Pagans (at
least after Christianity) though they asserted Many Gods, they calling all
Understanding Beings Superior to men by that Name (according to that of St.
Jerome, Deum quicquid supra se esset, Gentiles putabant;) yet they acknowledged
One Supreme Omnipotent and only Unmade Deity.

XVI. But because its very possible, that some may still suspect, all this to
have been nothing else but a Refinement and Interpolation of Paganism, after
that Christianity had appeared upon the Stage; or a kind of Mangonization of
it, to render it more vendible and plausible; the better able to defend it
self, and bear up against the Assaults of Christianity; whilst in the mean
time the Genuine Doctrine of the ancient Pagans was far otherwise: although the
contrary hereunto might sufficiently appear from what has been already
declared, yet however, for the fuller satisfaction of the more strongly
prejudiced, we shall by an Historical Deduction made, from the most ancient
times all along downwards, demonstrate that the Doctrine of the Greatest Pagan
Polytheists, as well before Christianity as after it, was always the same, That
besides their Many Gods, there was One Supreme, Omnipotent and Only Unmade
Deity.

And this we shall perform not as some have done, by laying the chief stress
upon the Sibylline Oracles, and those reputed Writings of Hermes Trismegist,
the Authority whereof has been of late so much decried by Learned Men; nor yet
upon such Oracles of the Pagan Deities, as may be suspected to have been
counterfeited by Christians: but upon such Monuments of Pagan Antiquity, as are
altogether unsuspected and indubitate. As for the Sibylline Oracles, there may
(as we conceive) be Two Extremes concerning them: One, in swallowing down all
that is now extant under that Title, as Genuine and Sincere; whereas nothing
can be more manifest, than that there is much Counterfeit and Supposititious
stuff, in this Sibylline Farrago which now we have. From whence, besides other
Instances of the like kind, it appears tooevidently to be denied, that some
pretended Christians of former times, have been for Pious and Religious Frauds;
and endeavored to uphold the Truth of Christianity by Figments and Forgeries
of their own devising. Which as it was a thing Ignoble and Unworthy in it self,
and argued that those very Defenders of Christianity, did themselves distrust
their own Cause; so may it well be thought, that there was a Policy of the
Devil in it also, there being no other more Effectual way than this, to render
all Christianity (at least in after-ages) to be suspected. Insomuch that it
might perhaps be questioned, Whether the Truth and Divinity of Christianity
appear more, in having prevailed against the open force and opposition of its
professed Enemies, or in not being at last smothered and oppressed, by these
Frauds and Forgeries of its seeming Friends and Defenders. The Other Extreme
may be, in concluding the whole business of the Sibylline Oracles (as any ways
relating to Christianity) to have been a mere Cheat and Figment; and that there
never was any thing in those Sibylline Books, which were under the Custody of
the Quindecimviri, that did in the least predict our Savior Christ or the
Times of Christianity. For notwithstanding all that the Learned Blundel has
written, it seems to be undeniably evident, from Virgil's Fourth Idyllium, that
the Cumean Sibyl, was then supposed to have predicted a New Flourishing Kingdom
or Monarchy, together with a Happy State of Justice or Righteousness, to
succeed, in the Latter Age of the World.

Vltima Cumaei venit jam Carminis aetas,
Magnus ab integro Seclorum nascitur ordo.
Jam redit and Virgo, redeunt Saturnia Regna,
Jam nova progenies Coelo delabitur alto, etc.
Moreover it is certain, that in Cicero's time, the Sibylline Prophecies, were
interpreted by some in favor of Caesar, as predicting a Monarchy; Cic. Div. L.
2.
Sibyllae versus observamus, quos illa furens fudisse dicitur. Quorum Interpres
nuper falsa quadam hominum fama dicturus in Senatu putabatur, Eum, quem revera
Regem habebamus, appellandum quoque esse Regem, si salvi esse vellemus. We take
notice of the Verses of the Sibyl, which she is said to have powered out in a
Fury or Prophetic Frenzy, the Interpreter whereof, L. Cotta Quind^cimvir.
was lately thought to have been about to declare in the Senate House, That if
we would be safe, we should acknowledge him for a King, who really was so.
Which Interpretation of the Sibylline Oracles (after Caesar's Death) Cicero was
so much offended with, (he also looking upon a Roman Monarchy, as a thing no
ness impossible than undesirable) that upon this occasion, he quarrels with
those very Sibylline Oracles themselves, as well as the Readers and Expounders
of them, after this manner; Hoc si est in Libris, in quem Hominem, and in quod
Tempus est? De Div. l. 2.
Callide enim, qui illa composuit, perfecit, ut, quodcunque accidisset,
praedictum videretur, Hominum and ^emporum definitione sublata. Adhibuit etiam
latebram obscuritatis, ut iidem versus alias in aliam rem posse accommodari
viderentur. Non esse autem illud Carmen furentis, tum ipsum Poema declarat,
(est enim magis Artis and Diligentiae quam Incitationis and motus) tum vero ea
quae (...), dicitur, cum deinceps ex primis Versuum literis aliquid
connectitur. Quamobrem Sibyllam quidem sepositam and conditam habeamus, ut, id,
quod proditum est a Majoribus, injussu Senatus ne legantur quidem Libri. If
there be any such thing contained in the Sibylline Books, then we demand,
concerning what Man is it spoken, and of what Time? For whoever framed those
Sibylline Verses, he craftily contrived, that whatsoever should come to pass,
might seem to have been predicted in them, by taking away all Distinction of
Persons and Times. He also purposely affected Obscurity, that the same Verses
might be accommodated sometime to one thing, and sometime to another. But that
they proceeded not from Fury and Prophetic Rage, but rather from Art and
Contrivance, does no less appear otherwise, than from the Acrostick in them.
Wherefore let us shut up the Sibyl and keep her close, that according to the
Decree of our Ancestors, her Verses may not be read without the express command
of the Senate. And lastly he adds, Cum Antistitibus agamus, ut quidvis potius
ex illis libris, quam Regem proserant, quem Romae posthac nec Dii nec Homines
esse patientur; Let us also deal with the Quindecimviri, and Interpreters of
these Sibylline Books, that they would rather produce any thing out of them,
than a King; whom neither Gods nor Men will hereafter suffer at Rome. Where
though Cicero were mistaken, as to the Event of the Roman Government, and there
were doubtless some Predictions in these Sibylline Books, of a New Kingdom or
Monarchy, to be set up in the World; yet that the Roman Empire was not the
thing intended in them, does manifestly appear from that Description in
Virgil's forementioned Eclogue; wherein there is accordingly another Completion
of them expected, though flatteringly applied to Saloninus. Wherefore we
conclude that the Kingdom and Happy State or Golden Age, predicted in the
Sibylline Oracles, was no other than that of the Messi^h, or our Savior
Christ, and the times of Christianity. Lastly, in that other Passage of
Cicero's, concerning the Sibylline Oracles, Valiant ad deponendas potius quam
ad suscipiendas Religiones; Let them be made use of rather for the
extinguishing, than the begetting of Religions and Superstitions; there seems
to be an Intimation, as if of themselves they rather tended, to the Lessening
than Increasing of the Pagan Superstitions; and therefore may probably be
thought, to have predicted a Change of that Pagan Religion, by the Worship of
one Sole Deity to be introduced. Neither ought it to seem a jot more strange,
that our Savior Christ should be foretold by the Pagan Sibyl, than that he was
so clearly predicted, by Balaam the Aramitick Sorcerer. However those things in
the Sibylline Verses, might have been derived some way or other, from the
Scripture-prophecies; which there is indeed the more probability of, because
that Sibylline Prophet made use of those very same Figures and Allegories, in
describing the Future Happy State, that are found in the Scripture; as for
Example, -- Nec magnos metuent Armenta Leones;
Occidet and Serpens, etc.


Now as Cicero seems to complain, that in his time these Sibylline Oracles were
too much exposed to view, so is it very probable, that notwithstanding they
were to be kept under the Guard of the Quindecimviri, yet many of them might be
copied out, and get abroad, and thereby an occasion be offered, to the
ignorantly zealous Christians, who were for Officious Lies and Pious Frauds, to
add a great deal more of their own forging to them. Neither indeed is it
imaginable, how any such Cheat as this, should either at first have been
attempted, or afterward have proved successful, had there not been some
Foundation of Truth, to support and countenance it. Besides which, it is
observable, that Celsus who would have had the Christians rather to have made
the Sibyl than our Savior Christ a God; taking notice of their using of those
Sibylline Testimonies against the Pagans, did not tax them, for counterfeiting
the whole business of these Sibylline Oracles, Orig. c. Cells. lib. 7. p. 368.
but only for inserting many things of their own into them; (...)^ You
Christians might much rather have acknowledged, even the Sibyl for the
Offspring of God; but now you can boldly insert into her Verses, Many, and
those Maledicent things of your own. Where Origin, that he might vindicate as
well as he could the honor of Christians, pleads in their defense, that Celsus
for all that, could not show what they had foisted into those Sibylline Verses,
because if he had been able to have produced more ancient and incorrupt Copies,
in which such things were not found, he would certainly have done it.
Notwithstanding which it is likely, that there were other ancient Copies then
to be found, and that Celsus might have met with them too, and that from thence
he took occasion to write as he did. However, this would not justify the
present Sibylline Books, in which there are Forgeries, plainly discoverable,
without Copies. Nevertheless it seems that all the ancient Christians did not
agree in making use of these Sibylline Testimonies, thus much being intimated
by Celsus himself, in the forecited words, (...), which some of you make use
of; as they did not all acknowledge the Sibyl to have been a Prophetess
neither, since upon Celsus mentioning a Sect of Christians called Sibyllists,
Origin tells us, that these were such as using the Sibylline Testimonies, were
called so in way of disgrace, by other Christians, who would not allow the
Sibyl to have been a Prophetess; they perhaps conceiving it derogatory to the
Scriptures. But though their may be some of the ancient Sibylline Verses still
left, in that Farrago which we now have; yet it being impossible for us to
prove which are such; we shall not insist upon any Testimonies at all from
thence, to evince that the ancient Pagans acknowledged One Supreme Deity.
Notwithstanding which we shall not omit one Sibylline Passage, which we find
recorded in Pausanias (from whence by the way it appears also, that the
Sibylline Verses were not kept up so close, but that some of them got abroad)
he telling us, that the defeat of the Athenians at Aegos Potamos, was predicted
by the Sibyl in these Words (amongst others;) (...)
(...), etc.
Ac tum Cecropidis luctum gemitusque ciebit,
Jupiter Altitonans, rerum cui Summa Potestas, etc.
Whereto might be added also, that of another ancient Peliadean Prophetess, in
the same Writer, wherein the Divine Eternity and Immutability, is plainly
declared.

(...). Jupiter Est, Fuit, atque Erit: O bone Jupiter alme. Besides these
Sibylline Prophecies, there are also other Oracles of the Pagan Deities
themselves, in which there was a clear acknowledgment of One Supreme and
Greatest God. But as for such of them, as are said to have been delivered since
the Times of Christianity, when the Pagan Oracles began to fail, and such as
are now extant only in Christian Writings, however diverse of them are cited out
of Porphyrius his Book of Oracles; because they may be suspected; we shall not
here mention any of them. Nevertheless we shall take notice of One Oracle of
the Clarian Apollo, that is recorded by Macrobius, in which One Supreme Deity
is not only asserted; but is also called by that Hebrew Name, (or
Tetragrammaton) Jao, (...). You are to call the Highest and Supreme of all the
Gods, Jao: Though it be very true, that that Clarian Devil there, cunningly
endeavored to divert this to the Sun, as if that were the Only Supreme Deity
and True Jao. To which might be added, another ancient Oracle (that now
occurrs) of the Dodonean Jupiter, together with the Interpretation of
Themistocles, to whom it was delivered; wherein he was commanded (...), to
repair to him who was called by the same Name with God; which Themistocles
apprehended to be the King of Persia, (...), because both he and God, were
alike called (though in different respects and degrees) the Great King or
Monarch.

But as for those Writings, commonly imputed to Hermes Trismegist, that have
been generally condemned by the Learned of this Latter Age, as wholly
Counterfeit and Supposititious, and yet on the contrary are asserted by
Athanasius Kircherus, for sincere and Genuine; we shall have occasion to
declare our sense, concerning them, more opportunely afterward.

The most Ancient Theologers, and most Eminent Assertors of Polytheism amongst
the Pagans, were Zoroaster in the Eastern Parts, and Orpheus amongst the
Greeks. The former of which, was of so great Antiquity, that Writers cannot
well agree about his Age. But that he was a Polytheist is acknowledged by all,
some affirming it to be signified in his very Name, as given him after his
death; it being interpreted by them A Worshipper of the Stars. Neither is it to
be doubted, but that Ster or Ester in the Persian Language did signify a Star,
as it has been observed also by Learned men, concerning sundry other Words,
now familiar in these European Languages, that they derived their Original from
the Persian. Notwithstanding which, it may be suspected that this was here but
a Greek Termination: the Word being not only in the Oriental Languages, written
Zertoost and Zaradust, but also in Agathias, Zarades. However Zoroaster's
Polytheism is intimated by Plato; where his Magic is defined, to have been
nothing else, but (...), The Worship of the Gods. Whence by the way we learn
also, that the word (...) or Magic, De A^st. L. 4. p. 165.
was first taken in a good sense, which is confirmed by Porphyrius (...)^
Amongst the Persians, those who were skilful in the knowledge of the Deity, and
Religious Worshippers of the same, were called Magi. And as Magic is commonly
conceived to be founded in a certain Vital Sympathy that is in the Universe, so
did these ancient Persian Magi, and Chaldeans (as Psellus tells us) suppose
(...), that there was a Sympathy, betwixt the Superior and Inferior Beings;
but it seems, the only way at first by them approved, of attracting the
Influence and Assistance of those Superior Invisible Powers, was by Piety,
Devotion, and Religious Rites: Nevertheless their Devotion was not carried out
only to One Omnipotent God, but also to Many Gods; neither is it to be
questioned but that this Divine Magic of Zoroaster, shortly after degenerated
in many of his Followers, into the Theurgical Magic, and at length into (...),
downright Sorcery and Witchcraft; the only thing which is now vulgarly called
Magic. But how many Gods soever this Zoroaster worshipped, that he
acknowledged notwithstanding One Supreme Deity, appears from the Testimony of
Eubulus, cited by Porphyrius in his De Antro Nympharum, P. 254.
(...)^ Zoroaster first of all, as Eubulus testifies, in the Mountains
adjoining to Persis, consecrated a Native Orbicular Cave, adorned with flowers
and watered with fountains, to the honor of Mithras, the Maker and Father of
all things; this Cave being an Image or Symbol to him, of the whole World,
which was made by Mithras. Which Testimony of Eubulus, is the more to be
valued, because as Porphyrius elsewhere informs us, he wrote the History of
Mithras at large, in many Books, from whence it may be presumed, that he had
thoroughly furnished himself with the knowledge of what belonged to the Persian
Religion. Wherefore from the Authority of Eubulus, we may well conclude also,
that notwithstanding the Sun, was generally worshipped by the Persians as a God,
yet Zoroaster and the ancient Magi, who were best initiated in the Mithraick
Mysteries, asserted That Mithras, which was called, (...), The Hidden God, was
not the Visible Sun.
another Deity, Superior to the Sun, for the True Mithras, such as was (...),
the Maker and Father of all things, or of the whole World, whereof the Sun is a
part. However these also looked upon the Sun as the most lively Image of this
Deity, in which it was worshipped by them, as they likewise worshipped the same
Deity Symbolically in Fire, as Maximus Tyrius informs us; agreeable to which,
is that in the Magic Oracles, -- (...). All things are the Offspring of one
Fire; that is, of One Supreme Deity. And Julian the Emperor was such a Devout
Sun-worshipper as this, who acknowledged besides the Sun, another Incorporeal
Deity, transcendent to it. Nevertheless we deny not, but that others amongst
the Persians, who were not able to conceive of any thing Incorporeal, might, as
well as Heraclitus, Hippocrates, and the Stoics amongst the Greeks, look upon
the Fiery Substance of the whole World (and especially the Sun) as Animated and
Intellectual, to be the Supreme Deity, and the only Mithras, according to that
Inscription, Deo Soli Invicto Mithrae. However, Mithras, whether supposed to be
Corporeal or Incorporeal, was unquestionably taken by the Persians for the
Supreme Deity, according to that of Hesychius, (...), Mithras, The First God
among the Persians; who was therefore called in the Inscription Omnipotent,
Omnipotenti Deo Mithrae. Which First, Supreme and Omnipotent God was
acknowledged by Artabanus the Persian, in his Conference with Themistocles,
Plut. Themist.
in these words, (...)^ Amongst those many excellent Laws of ours, the most
excellent is this, that the King is to be honored and worshipped religiously,
as the Image of that God, which conserveth all things. Scaliger with some
others (though we know not upon what certain grounds) affirm, that Mither in
the Persian Language signified Great, and Mithra, Greater or Greatest,
according to which, Mithras would be all one, with Deus Major or Maximus, The
Greatest God. Wherefore we conclude, that either Herodotus was mistaken, in
making the Persian Mithras the same with Mylitta or Venus; (And perhaps such a
mistake might be ocasioned from hence, because the Word Mader or Mether in the
Persian Language signified Mother, as Mylitta in the Syrian did;) or else
rather, (...) Genitrix.
that this Venus of his, is to be understood of the (...), the heavenly Venus
or Love; and thus indeed is she there called in Herodotus, Urania; by which
though some would understand nothing else but the Moon, yet we conceive the
Supreme Deity, True Heavenly love (the Mother and Nurse of all things) to have
been primarily signified therein.

But Zoroaster and the ancient Magi are said to have called the Supreme God
also by another name, viz. Oromasdes or Ormisdas; however Oromasdes, according
to Plato, seems to have been the Father of Zoroaster. Thus, besides Plutarch
and others, Porphyrius, P. 191.
in the Life of Pythagoras, (...)^ Which we would understand thus. Pythagoras
exhorted men chiefly to the Love of Truth, as being that alone which could make
them resemble God, he having learned from the Magi that God, whom they call
Oromasdes, was as to Corporeals most like to Light, and as to Incorporeals to
Truth. Though perhaps some would interpret these words otherwise, so as to
signify Oromasdes to have been really compounded of Soul and Body, and
therefore nothing else but the Animated Sun, as Mithras is commonly supposed
also to have been. But the contrary hereunto, is plainly implied in those
Zoroastrian Traditions or Fables, concerning Oromasdes, recorded in Plutarch,
(...), that Oromasdes was as far removed from the Sun, as the Sun was from the
Earth. Wherefore Oromasdes was according to the Persians, a Deity superior to
the Sun; God properly as the Fountain of Light and Original of all Good, and
the same with Plato's (...) or First Good. From whom the Persians, as Scaliger
informs us, called the First Day of every Month Ormasda, probably because he
was the Beginning of all things. And thus Zoroaster and the ancient Magi,
acknowledged one and the same Supreme Deity, under the different names of
Mithras and Oromasdes.

But it is here observable, that the Persian Mithras was commonly called (...),
Threefold or Treble. Thus Dionysius the Pseudo-Areopagite, (...)^ The Persian
Magi to this very day, celebrate a Festival Solemnity in honor of the
Triplasian (that is, the Threefold or Triplicated) Mithras. And something very
like to this, is recorded in Plutarch, concerning Oromasdes also, (...),
Oromasdes Thrice augmented or Triplicated himself; from whence it further
appears that Mithras and Oromasdes were really one and the same Numen. Now the
Scholiasts upon Dionysius pretend to give a reason of this Denomination of the
Persian Mithras, Triplasios, or Threefold, from the Miracle done in Hezekiah's
Time, when the Day was increased, and almost Triplicated; as if the Magi then
observing the same, had thereupon given the name of (...), or Threefold, to
their God Mithras, that is, the Sun, and appointed an Anniversary Solemnity for
a Memorial thereof. But Learned men have already showed the Foolery of this
Conceit; and therefore it cannot well be otherwise concluded, but that here is
a manifest Indication of a Higher Mystery, viz. a Trinity in the Persian
Theology; which Gerardus J. Vossius would willingly understand, according to
the Christian Hypothesis, of a Divine Triunity, or Three Hypostases in one and
the same Deity, whose Distinctive Characters, are Goodness, Wisdom, and Power.
But the Magical or Zoroastrian Oracles, seem to represent this Persian Trinity,
more agreeably to that Pythagorick or Platonic Hypothesis, of Three Distinct
Substances Subordinate one to another, the Two First whereof, are thus
expressed in the following Verses, (...)
(...).
To this Sense: The Father or First Deity, perfected all things, and delivered
them to the Second Mind, who is that, whom the Nations of men commonly take for
the First. Which Oracle Psellus thus glosseth upon; (...)^ The First Father of
the Trinity, having produced this whole Creation, delivered it to Mind or
Intellect. Which Mind, the whole Generation of Mankind being ignorant of the
Paternal Transcendency, commonly call the First God. After which, Psellus takes
notice of the difference here betwixt this Magical or Chaldaick Theology, and
that of Christians: (...), etc. But our Christian Doctrine is contrary
hereunto, namely thus; That the First Mind or Intellect, being the Son of the
Great Father, made the whole Creation. For the Father in the Mosaic Writings,
speaks to his Son, the Idea of the Creation; but the Son is the immediate
Opifex thereof. His meaning is, that according to this Persian or Chaldaick
Theology, the First Hypostasis of the Divine Triad, was the (...) or Immediate
Architect of the World, whereas according to the Christian as well as Platonic
Doctrine, he is the Second. For which cause, Pletho framed another
Interpretation of that Magic Oracle, to render it more conformable both to the
Christian and Platonic Doctrine, (...), etc. The Father perfected all things,
that is the Intelligible Ideas (for these are those things which are complete
and perfect) and delivered them to the Second God, to rule over them. Wherefore
whatsoever is produced by this God, according to its own Exemplar and the
Intelligible Essence, must needs owe its Original also to the Highest Father.
Which Second God, the Generations of men, commonly take for the First, they
looking up no higher, than to the Immediate Architect of the World. According
to which Interpretation of Pletho's (the more probable of the Two) the Second
Hypostasis in the Magic (or Persian) Trinity, as well as in the Platonic and
Christian, is the Immediate Opifex or Architect of the World; and this seems to
be properly that which was called Mithras in Eubulus.

But besides these Two Hypostases, there is also a Third mentioned in a certain
other Magic or Chaldaick Oracle, cited by Proclus, under the Name of Psyche,
or the Mundane Soul; -- (...),
(...)^
After (or next below) the Paternal Mind, I Psyche dwell. Now the Paternal
Mind, as Psellus informs us, is the Second Hypostasis beforementioned; (...),
The Paternal Mind is the Second God, and the Immediate Demiurgus or Opifex of
the Soul. Wherefore though both those Names Oromasdes and Mithras, were
frequently used by the Magi, for the (...), or whole Deity in General, yet this
being Triplasian or Threefold, according to their Theology, as containing Three
Hypostases in it; the First of those Three, seems to have been that, which was
most properly called Oromasdes, and the Second Mithras. And this is not only
confirmed by Pletho, but also with this further Superaddition to it, that the
Third Hypostasis of that Persian Trinity, was that which they called Arimanius;
he gathering as much even from Plutarch himself; (...)^ They say that Zoroaster
made a Threefold Distribution of Things, and that he assigned the First and
Highest Rank of them, to Oromasdes, who in the Oracles, is called the Father;
the lowest to Arimanes; and the Middle to Mithras, who in the same Oracles is
likewise called the Second Mind. Whereupon he observes, how great an Agreement
there was, betwixt the Zoroastrian and the Platonic Trinity, they differing in
a manner only in Words. And the Middle of these, namely the Eternal Intellect
that conteins the Ideas of all things, being, according to the Platonic
Hypothesis, the Immediate (...) and Architect of the World, this probably was
that Mithras, as we have already intimated, who is called in Eubulus, the
Demiurgus of the World, and the Maker and Father of all things. Now if that
Third Hypostasis of the Magic or Chaldaick Oracles, be the same with that,
which the Persians call Arimanius, then must it be upon such an account as
this, because this Lower World (wherein are Souls Vitally united to Bodies, and
Lapsable) is the Region where all manner of Evils, Wickedness, Pains,
Corruption and Mortality reign. And herewith Hesychius seems to agree: (...)
(says he) (...), Arimanius among the Persians, is Hades, that is, either Orcus
or Pluto; wherein he did but follow Theopompus, who in Plutarch calls Arimanius
likewise Hades or Pluto: which it seems was as well the Third in the Persian,
Trinity (or Triplasian Deity) as it was in the Homerican. And this was that
Arimanius, whom the Persian King in Plutarch, In vit. Them.
upon Themistocles his flight, addressed his Devotion to, (...), He prayed,
that Arimanius would always give such a mind to his Enemies, as thus to banish
and drive away their best men from them. And indeed from that which Plutarch
affirms, (...), That the Persians from their God Mithras, called any Mediator,
or Middle betwixt two, Mithras; it may be more reasonably concluded, that
Mithras, according to the Persian Theology, was properly the Middle Hypostasis
of that Triplasian or Triplicated Deity of theirs, than that he should be a
Middle Self-existent God, or Mediator, betwixt Two Adversary Gods Unmade, one
Good, and the other Evil, as Plutarch would suppose.

Notwithstanding which, if that which the same Plutarch and others do so
confidently affirm, should be true, that Zoroaster and the ancient Magi, made
Good and Evil, Light and Darkness, the Two Substantial Principles of the
Universe, that is, asserted an Evil Demon Coeternal with God, and Independent
on him, in the very same manner that Plutarch himself and the Manicheans
afterward did; yet however it is plain, that in this way also, Zoroaster and
the Magi, acknowledged One only Fountain and Original of all Good, and nothing
to be independent upon that One Good Principle or God, but only that which is
so contrary to his Nature and Perfection, as that it could not proceed from
him, namely Evil. But we have already discovered a suspicion, that the meaning
of those ancient Magi, might possibly be otherwise; they philosophizing only
concerning a certain Mixture of Evil and Darkness, together with Good and
Light, that was in the Composition of this Lower World, and Personating the
same; as also perhaps taking notice especially therein of Evil Demons (who are
acknowledged likewise in the Magic Oracles, and called (...), Beasts of the
Earth, and (...), Terrestial Dogs;) the Head of which might be sometimes called
also Emphatically (...), the Evil Demon of the Persians, as being the very same
with the Devil: all which was under the immediate Presidency or Government of
that God, called by them Arimanius, Hades or Pluto, the Third Hypostasis in the
Triplasian Deity of the Persians. Which suspicion, may be yet further confirmed
from hence, because the Persian Theologers, as appears by the Inscriptions,
expressly acknowledged the Divine Omnipotence, which they could not possibly
have done, had they admitted of a Manichean Substantial Evil Principle,
Coeternal with God, and Independent on him. Besides which it is observable,
that whereas the Gnostics in Plotinus time, asserting this World to have been
made, not so much from a Principle Essentially Evil and Eternal, as from a
Lapsed Soul; to weigh down the Authority of Plato that was against them, did
put Zoroaster in the other Scale, producing a Book entitled, (...), or the
Revelations of Zoroaster, Porphyrius tells us, that himself wrote purposely, to
disprove those Zoroastrian Revelations, as New and Counterfeit, and forged by
those Gnostics themselves; therein implying also the Doctrine of the ancient
Zoroaster, no way to have countenanced or favored that Gnostick Heresy.
Moreover the Tenants of these ancient Magi, concerning that Duplicity of
Principles, are by Writers represented with great Variety and Uncertainty. That
Account which Theodorus in Photius (treating of the Persian Magic) gives
thereof, as also that other of Eudemus in Damascius, are both of them so
Nonsensical, that we shall not here trouble the Reader with them; however,
neither of them suppose the Persian Arimanius or Satanas, to be an Unmade
Self-existing Demon. But the Arabians, writing of this Altanawiah, or Persian
Duplicity of Good and Evil Principles, affirm, That according to the most
approved Magi, Light, was Kadiman, the Most Ancient and First God, and that
Darkness was but a Created God; they expressly denying the Principle of Evil and
Darkness, to be Coeve with God, or the Principle of Good and Light. And
Abulseda represents the Zoroastrian Doctrine (as the Doctrine of the Magi
Reformed) after this manner; That God was older than Darkness and Light, Pocock
Spec. Hist. Ar. p. 146, 147, 148.
and the Creator of them, so that he was a Solitary Being, without Companion or
Corrival; and that Good and Evil, Virtue and Vice did arise from a certain
Commixture of Light and Darkness together, without which this lower World could
never have been produced; which Mixture was still to continue in it, till at
length Light should overcome Darkness: and then Light and Darkness shall each
of them have their separate and distinct Worlds, apart from one another.

If it were now needful, we might still make it further evident that Zoroaster,
notwithstanding the Multiplicity of Gods worshipped by him, was an Asserter of
One Supreme, Prap. Ev. L. 1*
from his own Description of God extant in Eusebius. (...)^ God is the First
Incorruptible, Eternal, Unmade, Indivisible, Most unlike to every thing, the
Head or Leader of all Good, Vnbribable, the Best of the Good, the Wisest of the
Wise; He is also the Father of Law and Justice, Self-taught, Perfect, and the
only Inventor of the Natural Holy. Which Eusebius tells us, that this
Zoroastrian Description of God, was contained verbatim, in a Book entitled, A
Holy Collection of the Persian Monuments; as also that Ostanes (himself a
famous Magician, and admirer of Zoroaster) had recorded the very same of him,
in his Octateuchon.

Now we having, in this Discourse concerning Zoroaster and the Magi, cited the
Oracles, called by some Magical, and imputed to Zoroaster, but by others
Chaldaical; we conceive it not improper to give some account of them here. And
indeed if there could be any Assurance of the Antiquity and Sincerity of those
Reputed Oracles, there would then need no other Testimony to prove, that either
Zoroaster and the Persian Magi, or else at least the Chaldeans, asserted not
only a Divine Monarchy, or One Supreme Deity the Original of all things; but
also a Trinity, consistently with the same.

And it is certain that those Oracles are not such Novel Things as some would
suspect, they being cited by Synesius, as then Venerable and of great
Authority, under the name of (...), Holy Oracles, and there being of this
Number, some produced by him that are not to be found in the Copies of Psellus
and Pletho; from whence it may be concluded, that we have only some Fragments
of these Oracles now left. And that they were not forged by Christians, as some
of the Sibylline Oracles undoubtedly were, seems probable from hence, because
so many Pagan Philosophers make use of their Testimonies, laying no small
stress upon them. As for Example Damascius, out of whom Patritius has made a
Considerable Collection of such of these Oracles are wanting in Psellus and
Pletho's Copies. And we learn from Photius, that whereas Hierocles his Book of
Fate and Providence, was divided into Seven Parts, the Drift of the Fourth of
them was this, (...), to reconcile the Reputed Oracles, with Plato 's
Doctrines. Where it is not to be doubted, but that those Reputed Oracles of
Hierocles, were the same with these Magic or Chaldaick Oracles; because these
are frequently cited by Philosophers under that name of (...) or Oracles. P. 97.
Proclus upon the Timaeus, (...)^ The Maker of the Universe, is celebrated both
by Plato, and Orpheus, and The Oracles, as the Father of Gods and Men; who both
produces Multitudes of Gods, and sends down Souls for the Generations of Men.
And as there are other Fragments of these, cited by Proclus elsewhere under the
name of (...) or Oracles, so does he sometimes give them that higher Title of
(...), and (...), The Theology that was of Divine Tradition or Revelation.
Which magnificent Encomium, was bestowed in like manner upon Pythagoras his
Philosophy, by Jamblichus, that being thought to have been derived in great
part from the Chaldeans and the Magi; (...)^ This Philosophy of Pythagoras,
having been first Divinely delivered, or reveiled by the Gods, ought not to be
handled by us without a Religious Invocation of them. And that Porphyrius was
not unacquainted with these Oracles neither, may be concluded from that Book of
his, entitled (...), concerning the Philosophy from Oracles; which consisting
of more Parts, one of them was called, (...), The Oracles of the Chaldeans:
which that they were the very same with those we now speak of, shall be further
proved afterward. Now though Psellus affirm, that the Chaldean Dogmata,
contained in those Oracles, were some of them admitted both by Aristotle and
Plato, yet does he not pretend, these very Greek Verses themselves to have been
so ancient. But it seems probable from Suidas, that Juliane a Chaldean and
Theurgist, the Son of Juliane a Philosopher, (who wrote concerning Demons and
Telesiurgicks) was the First that turned those Chalday or Magic Oracles, into
Greek Verse; (...)^ Juliane in the time of Marcus Antoninus the Emperor, wrote
the Theurgick and Telestick Oracles, in Verse. For that there is something of
the Theurgical Magic mixed together with Mystical Theology in these Oracles,
is a thing so manifest, from that Operation about the Hecatine Circle, and
other passages in them, that it cannot be denied; which renders it still more
unlikely, that they should have been forged by Christians. Nevertheless they
carry along with them (as has been already observed) a clear acknowledgement
of a Divine Monarchy, or One Supreme Deity, the Original of all things; which
is called in them The Father, and the Paternal Principle, and that
Intelligible, (...), that cannot be apprehended otherwise than by the Flower of
the Mind; as also that One Fire from whence all things spring; Psellus thus
glossing upon that Oracle, All things were the Offspring of one Fire, (...)^
All things whether Intelligible or Sensible receive their Essence from God
alone, and return back again only to him; so that this Oracle is
irreprehensible, and full of our Doctrine. And it is very observable, that
these very same Oracles, expressly determined also, that Matter was not (...),
Unmade or Self-existent, but derived in like manner, from the Deity. Which we
learn from Proclus upon Plato's Timaeus; where when he had positively asserted,
that there is (...), One thing the Cause of all things; and (...), That the
Supreme Good, being the Cause of all things, is also the Cause of Matter, he
confirms this Assertion of his, from the Authority of the Oracles, P. 118.
(...)^ From this Order also, do the Oracles deduce, the Generation of the
Matter, in these words, From thence (that is, from One Supreme Deity)
altogether proceeds the Genesis of the Multivarious Matter. Which
unquestionably was one of those very Magic or Chalday Oracles; and it may be
further proved from hence, because it was by Porphyrius set down amongst them,
as appears from Aeneas Gazeus in his Theophrastus, (...)^ Neither was Matter
void of Generation or Beginning, which the Chaldeans and Porphyrius teach thee;
he making this the Title of a whole Book published by him, The Oracles of the
Chaldeans, in which it is confirmed, that Matter was Made.

Moreover that there was also in these Magic or Chalday Oracles, a clear
Signification of a Divine Triad, has been already declared. But we shall here
produce Proclus his Testimony for it too, (...)^ Thus the Divinely Delivered
(or Inspired) Theology, affirms the whole World to have been completed from
these Three; Psyche or the Mundane Soul, therein speaking concerning that Zeus
or Jupiter, who was above the Maker of the World, in this manner, etc. For we
have already declared, that Proclus his (...), his Theology of Divine Tradition
or Revelation, is one and the same thing with the (...), or Oracles. To which
Testimony of Proclus, we might also ^upe^add, that Oracle cited out of
Damascius, by Patritius, (...)^ In the whole World shines forth a Triad or
Trinity, the (...) a Monad or Perfect Unity; Than which nothing can be pla^^e.

XVII. And now we pass out of Asia into Europe, from Zor^^s^^^ to Orpheus. G.I.
Vossius D. Ar. Po. c. 13.
It is the Opinion of some Eminent Philologers of L^t^er times, That there
never was any such Man as Orpheus, bu^ only in Fairy-land, and that the whole
History of Orpheus, was nothing b^^ a mere Romantic Allegory, utterly devoid
of all Truth and Reality. But there is nothing alleged for this Opinion from
Antiquity, save only this one Passage of Cicero's concerning Aristotle; De Not.
D.L. 1. p. 211.
Orpheum Poctam docet Aristoteles nunquam fuisse, Aristotle teaches that there
never was any such man as Orpheus the Poet; in which notwithstanding Aristotle
seems to have meant no more than this, that there was no such Poet as Orpheus
Senior to Homer, or that the Verses vulgarly called Orphical, were not written
by Orpheus. However, if i^ should be granted, that Aristotle had denied the
Existence of such a man; there seems to be no reason at all, why his Single
Testimony should here preponderate, against that Universal Consent of all
Antiquity, which is for one Orpheus the Son of Oeager, by birth a Thracian* the
Father or Chief Founder, of the Mythical and Allegorical Theology amongst the
Greeks, and of all their most Arcane Religious Rites and Mysteries; who is
commonly supposed to have lived before the Trojan War, (that is, in the time of
the Israelitish Judges) or at least, to have been Senior both to Hesiod and
Homer; and also to have died a Violent Death, most affirming him to have been
torn in pieces by Women. For which cause in that Vision of Herus Pamphylius in
Plato, De Rep. L. 10. Lib. 4. p. 162.
Orpheus his Soul being to come down again, into another Body, is said to have
chosen rather, that of a Swan (a reputed Musical Animal) than to be born again
of a Woman, by reason of that great hatred, which he had conceived of all
Womankind, for his suffering such a Violent Death from them. And the Historick
Truth of Orpheus, was not only acknowledged by Plato, but also by Isocrates,
Seniour to Aristotle likewise (in his Oration in the praise of Busiris;) and
confirmed by that sober Historiographer Diodorus Siculus, he giving this
Account of Orpheus, That he was a man who diligently applied himself to
Literature, and having learned (...), or the Mythical Part of Theology,
traveled into Egypt, where he attained to further knowledge, and became the
greatest of all the Greeks, in the Mysterious Rites of Religion, Theological
Skill and Poetry. To which Pausanias adds, that he gained great authority,
(...)^ Lib. 9. p.. 586.
As being believed to have found out Expiations for wicked Actions, Remedies
for Diseases, and Appeasments of the Divine Displeasure. Neither was this
History of Orpheus contradicted by Origin, when Celsus gave him so fit an
occasion, and so strong a Provocation to do it, by his Preferring Orpheus,
before our Savior Christ. To all which may be added in the last place, that it
being commonly concluded from the Greek word (...), that the Greeks derived
their Teletae and Mysteries of Religion, from the Thracians, it is not so
reasonable to think with the Learned Vossius, that Xamolxis was the Founder of
them, (and not Orpheus) this Xamolxis being by most reported to have been
Pythagoras his Servant, and consequently too much a Juniour; and though
Herodotus attribute more Antiquity to him, yet did he conceive him to have been
no other than a Demon, who appearing to the Thracians, was worshipped by them;
whereas in the mean time, the General Tradition of the Greeks, derived the
Thracian Religious Rites and Mysteries, from Orpheus and no other, according to
this of Suidas; (...)^ It is commonly said, that Orpheus the Thracian, was the
First Inventor of the Religious Mysteries of the Greeks, and that Religion was
from thence called Threscheia, as being a Thracian Invention. Wherefore though
it may well be granted, that by reason of Orpheus his great Antiquity, there
have been many Fabulous and Romantic things intermingled with his History; yet
there appears no reason at all, why we should disbelieve the Existence of such
a Man.

But though there were such a man as Orpheus, yet may it very well be
questioned for all that, Whether any of those Poems, commonly entitled to him,
and called Orphical, were so ancient, and indeed written by him. And this the
rather, because Herodotus declares it as his own Opinion, that Hesiod and
Homer, L. 2. p. 53.
were the ancientest of all the Greek Poets, (...), and that those other Poets,
said to have been before them, were indeed Juniors to them; meaning hereby in
all probability, Orpheus, Musaeus and Linus. As also because Aristotle seems
plainly to have followed Herodotus in this, he mentioning the Orphick Poems (in
his Book Of the Soul) after this manner, (...), L. 1. c. 7.. 7.
The Verses that are called Orphical. Besides which Cicero tells us that some
imputed all the Orphick Poems to Cercops a Pythagorean, and it is well known,
that many have attributed the same to another of that School, Onomacritus, who
lived in the times of the Pisistratidae: Wherefore we read more than once in
Sextus Empiricus of (...) (...), Onomacritus in the Orphicks. Suidas also
reports, that some of the Orphick Poems were anciently ascribed to Theogneius,
others to Timocles, Proleg. in Flor. Stob.
others to Zopyrus, etc. From all which Grotius seems to have made up this
Conclusion; That the Pythagoricks entitled their own Books to Orpheus and
Linus, just in the same manner, as Ancient Christians entitled theirs, some to
the Sibyls, and others to Hermes Trismegist. Implying therein, that both the
Orphick Poems and Doctrine, owed there very Being and First Original, only to
the Pythagoreans. But on the other side, Clemens Alexandrinus affirms that
Heraclitus the Philosopher borrowed many things from the Orphick Poems. And it
is certain, that Plato does not only very much commend the Orphick Hymns, for
their Suavity and Deliciousness, but also produce some Verses out of them, De
N. De. L. 1. p. 201. Lamb.
without making any Scruple concerning their Author. Cicero himself,
notwithstanding what he cites out of Aristotle to the contrary, seems to
acknowledge Orpheus for the most ancient Poet, he writing thus of Cleanthes, In
Secundo Libro De Natura Deorum, vult Orphei, Musaei, Hesiodi, Homeri que
Fabellas accomdare ad ea quae ipse de Diis Immortalibus scripserat, ut etiam
Veterrimi Poetae qui haec ne suspicati quidem sint, Stoici fuisse videantur;
Cleanthes in his Second Book of the Nature of the Gods, endeavors to
accommodate the Fables of Orpheus, Musaeus, Hesiod and Homer, to th^se very
things which himself had written concerning them; so that the most ancient
Poets, who never dreamed of any such matter, are made by him to have been
Stoics. Diodorus Siculus affirms Orpheus to have been the Author of a most
excellent Poem. And Justin Marty^, Cl^mens Alexandrinus, Athenagoras, and
others, take it for granted, that Homer borrowed many Passages of his Poems
from the Orphick Verses, and particularly that very Beginning of his Iliads,
(...). -- Lastly, Jamblichus testifies, that by Most Writers, Orpheus was
represented as the ancientest of all the Poets, De V. Pyth. c.. 34.
adding moreover, what Dialect he wrote in, (...)^ Most of the Historiographers
declare, that Orpheus, who was the ancientest of all the Poets, wrote in the
Dorick Dialect. Which if it be true* then those Orphick Fragments, that now we
have, (preserved in the Writings of such as did not Dorize) must have been
transformed by them out of their Native Idiom. Now as concerning Herodotus, who
supposing Homer and Hesiod to have been the ancientest of all the Greek Poets,
seemed therefore to conclude the Orphick Poems to have been Pseudepigraphous;
himself intimates that this was but a Singular Opinion, and as it were,
Paradox, of his own, the contrary thereunto being then generally received.
However Aristotle probably, might therefore be the more inclinable to follow
Herodotus in this, because he had no great kindness for the Pythagorick or
Orphick Philosophy. But it is altogether Irrational and Absurd to think, that
the Pythagoricks would entitle their Books to Orpheus, as designing to gain
credit and authority to them thereby; had there been no such Doctrine before,
either contained in some ancient Monument of Orpheus, or at least transmitted
down by Oral Tradition from him. Wherefore the Pythagoricks themselves
constantly maintain, that before Pythagoras his time, there was not only an
Orphick Cabala Extant, but also Orphick Poems. The Former was declared in that
ancient Book called (...), or The Holy Oration, if we may believe Proclus upon
the Timaeus. P. 291.
(...)^ Timaeus being a Pythagorean, follows the Pythagorick Principles, and
these are the Orphick Traditions; for what things Orpheus delivered Mystically,
(or in arcane Allegories) these Pythagoras learned when he was initiated by
Aglaophemus in the Orphick Mysteries, Pythagoras himself affirming as much in
his Book called, The Holy Oration. Where Proclus without any doubt or scruple,
entitles the Book inscribed (...) or The Holy Oration, to Pythagoras himself.
Indeed several of the ancients have resolved, Pythagoras to have written
nothing at all, as Fla. Josephus, Plutarch, Lucian and Porphyrius; and Epigenes
in Clemens Alex. affirms that the (...) or Holy Oration, was written by Cercops
a Pythagorean. Nevertheless Diogenes Laertius thinks them not to be in good
earnest, who deny Pythagoras to have written any thing, and he tells us that
Heraclides acknowledged this (...) or Holy Oration for a genuine and indubitate
Foetus of Pythagoras. Jamblichus is also of the same opinion, as the most
received; though confessing some to have attributed that Book, to Telauges
Pythagoras his Son. But whoever was the Writer of this Hieros Logos, whether
Pythagoras himself, or Telauges, or Cercops, it must needs be granted to be of
great antiquity, according to the Testimony whereof, Pythagoras derived much of
his Theology, from the Orphick Traditions. Strom. L. 1. p. 333.
Moreover Ion Chius in his Trigrammi testified, as Clemens Alexandrinus
informs us, that Pythagoras himself referred some Poems to Orpheus as their
Author; which is also the General sense of Platonists as well as Pythagoreans.
Wherefore upon all accounts, it seems most probable, That either, Orpheus
himself wrote some Philosophic or Theologick Poems, though certain other Poems
might be also fathered on him, because written in the same strain, of Mystical
and Allegorical Theology, and as it were in the same Spirit, with which this
Thracian Prophet was inspired: Or else at least, that the Orphick Doctrine, was
first conveyed down by Oral Cabala or Tradition from him, and afterward for
its better Preservation, expressed in Verses, that were imputed to Orpheus,
after the same manner, as the Golden Verses written by Lysis, were to
Pythagoras. And Philoponus intimates this Latter to have been Aristotle's
Opinion concerning the Orphick Verses: He glossing thus upon those words of
Aristotle before cited, (...)^ Aristotle calls them the Reputed Orphick Verses,
because they seem not to have been written by Orpheus himself, as the same
Aristotle affirms in his Book of Philosophy. The Doctrine and Opinions of
them indeed were his, but Onomacritus is said to have put them into Verse.
However, there can be no doubt at all made, but that the Orphick Verses, by
whomsoever Written, were some of them of great antiquity (they being much older
than either Aristotle, Plato or Herodotus) as they were also had in great
esteem amongst the Pagans; and therefore we may very well make a judgment of
the Theology of the ancient Pagans, from them.

Now that Orpheus, the Orphick Doctrine, and Poems, were Polytheistical, is a
thing acknowledged by all. Justin Martyr affirms that Orpheus asserted Three
Hundred and Sixty Gods; he also bestows upon him, this Honorable Title (if it
may be so accounted) of (...), The Father and First Teacher of Polytheism
amongst the Greeks; he supposing that Homer derived his Polytheism from him;
(...)^ Homer emulating Orpheus his Polytheism, did himself therefore fabulously
write of many Gods, that he might not seem to dissent from his Poems whom he
had so great a Veneration for. With which also agrees the Testimony of
Athenagoras, (...). Orpheus first invented the very names of the Gods,
declaring their Generations, and what was done by each of them, and Homer for
the most part follows him therein. Indeed the whole Mythical Theology, or
Fables of the Gods together with the Religious Rites amongst the Greeks, are
commonly supposed to have owed their First Original to no other but Orpheus. In
which Orphick Fables, not only the Things of Nature, and Parts of the World
were all Theologized, but also all manner of Humane Passions, Imperfections,
and Vices (according to the Literal Sense) attributed to the Gods. Insomuch
that diverse of the Pagans themselves, took great offense at them, In Lau. Busir.
as for Example Isocrates; who concludes that a Divine Nemesis or Vengeance was
inflicted upon Orpheus for this Impiety, (...), Orpheus. who was most of all
guilty in this kind, died a violent death. Also Diog. Laertius for this Cause
made a question, whether he should reckon Orpheus amongst the Philosophers or
no: and others have Concluded that Plato ought to have banished Orpheus
likewise out of his Commonwealth, for the same reason that he did Homer, which
is thus expressed, For not Lying well concerning the Gods. And here we may take
notice of the Monstrosity and Extravagancy of Orpheus his Fancy, from what
Diamascius and others tell us, that he made one of his Principles to be (...),
A Dragon, having the Heads both of a Bull and a Lion, and in the midst the Face
of a God, with Golden Wings upon his shoulders; which forsooth must be an
Incorporeal Deity and Hercules, with which Nature (called Ananche and Adrastea)
was associated. Nevertheless the Generality of the Greekish Pagans, looking
upon this Orpheus, not as a mere Fanciful Poet and Fabulator, but as a Serious
and Profound Philosopher, or Mystical Theologer; a Person transcendently Holy
and Wise; they supposed all his Fables of the Gods, to be deep Mysteries and
Allegories which had some Arcane and Recondite Sense under them, and therefore
had a high Veneration for him, as one who did (...) (as Athenagoras writes)
More truly Theologize than the rest, and was indeed Divinely Inspired. C. Cells.
L. 7. p. 367.
Insomuch that Celsus would rather have had the Christians to have taken
Orpheus for a God, than our Savior Christ, (...), as being a man
unquestionably endewed with a holy Spirit, and one who also (as well as the
Christians Jesus) died a violent death.

But that Orpheus, notwithstanding all his Polytheism or Multiplicity of Gods,
acknowledged One Supreme Unmade Deity, as the Original of all things, may be
First Presumed from hence, because those Two Most Religious Philosophic Sects,
the Phythagoreans and Platonists, not only had Orpheus in great esteem, he
being commonly called by them (...), The Theologer, but were also thought, in
great measure to have owed their Theology and Philosophy to him, as deriving
the same from his Principles and Traditions. This has been already intimated
and might be further proved. Pythagoras, as we are informed by Porphyrius and
Jamblichus, learned something from all these Four, from the Egyptians, from the
Persian Magi, from the Chaldeans, MS. Coll. Caj. Cant. p. 14.
and from Orpheus or his Followers. Accordingly Syrianus makes (...), The
Orphick and Pythagorick Principles to be one and the same. And as we understand
from Suidas, the same Syrianus wrote a Book entitled, (...), The Harmony of
Orpheus, Pythagoras and Plato. Proclus, besides the place before cited,
frequently insists upon this elsewhere, in his Commentary upon the Timaeus, as
p. 289. (...)^ It is Pythagorical to follow the Orphick Genealogies. For from
the Orphick Tradition downward by Pythagoras, was the knowledge of the Gods
derived to the Greeks. And that the Orphick Philosophy did really agree and
symbolize with that which afterward was called Pythagorick and Platonic, and
was of the same strain with it, may be gathered from that of Plato in his
Cratylus, where he speaks concerning the Etymology of the Greek Word (...)^ P.
400. Steph.
Orpheus and his followers seem to me to have given the best Etymology of this
word (...) (from (...)) That the Soul is here in a state of Punishment, its
Body being a Prison to it, wherein it is kept in custody, till its Debts or
Faults be expiated, and is therefore called (...). Now these Three
Philosophies, the Platonic, Pythagorick, and Orphick, symbolizing so much
together, it is probable that as the Platonic and Pythagorick, so the Orphick
likewise, derived all their Gods from One Self-existent Deity.

Which may be further manifested, from that Epitome of the Orphick Doctrine,
made long since by Timotheus the Chronographer in his Cosmopoeia, still extant
in Cedrenus and Eusebii Chronica, and imperfectly set down by Suidas (upon the
Word Orpheus) as his own, or without mentioning the Authors Name: -- (...)^
First of all the Ether was made by God, and after the Ether a Chaos; a Dark
and dreadful Night, then covering all under the whole Ether. (...), Orpheus
hereby signifying (says Timotheus) that Night was Seniour to day, or that the
World had a Beginning; (...)^ He having declared also in his Explication, that
there was a certain Incomprehensible Being, which was the Highest and Oldest of
all things, and the Maker of every thing, even of the Ether it self, and all
things under the Ether. But the Earth being then invisible by reason of the
Darkness, a Light breaking out through the Ether, illuminated the whole
Creation: This Light being said by him, to be that Highest of all Beings
(before mentioned) which is called also Counsel and Life. (...) (to use Suidas
his words here) (...)^ These Three Names in Orpheus (Light, Counsel and Life)
declaring one and the same Force and Power of that God, who is the Maker of
all, and who produces all out of Nothing into Being, whether Visible or
Invisible. To conclude with Timotheus: (...)^ And the same Orpheus in his Book
declared, that all things were made by one Godhead in Three Names, and that
this God is all things.

But that Orpheus asserted One Supreme Deity, as the Original of all things, is
unquestionably evident from the Orphick Verses themselves; of which
notwithstanding, before we mention any, in way of Proof, we shall premise this
Observation, or rather Suspicion of our own; That there seem to be some Orphick
Verses supposititious, as well as there were Sibylline; they being
counterfeited either by Christians or Jews. For we must freely profess, for our
own part, that we cannot believe all that to be genuine, which is produced by
ancient Fathers as Orphical; that is, either to have been written by Orpheus
himself, or else by Onomacritus, or any other Pagan of that Antiquity,
according to the Orphick Cabala or Tradition.

As for example, this concerning Moses, (...),
(...)^
Vt habet sermo antiquorum, ut Ex-aqua-ortus descripsit,
Accepta divinitus Lege quae Duplicia Praecepta continet.
And this that is commonly understood of Abraham, (...),
(...)
(...).
Non enim quispiam mortalium videre posset eum qui hominibus imperat,
Nisi Vnigenitus quidam profectus ab antiqua origin Gentis
Chaldaeorum; Sciebat enim astri cursum.
The manifest Forgery of which, might make one suspect also some other
Passages, such as this concerning the Divine Logos; (...),
(...).
Wherefore it being not ingenuous, to lay stress upon that for the Proof of any
thing, which our selves believe not to be sincere and genuine; we shall here
cite no Orphick Verses, for the acknowledgment of One Supreme Deity, but only
such as we find attested in Pagan Writings. As first of all that Copy produced
by Proclus upon the Timaeus: P. 99.
(...),
(...),
(...)^
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...)
(...).
To this Sense: Wherefore, together with the Universe, were made within
Jupiter, the Height of the Ethereal Heaven, the Breadth of the Earth and Sea,
the great Ocean, the Profound Tartara, the Rivers and Fountains, and all the
other things; all the Immortal Gods, and Goddesses. Whatsoever has been, or
shall be, was ot once contained in the Womb of Jupiter.

Proclus understands this of the Idea's of all things, being in God, before the
World was produced, that is, in order of Nature only, he supposing them in time
Coeve. However it is plain, that all things are said to be contained in the
Womb and Fecundity of One Self-originated Deity; not only all the other Gods
and Goddesses, but every thing else whatsoever.

Again Proclus in the same place, ushers in another Copy of Orphick Verses
(which are also found in the Writer de Mundo) after this manner: (...)^ The
Demiurgus or Maker of the World, being full of Ideas, did by these comprehend
all things within himself, as that Theologer also declares in these following
Verses: (...)^
(...)^
(...)^
(...)^
(...)^
(...)^
(...)^
(...).


Which likewise in plain Prose is this: The high-thundering Jove is both the
First and the Last; Jove is both the Head and Middle of all things; All things
were made out of Jupiter; Jove is both a Man and an Immortal Maid; Jove is the
Profundity of the Earth and Starry Heaven; Jove is the Breath of all things;
Jove is the Force of the untameable Fire; Jove the Bottom of the Sea; Jove is
Sun, Moon and Stars; Jove is both the Original, and King of all things: There
is one Power, and One God, and one great Ruler over all.

Where though there be many strange Expressions, yet this seems to be the
strangest of them all, that Jupiter should be said to be, both a Man, and an
Immortal Maid. But this is nothing but a Poetic Description of (...), Male and
Female together. And it was a thing very familar with all the Mystical
Theologers amongst the Pagans, to call God (...), Male and Female together;
they signifying thereby Emphatically, The Divine Fecundity, or the Generative
and Creative Power of the Deity; that God was able from himself alone, to
produce all things. Thus Damascius the Philosopher, writing of this very
Orphick Theology, expounds it, (...)^ The Orphick Theology calls the First
Principle, Hermaphroditick, or Male and Female together; thereby denoting that
Essence, that is Generative or Productive of all things. And that Learned and
Pious Christian Bishop, Synesius, it seems thought the Expression so harmless,
that he scrupled not himself to make use of it. in those elegant and devout
Hymns of his to God Almighty.

(...),
(...).
Tu Pater, Tu es Matter,
Tu Mas, Tu Foemina.
Besides these, there are also certain other Orphick Verses, scattered up and
down in Proclus, but cited altogether in Eusebius out of Porphyrius, in which
the whole World is represented, as One Great Animal, God being the Soul
thereof. (...),
(...)^
(...)^
(...)^
(...),
(...)
(...), etc.
Omnia Regali sunt haec in corpore clausa,
Ignis and Vnda, and Terra, Ether cum Nocte Dieque:
(Consilium, Primus Genitor, cum Numine Amoris:)
Juppiter immenso sub Corpore cuncta coerect:
En hujus Caput Eximium, Vultusque decoros
Vndique resplendens Coelum, cui pendula circum
Aurea Caesaries Astrorum lumina fundit:
Sunt oculi Phoebus, Phoeboque adversa recurrens
Cynthia, etc.
Where probably that one Verse, (...)^ though truly Orphical, and indeed Divine
(it signifying that Mind and Love were the First Begetters and Original of all
things) was notwithstanding, clapped in unduly out of some other place. But from
all these Citations, it plainly appears, that according to the Orphick
Theology, though there were many Ghds and Goddesses too, admitted, yet there
was One Original and King of them all, One Supreme Deity acknowledged. We are
not ignorant, that some of the ancient and learned Fathers, conceiving it
contradictious, for Orpheus at the same time, to assert both Many Gods, and One
God, apprehended this to be a convenient Salvo for this Difficulty, to suppose
that Orpheus had by Fits and Turns, been of different Humors and Persuasions;
First a Rank Polytheist, asserting Three Hundred Gods, and more; and then
afterward a Converted Monotheist; they being the rather led into this Opinion,
by reason of certain Counterfeit Orphick Verses in Aristobulus, made probably
by some ignorant Jew; wherein Orpheus is made to sing a Palinodia or
Recantation, for his former Error and Polytheism. But we must crave lieve with
all due respect, to dissent from Reverend Antiquity in this, See Just. Mart.
and Clem. Al. Prot.
it plainly appearing from that First Orphick Exception in Proclus, that
Orpheus at the same time acknowledged, both One Unmade Deity (the Original of
all things) and Many Generated Gods and Goddesses, that were all contained in
it.

Having now made it sufficiently evident from such Orphick Fragments, as have
been acknowledged by Pagan Writers and by them cited out of Orpheus his Hymns
and Rapsodies; that the Opinion of Monarchy or One Self-existent Deity, the
Original of all things, was an Essential Part of the Orphick Theology or
Cabala; we shall here further observe, that besides this Opinion of Monarchy
(but consistently with the same) a Trinity also of Divine Hypostases
Subordinate, P. 93.
was another part of this Orphick Cabala. Proclus upon Plato's Timaeus, making
an Enquiry into Plato's Demiurgus or Opifex of the World, gives us an account
amongst other Platonists, of the Doctrine of Amelius (who was contemporary with
Plotinus, and who is said to have taken notice of what St. John the Evangelist
had written concerning the Logos, as agreeing with the Platonic and
Pythagorick Hypothesis) after this manner: (...) (...). This Passage being very
remarkable, we thought fit to set it down at large, and shall here translate
it. Amelius makes a Threefold Demiurgus or Opifex of the World, Three Minds and
Three Kings: Him that Is, Him that Has, and Him that Beholds. Which Three
Minds differ thus, in that the First is Essentially that which he is (or all
Perfection:) The Second Is its own Intelligible, but Has the First (as
something distinct from it) and indeed partakes thereof, and therefore is
Second. The Third, Is also that Intelligible of its own, (for every Mind is the
same thing with its correspondent Intelligible) but Has that which is in the
Second, and Beholds the First. For how much soever every Being departs from the
First, so much the Obscurer is it. After which Proclus immediately subjoyns,
(...)^ Amelius therefore supposes These three Minds and Demiurgick Principles
of his, to be both the same with Plato 's Three Kings, and with Orpheus his
Trinity, of Phanes, Uranus, and Chronus; but Phanes is supposed by him to be
principally the Demiurgus. Where though Proclus (who had some Peculiar Phansies
and Whimseys of his own, and was indeed a Confounder of the Platonic Theology,
and a Mingler of much Unintelligible Stuff with it) does himself assert a Monad
or Unity, Superior to this Whole Trinity, yet does he seem nevertheless,
rightly to contend against Amelius, that it was not the First Hypostasis
neither in the Platonic nor Orphick Trinity, that was chiefly and properly the
Demiurgus or Opifex of the World, but the Sec^nd. And thus Proclus his Master
Syrianus had before determined, that in the Orphick Theology, the Title of
Opifex, did properly belong to Orpheus his (...), or First-begotten God, which
was the same with Plato's (...) or Divine Intellect. Agreeably whereunto
Proclus his Conclusion is, (...)^ Thus much may suffice to have declared, who
is the Demiurgus of the World, namely, that it is the Divine Intellect, which
is the proper and immediate Cause of the whole Creation, and that it is one and
the same Demiurgical Jupiter, that is praised both by Orpheus and Plato. Now
besides this, it is observable that Damascius in his Book (...), or Concerning
the Principles (not yet published) giving an account of the Orphick Theology,
tells us amongst other things, that Orpheus introduced, (...), a Triform Deity.
To all which may be added, what was before cited out of Timotheus the
Chronographer, That God had Three Names, Light, Counsel, and Life, and that all
things were made by one Deity under these Three several Names. Where Cedrenus,
the Preserver of that excellent Fragment of Antiquity, concludes in this
manner; (...) These things Timotheus the Chronographer wrote, affirming Orpheus
so long ago, to have declared, That All things were made by a Coessential or
Consubstantial Trinity. Which though otherwise it might be looked upon
suspiciously, because that Timotheus was a Christian (especially in regard of
that word (...)) yet by comparing it with what we have before alleged, out of
Pagan Writers, it appears, that so far as concerns an Orphick Trinity, it was
not altogether vainly Written, or without Ground by him.

But we have not yet done with Orpheus and the Orphick Theology, before we have
made one further Reflection upon it, so as to take notice of that strong and
rank Haut-goust, which was in it, of making God to be All. As for example, if
we may repeat the forecited Passages, and put in the Name of God, instead of
(...) or Jupiter; (...), This Universe, and all things belonging to it, were
made within God. (...), All things were contained together in the Womb of God:
(...), God is the Head and Middle of all things: (...), etc. God is the Basis
of the Earth and Heaven; God is the Depth of the Sea; God is the Breath of all
(or the Air that we breath;) God is the Force of the Untameable Fire; God is
Sun, Moon and Stars. (...), There is One Kingly (or Divine) Body; and (...),
For All these things lie in the Great Body of God. And thus was the Orphick
Theology before represented also by Timotheus the Chronographer, (...), All
things were made by God, and Himself is All Things.

But further to prove that the ancient Greekish Pagans, were indeed of such a
Religious Humor as this, to resolve All Things into God, and to make God All,
we shall here cite a Remarkable Testimony of Plutarch's, out of his Defect of
Oracles; (...), P. 436.
(...)^ (...)^ Whereas there are Two Causes of all Generation (the Divine and
the Natural) the most ancient Theologers and Poets, attended only to the more
excellent of these Two (the Divine Cause) resolving all things into God, and
pronouncing this of them universally, That God was both the Beginning, and
Middle, and that all things were out of God. Insomuch that these had no regard
at all to the other Natural and Necessary Causes of things. But on the contrary
their Juniours, who were called Physici (or Naturalists) straying from this
most excellent and Divine Principle, placed all in Bodies, their Passions,
Collisions, Mutations and Commixtures together. Where by the most ancient
Theologers and Poets, Plutarch plainly meant Orpheus and his Followers, it
being an Orphick Verse, that is here cited by him, whereby he gives also an
acknowledgment of their Antiquity. But by their Juniors, who are called
Physici, he could understand no other, than those First Ionick Philosophers,
Anaximander, Anaximenes, Hippo, and the rest, whom those Degenerate Italicks
afterward followed, Atomizing Atheistically, Leucippus, Democritus, and
Epicurus. So that here we have another Confirmation also, of what was before
asserted by us, that the Ionick Philosophers after Thales, and before
Anaxagoras, were generally Atheistical. And indeed from them the word (...) or
Naturalists, came to be often used as Synonymous with (...) or Atheists. Now
these Two are here condemned by Plutarch, for Two Contrary Extremes; the One
who resolved all into Natural and Necessary Causes, that is, into Matter,
Motion, and Qualities of Bodies, leaving out the Divine Cause, as guilty of
Atheism; the other, who altogether neglecting the Natural and Necessary Causes
of things, resolved all into the Divine Cause, as it were swallowing up all
into God, as guilty of a kind of Fanaticism. And thus we see plainly, that this
was one Grand Arcanum of the Orphick Cabala, and the ancient Greekish Theology,
That God is All things.

Some Fanatics of Latter Times, have made God to be All, in a Gross Sense, so
as to take away all Real Distinction betwixt God and the Creature, and indeed
to allow no other Being besides God; they supposing the Substance of every
thing, and even of all Inanimate Bodies, to be the very Substance of God
himself, and all the variety of things that is in the World, to be nothing but
God under several Forms, Appearances and Disguizes. The Stoics anciently made
God to be All, and All to be God, in somewhat a different way; they conceiving
God properly to be the Active Principle of the whole Corporeal Universe, which
yet (because they admitted of no Incorporeal Substance) they supposed, together
with the Passive or the Matter, to make up but one and the same complete
Substance. And others who acknowledged God to be an Incorporeal Substance
distinct from the Matter, have notwithstanding made All to be God also, in a
certain sense; they supposing God to be nothing but a Soul of the World, which
together with the Matter, made up all into One entire Divine Animal. Now the
Orphick Theologers cannot be charged with making God all, in that First and
Grosly-Fanatick Sense; as if they took away all Real Distinction betwixt God
and the Creature, they so asserting God to be all, as that notwithstanding,
they allowed other things to have Distinct Beings of their own. Thus much
appearing from that Riddle, which in the Orphick Verses was proposed by the
Maker of the World, to Night. Proclus in Tim.
(...); How can All things be One, and yet Every thing have a distinct Being of
its own? Where (...), All things One. or One all things, seems to be the
Supreme Deity, or Divine Intellect, as Proclus also interprets it, (...) (...)^
Jupiter who contains the Universe, and All things within himself, Vnitively
and Intellectually, according to these Orphick Oracles, gives a Particular
Subsistence of their own also, to all the Mundane Gods, and other parts of the
Universe. And this is (...), in that forecited Orphick Verse, Every thing
apart by it self, the whole Produced or Created Universe, with all its Variety
of things in it; which yet are Orphically said to be God also, in a certain
other sense, that shall be declared afterward. Nor can the Orphick Theologers
be charged with making God All, in the Second Stoical Sense, as if they denied
all Incorporeal Substance, they plainly asserting as Damascius and others
particularly note, (...), an Incorporeal Deity. But as for the Third way it is
very true, that the Orphick Theologers, did frequently call the World, The Body
of God, and its Several Parts, His Members, making the Whole Universe to be One
Divine Animal; Notwithstanding which they supposed not, this Animated World to
be the First and Highest God, but either (...), as the Hermaick or
Trismegistick Writers call it, The Second God; or else as Numenius and others
of the Platonists speak, (...), The Third God: the Soul thereof being as well
in the Orphick, as it was in the Pythagorick and Platonic Trinity, but the
Third Hypostasis; they supposing Two other Divine Hypostases Superior
thereunto, which were perfectly Secret from Matter. Wherefore, as to the
Supreme Deity, these Orphick Theologers, made Him to be All things, chiefly
upon the Two following Accounts. First because All things coming from God, they
inferred, that therefore they were all contained in Him, and consequently were
in a certain sense Himself; thus much being declared in those Orphick Verses
cited by Proclus and others, (...)^
(...).
Which Apuleius thus renders, Namque Sinu Occultans, dulces in luminis oras
Cuncta tulit, sacro versans sub pectore curas.
The Sense whereof is plainly this; That God at first Hiding or Occultly
containing all things within himself, did from thence display them, and bring
them forth into light, or distinct Beings of their own, and so make the World.
The Second is, Because the World, produced by God, and really existing without
him, is not therefore quite cut off from him, nor subsists alone by it self as
a Dead Thing, but is still Livingly united to him, essentially Dependent on
him, always Supported and Upheld, Quickened and Enlivened, Acted and Pervaded by
him; according to that Orphick Passage, (...) -- God passes through and
intimately pervades All things.

Now it is very true, that some Christian Theologers also have made God to be
All, according to these Latter senses; as when they affirm the whole World to
be nothing else but Deum Explicatum, God Expanded or Unfolded, and when they
call the Creatures, as St. Jerome and others often do, Radios Deitatis, the Rays
of the Deity. Nay the Scripture it self may seem, to give some countenance also
hereunto, when it tells us, That Of Him, and Through Him, and To Him, are All
things, which in the Orphick Theology was thus expressed, God is the Beginning,
and Middle, Col.1.16.
and End of All things; That (...), All things were made in him, as in the
Orphick Verses, -- (...); Col. 1.17.
That (...), All things consist in him: That, In Him we Live and Move, and have
our Being; That God does (...), 1 Timothy 6.13.
Quicken all things, and that he ought to be made, (...), 1 Cor. 15.28.
All in All; which supposes him in some sense to be so. Notwithstanding which,
this is a very Ticklish Point, and easily liable to Mistake and Abuse: and, as
we conceive, it was the mistake and abuse of this One Thing, which was the
Chief Ground and Original of the both Seeming and Real Polytheism, not only of
the Greekish and European, but also of the Egyptian and other Pagans; as will
be more particularly declared afterward: They concluding that because God was
All things, and consequently All things God, that therefore God ought to be
Worshipped in All things, that is, in all the several Parts of the World, and
Things of Nature; but especially in those Animated Intellectual Beings, which
are Superior to Men. Consentaneously whereunto, they did both (...),
Theologize or Deifie all things, looking upon every thing as having (...);
something Supernatural, or a kind of Divinity in it; and also bestow Several
Names upon God, according to all the several Parts of the World, and Things of
Nature, calling him in the Starry Heaven and Ether, Jupiter; in the Air, Juno;
in the Winds, Aeolus; in the Sea, Neptune; in the Earth and Subterraneous Parts
Pluto; in Learning, Knowledge and Invention, Minerva and the Muses; in War,
Mars; in Pleasure, Venus; in Corn, Ceres; in Wine, Bacchus, and the like.

However it is unquestionably Evident from hence, that Orpheus with his
Followers, that is, the Generality of the Greekish Pagans, acknowledged One
Universal and All-comprehending Deity, One that was All; and consequently could
not admit of Many Self-existent and Independent Deities.

XVIII. Having treated largely concerning the Two most Eminent Polytheists
amongst the ancient Pagans, Zoroaster and Orpheus. and clearly proved that they
asserted One Supreme Deity; we shall in the next place observe, that the
Egyptians themselves also, notwithstanding their Multifarious Polytheism and
Idolatry, had an acknowledgment, amongst them, of One Supreme, and Universal
Numen.

There has been some Controversy amongst Learned Men, Whether Polytheism and
Idolatry had their first rise from the Egyptians or the Chaldeans, because the
Pagan Writers for the most part give the Precedence here to the Egyptians: Dea
Syria p. 1059.
Lucian himself, who was by Birth a Syrian, and a diligent enquirer into the
Antiquities of his own Country, affirming that the Syrians and Assyrians
received their Religion and Gods first from the Egyptians: and before Lucian,
Herodotus the Father of History, reporting likewise that the Egyptians were the
First, that erected Temples and Statues to the Gods. But whether the Egyptians
or Chaldeans were the First Polytheists and Idolaters, there is is no question
to be made, but that the Greeks, and Europeans generally derived their
Polytheism and Idolatry from the Egyptians. Herodotus affirms in oneplace, that
the Greeks received their Twelve Gods from thence, and in another, that (...),
Almost all the Names of the Gods, came first out of Egypt into Greece. In what
sense this might be true of (...) it self, though the word be Originally
Greekish, shall be declared afterward: But it is probable that Herodotus had
here a further meaning, that the very Names of many of the Greekish Gods, were
originally Egyptian. In order to the confirmation of which, we shall here
propound a Conjecture concerning One of them, viz. (...), called otherwise by
the Greeks Pallas, and by the Latins Minerva. For first, the Greek Etymologies
of this word, seem to be all of them either Trifling and Frivolous, or Violent
and Forced. Plato in his Cratylus having observed, that according to the
ancient Allegorical Interpreters of Homer, (...), was nothing else but (...) or
(...), Mind or Understanding Personated and Deified, conceived that the first
imposers of that Name, intending to signify thereby Divine Wisdom called it
(...), as (...), The Understanding of God, or the Knowledge of Divine things;
as if the Word had been at first (...), and thence afterward transformed into
(...). But being not fully satisfied himself with this Etymology, he afterward
attempts another, deriving the Word from (...), Knowledge concerning Manners or
Practical Knowledge; as if it had been at first (...), and from thence changed
into (...). Others of the Greeks have deduced this Word, (...), because it is
the Property of Wisdom, to collect all into One, supposing that it was at first
(...). Others would fetch it from (...) and Alpha Privative, because Minerva or
Wisdom, though she be a Goddess, yet has nothing of Feminine Imperfection in
her. Others again would etymologize it, (...), because Virtue or Wisdom, is of
such a Noble and Generous temper, as that it scorns to subject it self to any
base and unworthy servitude. Lastly, others would derive it, (...), affirming
it to have been at first (...). From all which uncertainty of the Greeks
concerning the Etymon of this Word, (...), and from the Frivolousness or
Forcedness of these Conjectures, we may rather conclude, that it was not
originally Greekish but Exotical, and probably, according to Herodotus,
Egyptian. Wherefore let us try whether or no, we can find any Egyptian Word
from whence this (...) might be deri^ed. Plato in his Timaeus, making mention
of Sais a City in Egypt, where Solon sometime sojourned, tells us, (...), That
the President or Tutelar God of that City was called in the Egyptian Language
Neith, but in the Greek, as the same Egyptians affirm, (...). Now why might not
this very Egyptian word Neith, by an easy inversion have been at first turned
into Thien or (...), (men commonly pronouncing Exotic words ill-favouredly)
and then by additional Alpha's at the beginning and end, transformed into
(...)? This seems much more probable, than either Plato's (...), or (...), or
any other of those Greek Etymologies beforementioned. And as the Greeks thus
derived the Names of many of their Gods from the Egyptians, so do the Latins
seem to have done the like, from this one Instance of the word Neptune; which
though Varro would deduce a nubendo, as if it had been Nuptunus, because the
Sea covers and hides the Land, and Scaliger with others, (...), from Washing,
this being the chief use of Water, yet as the learned Bochart has observed, it
may with greater probability be derived from the Egyptian word Nephthus,
Plutarch telling us, (...), That the Egyptians called the Maritime parts of
Land, or such as border upon the Sea, Nephthus. Which Conjecture may be further
confirmed from what the same Plutarch elsewhere write, that as Isis was the
Wife of Osiris, so the Wife of Typhon was called Nephthus. From whence one
might collect, that as Isis was taken sometimes for the Earth; or the Goddess
presiding over it, so Nephthus was the Goddess of the Sea. To which may be
further added out of the same Writer, that Nephthus was sometimes called by the
Egyptians (...) or Venus, probably because Venus is said to have risen out of
the Sea. But whatever may be thought of these Etymological conjectures, certain
it is, that no Nation in the world was ever accounted by the Pagans, more
Devout, Religious and Superstitious, than the Egyptians, and consequently none
was more Polytheistical and Idolatrous. Isocrates in his Praise of Busiris,
gives them a high Encomium for their Sanctity; and Herodotus affirms of them,
that they were (...), Exceedingly more Religious and more Devout Worshippers of
the Deity, than all other Mortals. Wherefore they were highly celebrated by
Apollo's Oracle (recorded by Porphyrius) and preferred before all other Nations
for teaching rightly, Eusebius. Pr. Ev. l. 9. c. 10.
(...), that hard and difficult way that leads to God and Happiness* But in
the Scripture, Egypt is famous for her Idols and for her Spiritual Whoredoms
and Fornications; to denote the uncleanness whereof, she is sometimes joined
with Sodom. For the Egyptians, besides all those other Gods that were
worshipped by the Greeks and other Barbarians; besides the Stars, Demons and
Heroes; and those Artificial Gods, which they boasted so much of their power of
making, viz. Animated Statues; had this peculiar Intoxication of their own,
which rendered them infamous and ridiculous even amongst all the other Pagans,
that they worshipped Brute Animals also, in one sense or other, J^v. Sat. 1^.
Quis nescit, Volusi Bithynice, qualia demens
Aegyptus portenta colat? Crocodilon adorat
Pars haec, illa pavet saturam serpentibus Ibin.
Concerning which Origin against Celsus thus writes; Lib. 3. p. 121.
(...)^ (...). To him that comes to be a Spectator of the Egyptian Worship,
there first offer themselves to his view, most splendid and stately Temples,
sumptuously adorned, together with solemn Groves, and many pompous Rites and
mystical Ceremonies; but as soon as he enters in, he perceives that it was
either a Cat or an Ape, a Crocodile or a Goat, or a Dog, that was the Object of
this Religious Worship.

But notwithstanding this multifarious Polytheism and Idolatry of these
Egyptians, that they did nevertheless acknowledge, One Supreme and Universal
Numen, may first be probably collected, from that great Fame which they had
anciently over the whole World for their Wisdom. The Egyptians are called by
the Elei in Herodotus, (...), The wisest of Men, and it is a commendation that
is given to one in the same Writer, That he excelled the Egyptians, in wisdom,
who excelled all other Mortals. Thus is it set down in the Scripture, for Moses
his Encomium, that he was learned in all the Wisdom of the Egyptians; and the
Transcendency of Solomon's Wisdom is likewise thus expressed, by the Writer of
the Book of Kings, that it excelled the Wisdom of all the Children of the
East-country, and all the Wisdom of Egypt. Where by the Children of the East,
are chiefly meant the Persian Magi, and the Chaldeans; and there seems to be a
Climax here, that Solomon's Wisdom did not only excel the Wisdom of the Magi
and of the Chaldeans, but also that of the Egyptians themselves. From whence it
appears, that in Solomon's time Egypt was the chief School of Literature in the
whole World, and that the Greeks were then but little or not at all taken
notice of, nor had any considerable fame for Learning. For which cause, we can
by no means give credit to that of Philo in the Life of Moses, that besides the
Egyptian Priests, Learned men were sent for by Pharaoh's Daughter, out of
Greece to instruct Moses. Whereas it is manifest from the Greekish Monuments
themselves, that for many Ages after Solomon's time, the most famous of the
Greeks, traveled into Egypt to receive Culture and Literature, as Lycurgus,
Solon, Thales and many others, amongst whom were Pythagoras and Plato.
Concerning the former of which Isocrates writes, that coming into Egypt, and
being there instructed by the Priests, he was the first that brought Philosophy
into Greece: and the latter of them is perstringed by Xenophon, because (...),
not contented with that simple Philosophy of Socrates (which was little else
besides Morality) he was in love with Egypt, and that monstrous Wisdom of
Pythagoras. Now as it is not probable that the Egyptians, who were so famous
for Wisdom and Learning, should be ignorant of One Supreme Deity, so is it no
small Argument to the contrary, that they were had in so great esteem by those
Two Divine Philosophers, Pythagoras and Plato. We grant indeed, that after the
Greeks began to flourish in all manner of Literature, the Fame of the Egyptians
was not only much eclipsed, (so that we hear no more of Greeks traveling into
Egypt upon the former account) but also that their ardour toward the liberal
Sciences, did by degrees languish and abate; so that Strabo in his time could
find little more in Egypt, besides the empty Houses and Palaces in which
Priests formerly famous for Astronomy and Philosophy had dwelt. Nevertheless
their Arcane Theology remained more or less amongst them unextinct to the last,
as appears from what Origin, Porphyrius and Jamblichus have written concerning
them.

The Learning of the Egyptians was either Historical, or Philosophical, or
Theological. First the Egyptians were famous for their Historick Learning and
Knowledge of Antiquity, they being confessed in Plato to have had so much
ancienter Records of Time than the Greeks, that the Greeks were but Children or
Infants compared with them. They pretended to a continued and uninterrupted
series of History, from the Beginning of the World downward, and therefore seem
to have had the clearest and strongest Persuasions of the Cosmogonia. Indeed it
cannot be denied, but that this Tradition of the World's Beginning, was at
first in a manner Universal among all Nations. For concerning the Greeks and
Persians we have already manifested the same, and as Sancuniathon testifies
the like concerning the Phenicians, so does Strabo likewise of the Indian
Brachmans, L. 15.715.
affirming that they did agree with the Greeks in many things and Particularly
in this, (...), That the World was both Made, and should be Destroyed. Eusebius.
Chron. p. 6.
And though Diodorus affirm the contrary of the Chaldeans, yet we ought in
reason to assent rather to Berosus, in respect of his greater Antiquity, who
represents the sense of the Ancient Chaldeans after this manner, (...) -- (...)
-- (...)^ That there was a time when all was Darkness and Water, but Bell ( who
is interpreted Jupiter) cutting the Darkness in the middle, separated the Earth
and Heaven from one another and so framed the World; this Bell also producing
the Stars, the Sun and the Moon and the five Planets. From which Testimony of
Berosus, according to the Version of Alexander Polyhistor, by the way it
appears also, that the Ancient Chaldeans acknowledged One Supreme Deity, the
Maker of the whole World, as they are also celebrated for this in that Oracle
of Apollo, which is cited out of Porphyry by Eusebius, Eu. P. l. 9. c. 1^0.
(...),
(...).
Where the Chaldeans are joined with the Hebrews, as worshipping likewise in a
holy manner, One Self-existent Deity. Wherefore if Diodorus were not altogether
mistaken, it must be concluded, that in the latter times, the Chaldeans (then
perhaps receiving the Doctrine of Aristotle) did desert and abandon the
Tradition of their Ancestors concerning the Cosmogonia. But the Egyptians,
however they attributed more Antiquity to the World than they ought, yet seem
to have had a constant Persuasion of the Beginning of it, and the Firmest of
all other Nations: they (as Kircher tells us) therefore picturing Horus or the
World, as a Young man Beardless, not only to signify its constant youthful and
flourishing Vigor, but also the Youngness and Newness of its Duration. Neither
ought it to be suspected, that though the Egyptians held the World to have had
a Beginning, yet they conceived it to be made by Chance without a God, as
Anaximander, Democritus and Epicurus afterward did; the contrary thereunto
being so Confessed a Thing, that Simplicius a zealous Contender for the Worlds
Eternity, affirms the Mosaic History of its Creation by God, to have been
nothing else but (...), Egyptian Fables. The Place is so considerable, that I
shall here set it down in the Authors own Language, (...). Simpl. in Arist.
Phys. l. 8. fol. 268. col. 1.
If Grammaticus here mean the Lawgiver of the Jews, writing thus, [In the
beginning God made Heaven and Earth, and the Earth was invisible and unadorned,
and Darkness was upon the Deep, and the Spirit of God moved upon the Water:]
and then afterward when he had made Light, and separated the Light from the
Darkness, adding [And God called the Light Day, and the Darkness Night, and the
Evening and the Morning were the First Day] I say, if Grammaticus think this to
have been the First Generation and Beginning of Time; I would have him to know,
that all this is but a Fabulous Tradition, and wholly drawn from Egyptian
Fables.

As for the Philosophy of the Egyptians, That besides their Physiology, and the
Pure and Mixed Mathematics (Arithmetic, Geometry and Astronomy) they had
another higher kind of Philosophy also, concerning Incorporeal Substances,
appears from hence, because they were the first Asserters of the Immortality of
Souls, their Preexistence and Transmigration, from whence their Incorporeity is
necessarily inferred. Thus Herodotus; (...), Euterp. 123.
etc. The Egyptians were the first Asserters of the Souls Immortality, and of
its Transmigration after the Death and Corruption of this Body, into the Bodies
of other Animals successively, viz. until it have run round through the whole
Circuit of Terrestrial, Marine and Volatile Animals, after which (they say) it
is to return again into a Humane Body; they supposing this Revolution or
Apocatastasis of Souls, to be made in no less space than that of Three Thousand
years. But whether Herodotus were rightly Catechized and instructed in the
Egyptian Doctrine as to this particular or no, may very well be questioned;
because the Pythagoreans whom he there tacitly reprehends for arrogating the
first Invention of this to themselves, when they had borrowed it from the
Egyptians, did represent it otherwise; namely, That the Descent of Humane Souls
into these Earthy Bodies, was first in way of Punishment, and that their
sinking lower afterward into the Bodies of Brutes, was only to some, a further
Punishment for their further Degeneracy; but the Virtuous and Pious Souls
should after this Life enjoy a state of Happiness, in Celestial or Spiritual
Bodies. And the Egyptian Doctrine is represented after the same manner by
Porphyrius in Stobaeus, as also in the Hermetick or Tristmegistick Writings.
Moreover Chalcidius reports, that Hermes Trismegist, when he was about to die,
made an Oration to this purpose, That he had here lived in this Earthly Body,
but an Exile and Stranger, and was now returning home to his own Country, so
that his Death ought not to be lamented, this Life being rather to be accounted
Death. Which Persuasion the Indian Brachmans also were embued withal, whether
they received it from the Egyptians (as they did some other things) or no;
(...), That this Life here is but the Life of Embryo's, and that Death [to good
men] is a Generation or Birth into true life. And this may the better be
believed to have been the Egyptian Doctrine, Strabo L. 15. p. 715.
because Diodorus himself, has some Passages sounding that way; as that the
Egyptians lamented not the Death of Good men, but applauded their Happiness,
(...), as being to live ever in the other World with the pious. Domicilia
Viventium, Diversoria appellant, Diod.
However it being certain from this Egyptian Doctrine of Preexistence and
Transmigration, that the Egyptians did assert the Souls Incorporeity, it cannot
reasonably be doubted, but that they acknowledged also, an Incorporeal Deity.
The Objection against which, from what Porphyrius writes concerning Chaeremon,
will be answered afterward.

We come in the last place to the Theology of the Egyptians. Now it is certain,
that the Egyptians besides their Vulgar and Fabulous Theology (which is for the
most part that which Diodorus S. describes) had another (...), Arcane and
Recondite Theology, that was concealed from the Vulgar and communicated only to
the Kings, and such Priestsand others as were thought capable thereof; These
Two Theologies of theirs differing, as Aristotle's Exotericks and Acroamaticks.
Thus much is plainly declared by Origin, whose very name was Egyptian, it being
interpreted Horo-genitus, (which Horus was an Egyptian God) upon occasion of
Celsus his boasting, that he thoroughly understood all that belonged to
Christianity; Celsus (says he) seems here to me, L. 1. p. 11.
to do just as if a man traveling into Egypt, where the Wise men of the
Egyptians, according to their Country-Learning Philosophize much, about those
things that are accounted by them Divine, whilst the Idiots in the mean time,
hearing only certain Fables which they know not the meaning of, are very much
pleased therewith: Celsus, I say, does as if such a Sojourner in Egypt, who had
conversed only with those Idiots, and not been at all instructed by any of the
Priests, in their Arcane and Recondite Mysteries, should boast that he knew all
that belonged to the Egyptian Theology. Where the same Origin also adds, that
this was not a thing proper neither to the Egyptians only, to have such an
Arcane and True Theology, distinct from their Vulgar and Fabulous one, but
common with them to the Persians, Syrians, and other Barbarian Pagans; (...),
etc. What we have now affirmed (says he) concerning the difference betwixt the
Wise men and the Idiots amongst the Egyptians, the same may be said also of the
Persians, amongst whom the Religious Rites are performed Rationally by those
that are ingenious, whilst the superficial Vulgar look no further in the
observation of them, than the external Symbol or Ceremony. And the same is true
likewise concerning the Syrians and Indians, and all those other Nations, who
have besides their Religious Fables, a Learning and Doctrine. Neither can it be
dissembled, that Origin in this place plainly intimates the same also
concerning Christianity it self; namely that besides the Outside and exterior
Cortex of it (in which notwithstanding there is nothing Fabulous) communicated
to all, there was a more Arcane and Recondite Doctrine belonging thereunto,
which all were not alike capable of; he elsewhere observing this to be that
Wisdom that St. Paul spoke amongst the Perfect. From whence he concludes that
Celsus vainly boasted, (...), For I know all things belonging to Christianity,
when he was acquainted only with the exterior Surface of it. But concerning
the Egyptians this was a thing most notorious and observed by sundry other
Writers, as for Example Clemens of Alexandria, a man also well acquainted with
the affairs of Egypt; (...)^ Strom. l. 5. p. 508.
The Egyptians do not reveal their Religious Mysteries promiscuously to all,
nor communicate the knowledge of Divine things to the Profane, but only to
those who are to succeed in the Kingdom, and to such of the Priests as are
judged most fitly qualified for the same, upon account both of their Birth and
Education. With which agrees also the Testimony of Plutarch, he adding a
further Confirmation thereof from the Egyptian Sphinges, (...)^ De Is. and Os.
354.
When a among the Egyptians there is any King chosen out of the Military
Order, he is forthwith brought to the Priests, and by them instructed in that
Arcane Theology, which conceals Mysterious Truths under obscure Fables and
Allegories. Wherefore they place Sphinges before their Temples, to signify
that their Theology contained a certain Arcane and Enigmatical Wisdom in it.
And this meaning of the Sphinges in the Egyptian Temples, is confirmed likewise
by Clemens Alexandrinus, (...)^ Therefore do the Egyptians place Sphinges
before their Temples, to declare thereby, that the Doctrine concerning God is
Enigmatical and Obscure. Notwithstanding which, we acknowledge that the same
Clemens gives another interpretation also of these Sphinges, or Conjecture
concerning them, which may not be unworthy to be here read, (...)^ But perhaps
the meaning of those Egyptian Sphinges might be also to signify, that the
Deity ought both to be Loved and Feared; to be Loved as benign and propitious
to the Holy, but to be Feared as inexorably just to the Impious, the Sphinx
being made up of the Image both of a Man and a Lion. Moreover besides these
Sphinges, the Egyptians had also Harpocrates and Sigalions in their Temples,
which are thus described by the Poet, Quique premunt vocem, digitoque silentia
suadent. They being the Statues of Young men pressing their Lips with their
Finger. De Is. and Osir.
The meaning of which Harpocrates is thus expressed by Plutarch, (...)^ The
Harpocrates of the Egyptians is not to be taken for an Imperfect and Infant
God, but for the President of men's Speech concerning the Gods, that is but
imperfect, balbutient and inarticulate, and the Regulator or Corrector of the
same; his Finger upon his Mouth being a Symbol of Silence and Taciturnity. It
is very true that some Christians have made another Interpretation of this
Egyptian Harpocrates, as if the meaning of it had been this; That the Gods of
the Egyptians had been all of them really nothing else but Mortal Men, but that
this was a Secret that was to be concealed from the Vulgar. Which Conceit,
however it be witty, yet is it devoid of Truth; and doubtless the meaning of
those Egyptian Harpocrates was no other than this, That either the Supreme and
Incomprehensible Deity was to be adored with Silence, or not spoken of without
much caution and circumspection; or else that the Arcane Mysteries of Theology
were not to be promiscuously communicated, but concealed from the profane
Vulgar. Which same thing seems to have been also signified, by that yearly
Feast kept by the Egyptians in honor of Thoth or Hermes, when the Priests
eating Honey and Figs, pronounced those words, (...), Truth is sweet. As also
by that Amulet which Isis was fabled to have worn about her, the interpretation
whereof, was (...), True speech.

This (...), this Arcane and Recondite Theology of the Egyptians, was concealed
from the Vulgar Two manner of ways, by Fables or Allegories, and by Symbols or
Hieroglyphics. Eusebius informs us, that Porphyrius wrote a Book (...),
Concerning the Allegorical Theology both of the Greeks and Egyptians. And here
by the way we may observe, that this business of Allegorizing in matters of
Religion, had not its first and only Rise amongst the Christians, but was a
thing very much in use among the Pagan Theologers also: and therefore Celsus in
Origin, commends some of the Christians for this, that they could Allegorize
ingeniously and handsomely. It is well known how both Plutarch and Synesius
Allegorized those Egyptian Fables of Isis and Osiris, the one to a
Philosophical, the other to a Political sense. And the Egyptian Hieroglyphics,
which were Figures not answering to Sounds or Words, but immediately
representing the Objects and Conceptions of the Mind, were chiefly made use of
by them to this purpose, to express the Mysteries of their Religion and
Theology, so as that they might be concealed from the profane Vulgar. For
which cause the Hieroglyphick Learning of the Egyptians, is commonly taken for
one and the same thing with their Arcane Theology or Metaphysics. And this the
Author of the Questions and Answers ad Orthodoxos, Q. 25.
tells us was anciently had in much greater esteem amongst the Egyptians, than
all their other Learning, and that therefore Moses was as well instructed in
this Hieroglyphick Learning and Metaphysical Theology of theirs, as in their
Mathematics. And for our parts we doubt not but that the Mensa Isiaca lately
published, containing so many strange and uncouth Hieroglyphics in it, was
something of this (...), this Arcane Theology of the Egyptians, and not mere
History, as some imagine: Though the late confident Oedipus, seem to arrogate
too much to himself, in pretending to such a certain and exact Interpretation
of it. Now as it is reasonable to think, that in all those Pagan Nations where
there was another Theology besides the Vulgar, the principal part thereof, was
the Doctrine of One Supreme and Universal Deity the Maker of the whole World,
so can it not well be conceived, what this (...) and (...) and (...), this
Arcane and Mysterious and Enigmatick Theology of the Egyptians, so much talked
of, should be other than a kind of Metaphysics concerning God, as One Perfect
Incorporeal Being, the Original of all things.

We know nothing of any Moment, that can be objected against this, save only
that which Porphyrius, in his Epistle to Anebo an Egyptian Priest, writes
concerning Chaeremon, (...), Pr. Ev. Lib. 3. c. 4.
etc. Chaeremon and others acknowledge nothing before this Visible and
Corporeal World, alleging for the countenance of their Opinion, such of the
Egyptians as talk of no other Gods, but the Planets and those Stars that fill
up the Zodiac, or rise together with them, their Decans, and Horoscopes, and
Robust Princes, as they call them; whose names are also inserted into their
Almanacks or Ephemerides, together with the times of their Risings and
Settings, and the Prognostics or significations of future Events from them.
For he observed that those Egyptians who made the Sun the Demiurgus or
Architect of the World, interpreted the Stories of Isis and Osiris, and all
those other Religious Fables, into nothing but Stars and Planets and the River
Nile, (...), and referred all things universally into Natural or Inanimate,
nothing into Incorporeal and Living Substances. Which Passage of Porphyrius
concerning Chaeremon, we confess Eusebius lays great stress upon, endeavoring
to make advantage of it, first against the Egyptians, and then against the
Greeks and other Pagans, as deriving their Religion and Theology from them; It
is manifest from hence, says he, that the very Arcane Theology of the
Egyptians, Deified nothing but Stars and Planets, and acknowledged no
Incorporeal Principle or Demiurgick Reason as the Cause of this Universe, but
only the Visible Sun: And then he concludes in this manner, See now what is
become of this Arcane Theology of the Egyptians, that deifies nothing but
senseless Matter or Dead Inanimate Bodies. But it is well known that Eusebius
took all advantages possible, to represent the Pagans to the worst, and render
their Theology ridiculous and absurd; nevertheless what he here urges against
the Egyptians, is the less valuable, because himself plainly contradicts it
elsewhere, declaring that the Egyptians acknowledged a Demiurgick Reason and
Intellectual Architect of the World, which consequently was the Maker of the
Sun; and confessing the same of the other Pagans also. Now to affirm that the
Egyptians acknowledged no other Deity than Inanimate Matter and the Senseless
Corporeal World, is not only to deny that they had any (...), any Arcane
Theology at all, (which yet has been sufficiently proved) but also to render
them absolute Atheists. For if this be not Atheism to acknowledge no other
Deity besides Dead and Senseless Matter, then the word has no signification.
Chaeremon indeed seems to impute this Opinion (not to all the Egyptians) but to
some of them; and it is very possible that there might be some Atheists amongst
the Egyptians also, as well as amongst the Greeks and their Philosophers. And
doubtless this Chaeremon himself was a kind of Astrological Atheist; for which
cause we conclude, that it was not Chaeremon the Stoic, from whom
notwithstanding Porphyrius in his Book of Abstinence cites certain other
things concerning the Egyptians, but either that Chaeremon whom Strabo made use
of in Egypt, or else some other of that name. But that there ever was or can be
any such Religious Atheists, as Eusebius with some others imagine, who though
acknowledging no Deity, besides Dead and Senseless Matter, notwithstanding
devoutly court and worship the same, constantly invoking it and imploring its
assistance, as expecting great Benefit to themselves thereby; This we confess
is such a thing, as that we have not Faith enough to believe, it being a
sottishness and contradictious Nonsense, that is not incident to humane
Nature. Neither can we doubt, but that all the devout Pagans, acknowledged some
Living and Understanding Deities or other; nor easily believe that they ever
Worshipped any Inanimate or Senseless Bodies otherwise, than as some way
referring to the same, or as Images and Symbols of them. But as for that
Passage in Porphyrius his Epistle concerning Chaeremon, where he only propounds
doubts to Anebo the Egyptian Priest, as desiring further Information from him
concerning them, Jamblichus has given us a full answer to it, under the person
of Abammo another Egyptian Priest, which notwithstanding has not hitherto been
at all taken notice of, because Ficinus and Scutellius not understanding the
word Chaeremon to be a Proper name, ridiculously turned it in their
Translations, Optarem and Gauderem, thereby also perverting the whole sense.
The words in the Greek MS. (now in the hands of my Learned Friend Mr. Gale) run
thus, (...). But Chaeremon and those others who pretend to write of the first
Causes of the World, declare only the Last and Lowest Principles, as likewise
they who treat of the Planets, the Zodiac, the Decans, the Horoscopes and the
Robust Princes. And those things that are in the Egyptian Almanacks (or
Ephemerides) contain the least part of the Hermaical Institutions, namely the
Phases and Occultations of the Stars, the Increase and Decrease of the Moon and
the like Astrological Matters; which things have the lowest place in the
Egyptian Aetiology. Nor do the Egyptians resolve all things into (Sensles)
Nature, but they distinguish both the Life of the Soul, and the Intellectual
Life, from that of Nature, and that not only in our selves, but also in the
Universe; they determining Mind and Reason, first to have existed of
themselves, and so this whole World to have been made. Wherefore they
acknowledge before the Heaven and in the Heaven a Living Power, and place pure
Mind above the World, as the Demiurgus and Architect thereof. From which
Testimony of Jamblichus, who was but little Juniour to Porphyrius, and
Contemporary with Eusebius, and who had made it his business to inform himself
thoroughly concerning the Theology of the Egyptians, it plainly appears that
the Egyptians did not generally suppose (as Chaeremon pretended concerning some
of them) a Senseless Inanimate Nature to be the first Original of all things,
but that as well in the World as in our selves, they acknowledged Soul
superior to Nature, and Mind or Intellect superior to Soul, this being the
Demiurgus of the World. But we shall have afterward occasion more opportunely
to cite other Passages out of this Jamblichus his Egyptian Mysteries, to the
same purpose.

Wherefore there is no pretense at all to suspect, that the Egyptians were
universally Atheists and Anarchists, such as supposed no Living Understanding
Deity, but resolved all into Senseless Matter as the first and highest
Principle; But all the question is whether they were not Polyarchists, such as
asserted a Multitude of Understanding Deities Self-existent or Unmade. Now that
Monarchy was an essential part of the Arcane and True Theology of the Egyptians
A. Steuchus Eugubinus, and many other learned men, have thought to be
unquestionably evident, from the Hermetick or Trismegistick Writings, they
taking it for granted, that these are all genuine and sincere. Whereas there is
too much cause to suspect that there have been some Pious Frauds practiced upon
these Trismegistick Writings, as well as there were upon the Sibylline; and
that either whole Books of them have been counterfeited by pretended
Christians, or at least several spurious and supposititious Passages here and
there inserted into some of them. Isaac Casaubon who was the first Discoverer,
has taken notice of many such, in that first Hermetick Book entitled
Paemander, some also in the Fourth Book inscribed Crater, and some in the
Thirteenth called the Sermon in the Mount, concerning Regeneration; which may
justly render those Three whole Books, or at least the First and Last of them
to be suspected. We shall here repeat none of Casaubon's condemned Passages,
but add one more to them out of the Thirteenth Book, or Sermon in the Mount,
which, however omitted by him, seems to be more rankly Christian than any
other, (...)^ Tell me this also, Who is the Cause or Worker of Regeneration?
The Son of God, One Man, by the will of God. Wherefore though Ath. Kircherus
contend with much zeal for the sincerity of all these Trismegistick Books; yet
we must needs pronounce of the Three forementioned, at least the Paemander
properly so called, and the Sermon in the Mount, that they were either wholly
forged and counterfeited by some pretended Christians, or else had many
spurious Passages inferted into them. Wherefore it cannot be solidly proved,
from the Trismegistick Books, after this manner, as supposed to be all alike
Genuine and sincere, that the Egyptian Pagans acknowledged One Supreme and
Universal Numen. Much less can the same be evinced from that pretended
Aristotelick Book, De secretiore part Divinae Sapientiae secundum Aegyptios,
greedily swallowed down also by Kircherus, but unquestionably pseudepigraphous.

Notwithstanding which, we conceive that though all the Trismegistick Books
that now are or have been formerly extant, had been forged by some pretended
Christians, as that Book of the Arcane Egyptian Wisdom, was by some Philosopher
and imputed to Aristotle; yet would they for all that upon another account,
afford no inconsiderable Argument to prove that the Egyptian Pagans asserted
One Supreme Deity; viz. Because every Cheat and Imposture must needs have some
Basis or Foundation of Truth to stand upon; there must have been something
truly Egyptian, in such counterfeit Egyptian Writings, (and therefore this at
least of One Supreme Deity) or else they could never have obtained credit at
first, or afterward have maintained the same. The rather because these
Trismegistick Books were dispersed in those ancient times before the Egyptian
Paganism and their Succession of Priests were yet extinct; and therefore had
that which is so much insisted upon in them, been dissonant from the Egyptian
Theology, they must needs have been presently exploded as mere Lies and
Forgeries. Wherefore we say again, that if all the Hermaick or Trismegistick
Books that are now extant, and those to boot, which being mentioned in ancient
Fathers have been lost, as the (...), and the (...), and the like, had been
nothing but the Pious Frauds and Cheats of Christians, yet must there needs
have been some Truth at the bottom to give subsistence to them; This at least,
that Hermes Trismegist or the Egyptian Priests, in their Arcane and True
Theology, really acknowledged One Supreme and Universal Numen.

But it does not all follow that because some of these Hermaick or
Trismegistick Books now extant, were counterfeit or supposititious, that
therefore all of them must needs be such, and not only so, but those also that
are mentioned in the Writings of ancient Fathers which are now lost. Wherefore
the Learned Casaubon seems not to have reckoned or concluded well, when from
the detection of Forgery in Two or Three of those Trismegistick Books at most,
he pronounces of them all universally, that they were nothing but Christian
Cheats and Impostures. And probably he was lead into this mistake, by reason of
his too securely following that vulgar Error (which yet had been confuted by
Patricius) that all that was published by Ficinus under the name of Hermes
Trismegist, was but one and the same Book Poemander, consisting of several
Chapters, whereas they are all indeed so many Distinct and Independent Books,
whereof Poemander is only placed First. However there was no shadow of reason,
why the Asclepius should have fallen under the same condemnation, nor several
other Books superadded by Patricius, they being unquestionably distinct from
the Poemander, and no signs of Spuriousness or Bastardy discovered in them.
Much less ought those Trismegistick Books, cited by the Fathers and now lost,
have been condemned also Unseen. Wherefore notwithstanding all that Casaubon
has written, there may very well be some Hermetick or Trismegistick Books
Genuine, though all of them be not such; that is, according to our
after-declaration, there may be such Books, as were really Egyptian, and not
counterfeited by any Christian, though perhaps not written by Hermes Trismegist
himself, nor in the Egyptian Language. And as it cannot well be conceived how
there should have beeen any counterfeit Egyptian Books, had there been none at
all Real, so that there were some Real, and Genuine, will perhaps be rendered
probable by these following Considerations.

That there was anciently amongst the Egyptians, such a man as Thoth, Theuth or
Taut, who together with Letters, was the First Inventor of Arts and Sciences,
as Arithmetic, Geometry, Astronomy, and of the Hieroglyphick Learning,
(therefore called by the Greeks Hermes, and by the Latins Mercurius) cannot
reasonably be denied; it being a thing confirmed by general Fame in all Ages,
and by the Testimonies not only of Sanchuniathon a Phenician Historiographer,
who lived about the times of the Trojan War, and wrote a Book concerning the
Theology of the Egyptians, and Manethos Sebennyta an Egyptian Priest,
contemporary with Ptol. Philadelphus; but also of that grave Philosopher Plato,
who is said to have sojourned Thirteen years in Egypt, that in his Philebus
speaks of him as the First Inventor of Letters (who distinguished betwixt
Vowels and Consonants determining their several Numbers) there calling him
either a God or Divine Man; but in his Phaedrus attributes to him also, the
Invention of Arithmetic, Geometry and Astronomy, together with some ludicrous
Recreations, making him either a God or Demon, (...)^ I have heard (says he)
that about Naucratis in Egypt, there was one of the ancient Egyptian Gods, to
whom the Bird Ibis was sacred, as his Symbol or Hieroglyphick; the name of
which Demon was Theuth. In which place, the Philosopher subjoyns also an
Ingenious Dispute, betwixt this Theuth, and Thamus then King of Egypt,
concerning the Convenience and Inconvenience of Letters; the Former boasting of
that Invention (...), as a Remedy for Memory and great Help to Wisdom, but the
Latter contending, that it would rather beget Oblivion, by the neglect of
Memory, and therefore was not so properly (...) as (...), a Remedy for Memory,
as Reminiscence, or the Recovery of things forgotten: adding, that it would
also weaken and enervate Men's Natural Faculties, by slugging them, and rather
beget (...), than (...), a Puffy Conceit and Opinion of Knowledge, by a
Multifarious Rabble of Indigested Notions, than the Truth thereof. Moreover
since it is certain, that the Egyptians were famous for Literature before the
Greeks, they must of necessity have some One or More Founders of Learning
amongst them, as the Greeks had; and Thoth is the Only or First Person
celebrated amongst them upon this account, in remembrance of whom the First
Month of the Year was called by that Name. Which Thoth is generally supposed
to have lived in the times of the Patriarchs, or considerably before Moses;
Moses himself being said to have been instructed in that Learning, which owed
its Original to him.

Again, besides this Thoth or Theuth, who was called the First Hermes, the
Egyptians had also afterward, another eminent Advancer or Restorer of
Learning, who was called (...), The Second Hermes; They perhaps supposing the
Soul of Thoth or the First Hermes to have come into him by Transmigration; but
his proper Egyptian Name was Siphoas, as Syncellus out of Manetho informs us;
(...), Siphoas ( who is also Hermes) the Son of Vulcan. This is he, who is said
to have been the Father of Tat, and to have been Surnamed (...), Ter Maximus,
(he being so styled by Manetho, Jamblichus and others.) And he is placed by
Eusebius in the Fiftieth year after the Israelitish Exitus, though probably
somewhat too Early. The Former of these Two Hermes, was the Inventor of Arts
and Sciences, the Latter, the Restorer and Advancer of them: the First wrote in
Hieroglyphics upon Pillars, (...), (as the learned Valesius conjectures it
should be read, instead of (...).) Which Syringes what they were, Am.
Marcellinus will instruct us; The Second Interpreted and Translated those
Hieroglyphics, composing many Books in several Arts and Sciences; the Number
whereof set down by Jamblichus, must needs be Fabulous, unless it be understood
of Paragraphs, or Verses. Which Trismegistick or Hermetick Books, were said to
be carefully preserved by the Priests, in the Interior Recesses of their
Temples.

But besides the Hieroglyphics written by the First Hermes, and the Books
composed by the Second (who was called also Trismegist) it cannot be doubted,
but that there were Many other Books written by the Egyptian Priests
successively in several Ages. And Jamblichus informs us, in the beginning of
his Mysteries, That Hermes the God of Eloquence, and President or Patron of all
true Knowledge concerning the Gods, was formerly accounted Common to all the
Priests, insomuch, that (...), they dedicated the Inventions of their Wisdom to
him, entitling their own Books to Hermes Trismegist. Now though One Reason
hereof, might probably have been thought to have been this, because those Books
were supposed to have been written, according to the Tenor of the Old
Hermetick or Trismegistick Doctrine; yet Jamblichus here acquaints us with the
chief Ground of it, namely this, that though Hermes was once a Mortal Man, yet
he was afterward Deified by the Egygtians (which is testified also by Plato)
and made to be the Tutelar God, and Fautor of all Arts and Sciences, but
especially Theology; by whose Inspiration therefore, all such Books were
conceived to have been written. Nay further we may observe, that in some of the
Hermaick or Trismegistick Books, now extant, Hermes is sometimes put for the
Divine Wisdom or Vnd^rstanding it self. And now we see the true Reason, Why
there have been many Books, called Hermetical and Trismegistical; Some of which
notwithstanding, cannot possibly be conceived to have been of such great
Antiquity, nor written by Hermes Trismegist himself, viz. because it was
customary with the Egyptian Priests, to entitle their own Philosophic and
Theologick Books, to Hermes. Moreover it is very probable, that several of the
Books of the Egyptian Priests of Latter times, were not Originally written in
the Egyptian Language, but the Greek; because at least from the Ptolemaick
Kings downward, Greek was become very familiar to all the learned Egyptians,
and in a manner vulgarly spoken; as may appear from those very Words, Hermes,
Trismegist, and the like, so commonly used by them, together with the Proper
Names of Places, and because the Coptick Language to this very day, has more
of Greek than Egyptian Words in it; nay Plutarch ventures to etymologize those
Old Egyptian Names, Isis, Osiris, Horus and Typhon from the Greek, as if the
Egyptians had been anciently well acquainted with that Language.

Now that some of those ancient Hermaick Books, written by Hermes Trismegist
himself, or believed to be such by the Egyptians, and kept in the custody of
their Priests, were still in being and extant amongst them, after the times of
Christianity, seems to be unquestionable, Strom. 6. p. 633.
from the testimony of that Pious and Learned Father Clemens Alexandrinus, he
giving this particular Account of them, after the mentioning of their Opinion
concerning the Transmigration of Souls. The Egyptians follow a certain peculiar
Philosophy of their own, which may be best declared by setting down the Order
of their Religious Procession. First, therefore goes the Precentor, carrying
Two of Hermes his Books along with him, the One of which conteins the Hymns of
the Gods, the Other Directions for the Kingly Office. After him follows the
Horoscopus, who is particularly instructed in Hermes his Astrological Books,
which are Four. Then succeeds the Hierogrammateus or Sacred Scribe, with
Feathers upon his head, and a Book and Rule in his hands, to whom it belongs
to be thoroughly acquainted with the Hieroglyphics, as also with Cosmography,
Geography, the Order of the Sun and Moon and Five Planets, the Chorography of
Egypt, and Description of Nile. In the next place comes the Stolistes, who is
to be thoroughly instructed in those Ten Books, which treat concerning the
honor of the Gods, the Egyptian Worship, Sacrifices, First Fruits, Prayers,
Pomps, and Festivals. And last of all marches the Prophet, who is President of
the Temple and Sacred things, and ought to be thoroughly versed in those other
Ten Books, called Sacerdotal, concerning Laws, the Gods, and the whole
Discipline of the Priests. Wherefore amongst the Books of Hermes there are
Forty Two accounted most necessary, of which Thirty Six, containing all the
Egyptian Philosophy, were to be learned by those Particular Orders
beforementioned; but the other Six, treating of Medicinal things, by the
Pastophori. From which place we understand, that at least Forty Two Books of
the ancient Hermes Trismegist, or such reputed by the Egyptians, were still
extant in the time of Clemens Alexandrinus; about Two Hundred years after the
Christian Epoch.

Furthermore, that there were certain Books really Egyptian, and called
Hermaical or Trismegistical (whether written by the ancient Hermes Trismegist
himself, or by other Egyptian Priests of latter times according to the Tenor
of his Doctrine, and only entitled to him) which after the times of
Christianity began to be taken notice of by other Nations, the Greeks and
Latins; seems probable from hence, because such Books are not only mentioned
and acknowledged by Christian Writers and Fathers, but also by Pagans and
Philosophers. P. 374.
In Plutarch's Discourse de Iside and Osiride we read thus of them, (...)^ In
the Books called Hermes 's or Hermaical, it is reported to have been written
concerning Sacred Names; that the Power appointed to preside over the Motion of
the Sun, is called by the Egyptians Horus (as by the Greeks Apollo) and that
which presides over the Air and Wind, is called by some Osiris, by others
Sarapis, and by others Sothi, in the Egyptian Language. Now these Sacred Names
in Plutarch, seem to be, Several Names of God, and therefore whether these
Hermaick Books of his, were the same with those in Clemens Alexandrinus, such
as were supposed by the Egyptians to have been written by Hermes Trismegist
himself, or other Books written by Egyptian Priests according to the Tenor of
this Doctrine; We may by the way observe, that according to the Hermaical or
Trismegistick Doctrine, One and the same Deity, was worshipped under Several
Names and Notions, according to its Several Powers and Virtues, manifested in
the World; which is a thing afterward more to be insisted on. Moreover it has
been generally believed, that L. Apuleius Madaurensis an eminent Platonic
Philosopher, and zealous Asserter of Paganism, was the Translator of the
Asclepian Dialogue of Hermes Trismegist, out of Greek into Latin; which
therefore has been accordingly published with Apuleius his Works. And Barthius
affirms that St. Austin does somewhere expressly impute this Version to
Apuleius, but we confess we have not yet met with the place. However there
seems to be no sufficient reason, why Colvius should call this into Question,
from the Style and Latin. Again it is certain, that Jamblichus does not only
mention these Hermaick Books, under the name of (...), the Books that are
carried up and down as Hermes 's or vulgarly imputed to him; but also vindicate
them from the imputation of Imposture. Not as if there were any suspicion at
all of that which Casaubon is so confident of, that these Hermaick Books were
all forged by Christians, but because some might then possibly imagine them to
have been counterfeited by Philosophers. Wherefore it will be convenient here
to set down the whole Passage of Jamblichus concerning it, as it is in the
Greek MS. (...) (...), etc. These things being thus discussed and determined,
the Solution of that difficulty, from those Books which Porphyrius says he met
withal, (namely the Hermaicks, and those Writings of Chaeremon) will be clear
and easy. For the Books vulgarly imputed to Hermes, do really contain the
Hermaick Opinions and Doctrines in them, although they often speak the language
of Philosophers, the reason whereof is, because they were translat^d out of the
Egyptian tongue, by men not unacquainted with Philosophy. But Chaeremon and
those others, etc. Where it is First observable, that Jamblichus does not
affirm, these Hermaick Books to have been written by Hermes Trismegist himself,
he calling them only (...), the Books that were carried about as Hermes 's. But
that which he affirms of them is this, That they did really contain the
Hermaical Opinions, and derive their Original from Egypt. Again whereas some
might then possibly suspect, that these Hermaick Books had been counterfeited
by Greek Philosophers, and contained nothing but the Greek Learning in them,
because they speak so much the Philosophic Language; Jamblichus gives an
account of this also, that the reason hereof was, because they were translated
out of the Egyptian Language, by men skilled in the Greek Philosophy, who
therefore added something of their own Phrase and Notion to them. It is true
indeed, that most of these Hermaick Books which now we have, seem to have been
written originally in Greek, notwithstanding which, others of them and
particularly those that are now lost, as the (...), and the like, might as
Jamblichus here affirms, have been translated out of the Egyptian Tongue, but
by their Translators disguised with Philosophic Language and other Grecanick
things intermixed with them. Moreover from the forecited Passage of Jamblichus,
we may clearly collect, that Porphyrius in his Epistle to Anebo the Egyptian
Priest (of which Epistle there are only some small fragments left) did also
make mention of these Hermaick Writings; and whereas he found the Writings of
Chaeremon to be contradictious to them, therefore desired to be resolved by
that Egyptian Priest, whether the Doctrine of those Hermaick Books, were
genuine and truly Egyptian, or no. Now Jamblichus in his answer here affirms,
that the Doctrine of the ancient Hermes, or the Egyptian Theology, was as to
the Substance truly represented in those Books, (vulgarly imputed to Hermes,)
but not so by Chaeremon. Lastly, St. Cyril of Alexandria informs us, C. Jul. L.
1.
that there was an Edition of these Hermaick or Trismegistick Books (compiled
together) formerly made at Athens, under this Title, (...), Fifteen Hermaick
Books. Which Hermaicks, Casaubon, conceiving them to have been published before
Jamblichus his time, took them for those Salaminiaca, which he found in the
Latin Translations of Jamblichus made by Ficinus and Scutellius. Whereas indeed
he was here abused by those Translators, there being no such thing to be found
in the Greek Copy. But the word (...), (not understood by them) being turned
into Salaminiaca; Casaubon therefore conjectured them to have been those
Hermaick Books published at Athens, because Salamin was not far distant from
thence. Now it cannot be doubted, but that this Edition of Hermaick Books at
Athens, was made by some Philosopher or Pagans and not by Christians, this
appearing also from the words of St. Cyril himself, where having spoken of
Moses and the agreement of Hermes with him, he adds, (...)^ Of which Moses he
also who compiled and published the Fifteen Hermaick Books at Athens, makes
mention in his own discourse (annexed thereunto.) For thus we conceive that
place is to be understood, that the Pagan Publisher of the Hermaick Books
himself, took notice of some agreement that was betwixt Moses and Hermes. But
here it is to be noted that because Hermes and the Hermaick Books were in such
great credit not only amongst the Christians, but also the Greek and Latin
Pagans, therefore were there some counterfeit Writings obtruded also under that
specious Title; such as that Ancient Botanick Book mentioned by Galen, and
those Christian Forgeries of later times the Paemander and Sermon on the Mount.
Which being not cited by any ancient Father or Writer, were both of them
doubtless Later than Jamblichus, who discovers no suspicion of any Christian
Forgeries in this kind.

But Casaubon, who contends that all the Theologick Books imputed to Hermes
Trismegist, were counterfeited by Christians, affirms, all the Philosophy,
Doctrine and Learning of them (excepting what only is Christian in them) to be
merely Platonical and Grecanical but not at all Egyptian; thence concluding,
that these Books were forged by such Christians, as were skilled in the
Platonic or Grecanick Learning. But First, it is here considerable, that since
Pythagorism, Platonism and the Greek Learning in general, was in great part
derived from the Egyptians, it cannot be concluded, that whatsoever is
Platonical or Grecanical, therefore was not Egyptian. The only Instance that
Casaubon insists upon, is this Dogma in the Trismegistick Books, That Nothing
in the World perishes, and that Death is not the Destruction, but Change and
Translation of Things only: Which because he finds amongst some of the Greek
Philosophers, he resolves to be peculiar to them only, and not common with the
Egyptians. But since the chief design and tendency of that Dogma, was plainly
to maintain the Immortality, preexistence and Transmigration of Souls which
Doctrine was unquestionably derived from the Egyptians, there is little reason
to doubt but that this Dogma was it self Egyptian also. And Phythagoras, who
was the chief Propagator of this Doctrine amongst the Greeks, (...), That no
real Entity (in Generations and Corruptions) was Made or destroyed, according
to those Ovidian Verses before cited, Nec perit in toto quicquam, mihi credit,
mundo,
Sed variat faciemque novat. Nascique vocatur
Incipere esse Aliud, etc.
did in all probability, derive it together with its superstructure, (the
Preexistence and Transmigration of Souls,) at once from the Egyptians. But it
is observable, that the Egyptians had also a peculiar ground of their own, for
this Dogma (which we do not find insisted upon by the Greek Philosophers) and
it is thus expressed in the Eighth of Ficinus his Hermetick Books or Chapters;
(...)^ If the World be a Second God and an Immortal Animal, then is it
impossible that any part of this Immortal Animal should perish or come to
nothing; but all things in the World are Parts of this great Mundane Animal,
and chiefly Man, who is a Rational Animal. Which same Notion we find also
insisted on in the Asclepian Dialogue; Secundum Deum hunc creed, o Asclepi,
omnia gubernantem omniaque mundana illustrantem animalia. Si enim Animal,
Mundus, vivens, semper and fuit and est and erit, nihil in mundo mortale est:
viventis enim uniuscujusque Partis, quae in ipso mundo, sicut in uno eodemque
Animale semper vivente, nullus est mortalitatis locus. Where though the Latin
be a little imperfect, yet the sense is this; You are to believe the World, o
Asclepius, to be a Second God, governing all things, and illustrating all
Mundane Animals. Now if the World be a Living Animal, and Immortal; then there
is nothing Mortal in it, there being no place for mortality as to any Living
Part or Member, of that Mundane Animal, that always Lives. Notwithstanding
which we deny not, but that though Pythagoras First derived this Notion from
the Egyptians, yet he and his Followers might probably improve the same farther
(as Plato tells us, that the Greeks generally did, what they received from the
Barbarians) namely to the taking away the Qualities and Forms of Bodies, and
resolving all Corporeal Things, into Magnitude, Figure and Motion. But that
there is indeed some of the old Egyptian Learning, contained in these
Trismegistick Books now extant, shall be clearly proved afterward, when we
come to speak of that Grand Mystery of the Egyptian Theology (derived by
Orpheus from them) That God is All. To conclude, Jamblichus his judgment in
this case, ought without controversy, to be far preferred before Casaubon's,
both by reason of his great Antiquity, and his being much better skilled, not
only in the Greek, but also the Egyptian Learning; That the Books imputed to
Hermes Trismegist did (...), really contain the Hermaick Opinions, though they
spoke sometimes the Language of the Greek Philosophers.

Wherefore upon all these Considerations, we conceive it reasonable to
conclude, that though there have been some Hermaick Books counterfeited by
Christians, since Jamblichus his time, as namely the Paemander and The Sermon
in the Mount, concerning Regeneration; neither of which are found cited by any
ancient Father; yet there were other Hermaick Books which though not written by
Hermes Trismegist himself, nor all of them in the Egyptian Language, but some
of them in Greek, were truly Egyptian, and did for the substance of them,
contain the Hermaick Doctrine. Such probably were those mentioned by the
Ancient Fathers, but since lost, as the (...), which seems to have been a
discourse concerning the Cosmogonia, and the (...), and the like. And such also
may some of these Hermaick Books be, that are still extant, as to instance
particularly, the Asclepian Dialogue, entitled in the Greek (...), the Perfect
Oration, and in all probability translated into Latin by Apuleius. For it can
hardly be imagined, that he who was so devout a Pagan, so learned a
Philosopher, and so Witty a man, should be so far imposed upon, by a
counterfeit Trismegistick Book, and mere Christian Cheat, as to bestow
Translating upon it, and recommend it to the World, as that which was genuinely
Pagan. But however, whether Apuleius were the Translator of this Asclepian
Dialogue or no, it is evident that the Spirit of it is not at all Christian,
but rankly Pagan; one Instance whereof we have, in its glorying of a power that
men have of Making Gods, upon which account St. Austin thought fit to concern
himself in the confutation of it. Moreover it being extant and vulgarly known
before Jamblichus his time, it must needs be included in his (...), and
consequently receive this attestation from him, that it did contain not merely
the Greekish, but the Hermaical and Egyptian Doctrine.

Page 607. Col.
There are indeed some Objections made against this, as first from what we read
in this Dialogue, concerning the Purgation of the World partly by Water, and
partly by Fire; Tunc ille Dominus and Pater Deus, Primipotens, and Vnus
Gubernator mundi, intuens in mores factaque hominum, voluntate sua (quae est
Dei Benignitas) vitiis resistens, and corruptelae errorem revocans,
malignitatem omnem vel Alluvione diluens, vel igne consumens, ad antiquam
faciem mundum revocabit: When the World becomes thus Degenerate, then that Lord
and Father, the Supreme God, and the only Governor of the World, beholding the
manners and deeds of men, by his Will (which is his Benignity) always resisting
vice, and restoring things from their Degeneracy, will either wash away the
Malignity of the World by Water, or else consume it by Fire, and restore it to
its ancient form again. But since we find in Julius Firmicus, that there was a
Tradition amongst the Egyptians, concerning the Apocatastasis of the World,
partim per (...), partim per (...), partly by Inundation and partly by
Conflagration, this Objection can signify nothing. Wherefore there is another
Objection, that has some more plausibility, from that Prophecy which we find
in this Asclepius, concerning the overthrow of the Egyptian Paganism (ushered
in with much Lamentation) in these words, Tunc Terra ista, sanctissima seeds
Delubrorum, Sepulchrorum erit mortuorumque plenissima; Then this Land of Egypt,
formerly the most holy seat of the Religious Temples of the Gods, shall be
every where full of the Sepulchers of Dead men. The sense whereof is thus
expressed by St. Austin, Civ. D.L. 8. c. 26.
Hoc videtur dolere, quod Memoriae Martyrum nostrorum, Templis eorum
Delubrisque succederent; ut viz. qui haec legunt, animo a nobis averso atque
perverso, putent a Paganis Deos cultos fuisse in Templis, a nobis autem coli
Mortuos in Sepulchris: He seems to lament this, that the Memorials of our
Martyrs should succeed in the place of their Temples, that so they who read
this with a perverse mind, might think that by the Pagans the Gods were
worshipped in Temples, but by us (Christians) Dead men in Sepulchers.
Notwithstanding which, this very thing seems to have had its accomplishment too
soon after, as may be gathered from these Passages of Theodoret, (...)^ De Cur.
G. A. L 8.
Now the Martyrs have utterly abolished and blotted out of the minds of men,
the memory of those who were formerly called Gods. And again, (...), etc. Our
Lord has now brought his Dead (that is his Martyrs) into the room and place
(that is the Temples) of the Gods; whom he has sent away empty, and bestowed
their honor upon these his Martyrs. For now in stead of the Festivals of
Jupiter and Bacchus, are celebrated those of Peter and Paul, Thomas and
Sergius, and other holy Martyrs. Wherefore this being so shrewd and plain a
Description in the Asclepian Dialogue, of what really happened in the Christian
World, it may seem suspicious, that it was rather a History, written after the
Event, than a Prophecy before it, as it pretends to be. It very much resembling
that complaint of Eunapius Sardianus in the Life of Aedesius, when the
Christians had demolished the Temple of Serapis in Egypt, seizing upon its
Riches and Treasure, That instead of the Gods, the Monks then gave Divine
honor to certain vile and flagitious persons deceased, called by the name of
Martyrs. Now if this be granted, this Book must needs be Counterfeit and
supposititious. Nevertheless St. Austin entertained no such Suspicion,
concerning this Asclepian Passage, as if it had been a History written after
the Fact, that is, after the Sepulchers and Memorials of the Martyrs came to be
so frequented; he supposing this Book to be unquestionably, of greater
Antiquity. Wherefore he concludes it to be a Prophecy or Prediction made,
instinctu fallacis Spiritus, by the Instinct or Suggestion of some Evil Spirit;
they sadly then presaging the ruin of their own Empire. Neither was this
Asclepian Dialogue only ancienter than St. Austin, but it is cited by
Lactantius Firmianus also, under the name of (...), the Perfect Oration, as was
said before, and that as a thing then reputed of great Antiquity. Wherefore in
all probability this Asclepian Passage, was written before that described Event
had its accomplishment. And indeed if Antoninus the Philosopher (as the
forementioned Eunapius writes) did predict the very same thing, that after his
decease, that magnificent Temple of Serapis in Egypt, together with the rest,
should be demolished, (...), and the Temples of the Gods turned into
Sepulchers; why might not this Egyptian or Trismegistick Writer, receive the
like Inspiration or Tradition? Or at least make the same Conjucture.

But there is yet another Objection made against the Sincerity of this
Asclepian Dialogue, from Lactantius his citing a Passage out of it, Lib. 4.
cap. 6.
for the Second Person in the Trinity, the Son of God; Hermes in eo Libro
(says Lactantius) qui (...) inscribitur, his usus est verbis, (...)^ Which we
find in Apuleius his Latin Translation thus rendered, Dominus and omnium
Conformator, Colv. p. 588.
quem recte Deum dicimus, a se Secundum Deum fecit, qui videri and sentiri
possit; quem Secundum [Deum] sensibilem ita dixerim, non ideo quod ipse sentiat
(de hoc enim an ipse sentiat annon alio dicemus tempore) sed eo quod videntium
sensus incurrit:) Quoniam ergo hunc fecit ex se Primum, and a se Secundum,
visusque est ei pulcher, utpote qui est omnium bonitate plenissimus, amavit eum
ut Divinitatis suae Prolem (for so it ought to be read, and not Patrem, it
being (...) in the Greek:) The Lord and Maker of all, whom we rightly call God,
when he had made a Second God, Visible and Sensible (I say, sensible, not
actively, because himself has Sense, for concerning this, whether he have
Sense or no, we shall speak elsewhere, but passively, because he incurrs into
our Senses) this being his First and Only Production, seemed both beautiful to
him, and most full of all good, and therefore he loved him dearly as his own
Offspring. Which Lactantius, and after him St. Austin, understanding of the
Perfect Word of God or Eternal (...), made use of it as a Testimony against the
Pagans, for the Confirmation of Christianity, they taking it for granted that
this Hermaick Book was genuinely Egyptian and did represent the Doctrine of the
ancient Hermes Trismegist. But Dionysius Petavius and other later Writers,
understanding this place in the same sense with Lactantius and St. Austin, have
made a quite different use of it, namely, to infer from thence, that this Book
was Spurious and Counterfeited by some Christian. To which we reply, First,
that if this Hermaick Writer had acknowledged, an Eternal (...) or Word of God
and called it a Second God and the Son of God, he had done no more in this,
than Philo the Jew did, who speaking of this same (...) expressly calls it (...)
and (...), the Second God and the First Begotten Son of God. Notwithstanding
which, those Writings of Philo's are not at all suspected. In Genesis Hom. 14.
And Origin affirms that some of the Ancient Philosophers did the like, Multi
Philosophorum Veterum, Vnum esse Deum qui cuncta crearit, dixerunt; atque in
hoc consentiunt Legi. Aliquanti autem hoc adjiciunt, quod Deus cuncta per
Verbum suum fecerit and regat, and Verbum Dei sit, quo cuncta moderentur; in
hoc non solum Legi, sed and Evangelio quoque consona scribunt. Many of the old
Philosophers (that is all besides a few Atheistick ones) have said, that there
is One God who created all things, and these agree with the Law: but some add
further, that God made all things by his Word, and that it is the Word of God,
by which all things are governed, and these write consonantly not only to the
Law but also to the Gospel. But whether Philo derived this Doctrine from the
Greek Philosophers, or from the Egyptians and Hermes Trismegist, he being an
Alexandrian, Con Jul. lib. 1. p. 33.
may well be a Question. For St. Cyril does indeed cite several Passages out of
Hermaick Writings then extant, to this very purpose. We shall only set down one
of them here; (...)^ The World has a Governor set over it, that Word of the
Lord of all, which was the Maker of it; this is the first Power after himself,
Uncreated, Infinite, looking out from him, and ruling over all things that were
made by him; this is the Perfect and genuine Son of the first Omniperfect
Being. Nevertheless the Author of the (...) or Asclepian Dialogue, in that
forecited Passage of his, by his Second God, the Son of the First, meant no
such thing at all, as the Christian Logos, or Second Person of the Trinity, but
only the Visible World. Which is so plain from the words themselves, that it is
a wonder how Lactantius and St. Austin could interpret them otherwise, he
making therein a Question whether this Second God were [actively] Sensible or
no. But the same is farther manifrom other places of that Dialogue, as this for
example, Aeternitatis Dominus Deus Primus est, Secundus est Mundus; The Lord of
Eternity is the First God, but the Second God is the World. And again, Summus
qui dicitur Deus Rector Gubernatorque Sensibilis Dei, ejus qui in se
complectitur omnem locum, omnemque rerum substantiam; The Supreme God is the
Governor of that Sensible God, which contains in it all place and all the
Substance of things. And that this was indeed a part of the Hermaick or
Egyptian Theology, that the Visible World Animated, was a Second God, and the
Son of the First God, appears also from those Hermaick Books published by
Ficinus, and vulgarly called Poemander, though that be only the First of them.
There has been one Passage already cited out of the Eighth Book, (...), The
World is a Second God. After which follows more to the same purpose, (...)^
The First God is that Eternal Unmade Maker of all things; the Second is he that
is made according to the Image of the First, which is contained, cherished or
nourished and immortalized by him, as by his own Parent, by whom it is made an
Immortal Animal. So again in the Ninth Book, (...), God is the Father of the
World, and the World is the Son of God. And in the Twelfth, (...), This whole
World is a Great God and the Image of a Greater.

As for the other Hermetick or Trismegistick Books, published partly by
Ficinus, and partly by Patricius, we cannot confidently condemn any of them for
Christian Cheats or Impostures, save only the Poemander, and the Sermon in the
Mount concerning Regeneration, the First and Thirteenth of Ficinus his Chapters
or Books. Neither of which Books are cited by any of the Ancient Fathers, and
therefore may be presumed not to have been extant in Jamblichus his time, but
more lately forged; and that probably by one and the self same hand, since the
Writer of the Latter (the Sermon in the Mount) makes mention of the Former
(that is, the Poemander) in the close of it. For that which Casaubon objects
against the Fourth of Ficinus his Books or Chapters (entitled the Crater)
seems not very considerable, it being questionable, whether by the Crater, any
such thing were there meant, as the Christian Baptisterion. Wherefore as for
all the rest of those Hermaick Books, especially such of them as being cited by
ancient Fathers, may be presumed to have been extant before Jamblichus his
time; we know no reason why we should not concur with that learned Philosopher
in his Judgment concerning them, That though they often speak the Language of
Philosophers, and were not written by Hermes Trismegist himself, yet they do
really contain (...), Hermaical Opinions, or the Egyptian Doctrine. The Ninth
of Ficinus his Books mentions the Asclepian Dialogue, under the Greek Title of
(...), pretending to have been written by the same hand; (...)^ The meaning of
which place (not understood by the Translator) is this; I lately published (O
Asclepius) the Book entitled (...) (or the Perfect Oration) and now I judge it
necessary, in pursuit of the same, to discourse concerning Sense. Which Book, as
well as the Perfect Oration, is cited by Lactantius. As is also the Tenth of
Ficinus, called the Clavis, which does not only pretend to be of kin to the
Ninth and consequently to the Asclepius likewise, but also to contain in it an
Epitome of that Hermaick Book called (...), mentioned in Eusebius his
Chronicon, (...)^ My former Discourse was dedicated to thee (O Asclepius) but
this to Tatius, it being an Epitome of those Genica that were delivered to him.
Which (...) are thus again afterward mentioned in the same Book, (...); Have
you not heard in the Genica, that all Souls are derived from one Soul of the
Universe? Neither of which two places were understood by Ficinus. But doubtless
this latter Hermaick Book had something foisted into it, because there is a
manifest contradiction found therein; forasmuch as that Transmigration of
Humane Souls into Brutes, which in the former part thereof is asserted after
the Egyptian way, (...), as the just punishment of the wicked, is afterward
cried down and condemned in it, as the greatest Error. And the Eleventh and
Twelfth following Books, seem to us to be as Egyptian, as any of the rest; as
also does that long Book entitled, (...), the Thirteenth in Patricius. Nay it
is observable, that even those very Books themselves, that are so justly
suspected and condemned for Christian Forgeries, have something of the
Hermaical or Egyptian Philosophy, here and there interspersed in them. As for
example, when in the Poemander God is twice called (...), Male and Female
together, this seems to have been Egyptian (and derived from thence by Orpheus)
according to that elegant Passage in the Asclepian Dialogue concerning God; Hic
ergo qui Solus est Omnia, utriusque Sexus foecunditate plenissimus, semper
Voluntatis suae pregnans, parit semper quicquid voluerit procreare; He
therefore who alone is All Things, and most full of the Fecundity of both
Sexes, being always pregnant of his own Will, always produces whatsoever he
pleases. Again when Death is thus described in it, (...), to be nothing else
but the Change of the Body, and the Form or Life's passing into the Invisible:
This agrees with that in the Eleventh Book or Chapter, (...), That Death is
nothing but a Change, it being only the dissolution of the Body, and the Life
or Soul's passing into the Invisible or Inconspicuous. In which Book it is also
affirmed of the World, (...), That every day some part or other of it, goes
into the Invisible, or into Hades, that is, does not utterly perish, but only
disappears to our sight, it being either translated into some other Place, or
changed into another Form. And accordingly it is said of Animals, in the
Twelfth Book, (...), That they are dissolved by Death, not that they might be
destroyed, but made again anew. As it is also there affirmed of the World, that
it does (...), make all things out of it self, and again unmake them into it
self, (...), and that dissolving all things it does perpetually renew them. For
that nothing in the whole World utterly perishes, as it is often declared
elsewhere in these Trismegistick Writings, so particularly in this Twelfth Book
of Ficinus, (...)^ The whole World is unchangeable, only the parts of it being
alterable; and this so, as that none of these neither utterly perishes, or is
absolutely destroyed; (...); For how can any part of that be Corrupted, which
is Incorruptible, or any thing of God perish or go to nothing? All which, by
Casaubon's lieve, we take to have been originally Egyptian Doctrine, and thence
in part afterward transplanted into Greece. Moreover when in the Poemander,
God is styled more than once, (...), Light and Life, this seems to have been
Egyptian also, because it was Orphical. In like manner the Appendix to the
Sermon in the Mount, called (...), or the Occult Cantion, has some strains of
the Egyptian Theology in it, which will be afterward mentioned.

The result of our present Discourse is this, that though some of the
Trismegistick Books, were either wholly counterfeited, or else had certain
supposititious Passages inserted into them by some Christian hand, yet there
being others of them originally Egyptian, or which as to the substance of them,
do contain Hermaical or Egyptian Doctrines (in all which One Supreme Deity is
every where asserted) we may well conclude from hence, that the Egyptians had
an acknowledgment amongst them of One Supreme Deity. And herein several of the
Ancient Fathers have gone before us; as first of all Justin Martyr, (...)^
Ammon in his Books, calls God Most Hidden, and Hermes plainly declares, That
it is hard to conceive God, but impossible to express him. Neither does it
follow that this latter Passage is counterfeit, as Casaubon concludes, because
there is something like it in Plato's Timaeus, there being doubtless a very
great agreement betwixt Platonism and the Ancient Egyptian Doctrine. Thus again
St. Cyprian; De Idol. van.
Hermes quoque Trismegistus Vnum Deum loquitur, eumque ineffabilem and
inaestimabilem confitetur, Hermes Trismegist also acknowledges One God,
confessing him to be ineffable and inestimable; which Passage is also cited by
St. Austin. Lib. 1. page 30.
Lactantius likewise; Thoth antiquissimus and instructissimus omni genere
Doctrinae, adeo ut ei multarum rerum and artium scientia Trismegisti cognomen
imponeret; Hic scripsit Libros and quidem multos, ad cognitionem Divinarum
rerum pertinentes, in quibus Majestatem Summi and Singularis Dei asserit,
iisdemque nominibus appellat, quibus nos, Deum and Patrem. Ac ne quis nomen
ejus requireret (...) esse dixit. Thoth (that is Hermes) the most ancient and
most instructed in all kind of Learning (for which he was called Trismegist)
wrote Books and those many, belonging to the Knowledge of Divine things,
wherein he asserts the Majesty of One Supreme Deity, calling him by the same
names that we do, God and Father; but (lest any one should require a Proper
name of him) affirming him to be Anonymous. Lastly, St. Cyril has much more to
the same purpose also: And we must confess that we have the rather here
insisted so much upon these Hermaick or Trismegistick Writings, that in this
particular we might vindicate these Ancient Fathers, from the Imputation either
of Fraud and Imposture, or of Simplicity and Folly.

But that the Egyptians acknowledged, besides their Many Gods, One Supreme and
All-comprehending Deity, needs not be proved from these Trismegistick Writings
(concerning which we leave others to judge as they find Cause) it otherwise
appearing, not only because Orpheus (who was an undoubted Asserter of Monarchy,
or One First Principle of All things) is generally affirmed to have derived his
Doctrine from the Egyptians; but also from plain and express Testimonies. For
besides Apollonius Tyanaeus his Affirmation concerning both Indians and
Egyptians, Page 269.
before cited, Plutarch throughout his whole Book De Iside and Osiride,
supposes the Egyptians thus to have asserted One Supreme Deity, they commonly
calling him (...), the First God. Thus in the beginning of that Book he tells
us, that the End of all the Religious Rites and Mysteries, of that Egyptian
Goddess Isis, was (...), the Knowledge of that First God, who is the Lord of
all things, and only intelligible by the Mind, whom this Goddess exhorts men
to seek, in her Communion. After which he declares, that this First God of the
Egyptians was accounted by them an Obscure and Hidden Deity, and accordingly he
gives the reason why they made the Crocodile to be a Symbol of him, (...)^ Page
381.
Because they say the Crocodile is the only Animal, which living in the water,
has his Eyes covered by a thin transparent membrane, falling down over them,
by reason whereof it sees and is not seen, which is a thing that belongs to the
First God, To see all things, himself being not seen. Though Plutarch in that
place gives also another reason why the Egyptians made the Crocodile a Symbol
of the Deity; (...)^ Neither were the Egyptians without a plausible reason, for
worshipping God Symbolically in the Crocodile, that being said to be an
Imitation of God, in that it is the only Animal without a Tongue. For the
Divine (...) or Reason standing not in need of Speech, and going on through a
silent path of Justice in the World, does without noise righteously govern and
dispense all humane affairs. In like manner Horus-Apollo in his Hieroglyphics,
tells us, that the Egyptians acknowledging a (...) and (...), an Omnipotent
Being that was the Governor of the whole World, did Symbolically represent him
by a Serpent, (...), they picturing also a great House or Palace within its
circumference, because the World is the Royal palace of the Deity. Which Writer
also gives us another reason, why the Serpent was made to be the Hieroglyphick
of the Deity; Lib. 1. c. 2.
(...). Because the Serpent feeding as it were upon its own Body, does aptly
signify, that all things generated in the World by Divine Providence, are
again resolved into him. And Philo Byblius from Sanchuniathon, gives the same
reason why the Serpent was Deified by Tant or the Egyptian Hermes, (...),
because it is immortal and resolved into it self. Though sometimes the
Egyptians added to the Serpent also a Hawk, thus complicating the Hieroglypick
of the Deity; according to that of a famous Egyptian Priest in Eusebius, (...)
that the First and Divinest Being of all, is Symbolically represented, by a
Serpent having the head of an Hawk. And that a Hawk was also sometimes used
alone, for a Hieroglyphick of the Deity, appears from that of Plutarch, That
in the Porch of an Egyptian Temple at Sais, were engraven these Three
Hieroglyphics, a Young man, an Old man, and an Hawk; to make up this Sentence,
That both the Beginning and End of humane Life depends upon God, or
Providence. But we have Two more remarkable Passages in the forementioned Horus
Apollo, concerning the Egyptian Theology, which must not be pretermitted; the
first this, (...), That according to them, there is a Spirit passing through
the Whole World, to wit, God. And again (...), It seems to the Egyptians,
that nothing at all consists without God. In the next place, Jamblichus was a
person who had made it his business, to inform himself thoroughly, concerning
the Theology of the Egyptians, and who undertakes to give an account thereof,
in his Answer to Porphyrius his Epistle to Anebo an Egyptian Priest; whose
Testimony therefore may well seem to deserve credit. And he first gives us a
Summary account of their Theology after this manner, (...)^ That God, who is
the Cause of Generation and the whole Nature, and of all the Powers in the
Elements themselves, is Separate, Exempt, Elevated above, and expanded over,
all the Powers and Elements in the World. For being above the World and
transcending the same, Immaterial, and Incorporeal, Supernatural, Unmade,
Indivisible, manifested wholly from himself, and in himself, he rules over all
things and in himself contains all things. And because he virtually
comprehends all things, therefore does he impart and display the same from
himself. According to which excellent Description of the Deity, it is plain
that the Egyptians asserting One God that Comprehends All things, could not
possibly suppose a Multitude of Self-existent Deities. In which place also the
same Jamblichus tells us, that as the Egyptian Hieroglyphick for Material and
Corporeal things, was Mud or floating Water, so they pictured God, in Loto
arbore sedentem super Lutum, sitting upon the Lote-tree above the Watery Mud,
Quod innuit Dei eminentiam altissimam, qua fit ut nullo modo attingat Lutum
ipsum. Demonstratque Dei imperium intellectuale, quia Loti arboris omnia sunt
rotunda tam frondes quam fructus, etc. Which signifies the transcendent
Eminency of the Deity above the Matter, and its intellectual Empire over the
World, because, both the Leaves and Fruit of that tree are Round, representing
the Motion of intellect. Again he there adds also, that the Egyptians sometime
pictured God sitting at the Helm of a Ship. Seg. 8. c. 1.
But afterward in the same Book, he sums up the Queries, which Porphyrius had
propounded to the Egyptian Priest, to be resolved concerning them, in this
manner; (...) You desire to be resolved, What the Egyptians think to be the
first Cause of all. Whether Intellect or something above Intellect? And that
Whether alone or with some other? Whether Incorporeal or Corporeal? Whether the
first Principle be the same with the Demiurgus and Architect of the World, or
before him? Whether all things proceed from One or Many? Whether they suppose
Matter, or Qualified Bodies, to be the first? and if they admit a First Matter,
Whether they assert it to be Unmade or Made? In answer to which Porphyrian
Quaeries, Jamblichus thus begins; (...). I shall first reply to that you first
demand, That, according to the Egyptians, before all Entities and Principles
there is One God, who is in order of nature before (him that is commonly
called) the first God and King; Immovable; and always remaining in the
solitariety of his own Unity, there being nothing Intelligible nor any thing
else complicated with him, etc. In which words of Jamblichus and those others
that there follow after, though there be some obscurity (and we may perhaps
have occasion further to consider the meaning of them elsewhere) yet he plainly
declares, that according to the Egyptians, the first Original of all things,
was a perfect Unity above Intellect; but intimating withal, that besides this
First Unity, they did admit of certain other Divine Hypostases (as a Perfect
Intellect, and Mundane Soul) subordinate thereunto, and dependent on it,
concerning which he thus writes afterward; (...)^ The Egyptians acknowledge,
before the Heaven, and in the Heaven, a Living Power (or Soul) and again they
place a pure Mind or Intellect above the World. But that they did not
acknowledge a Plurality of Coordinate and Independent Principles is further
declared by him after this manner. (...)^ And thus the Egyptian Philosophy,
from first to last, begins from Unity; and thence descends to Multitude; the
Many being always governed by the One; and the Infinite or Vndeterminate
nature, every where mastered and conquered by some finite and determined
measure; and all ultimately, by that highest Unity that is the first Cause of
all things. Moreover in answer to the last Porphyrian Question concerning
Matter; whether the Egyptians thought it to be Unmade and Selfexistent or Made,
Jamblichus thus replies, (...)^ That according to Hermes and the Egyptians,
Matter was also Made or produced by God; ab Essentialitate succisa ac subscissa
Materialitate, as Scutellius turns it. Which Passage of Jamblichus, Page 117.
Proclus upon the Timaeus (where he asserts that God was (...), the uneffable
cause of Matter) takes notice of in this manner; (...)^ And the Tradition of
the Egyptians agrees herewith, That Matter was not Unmade or Self-existent,
but produced by the Deity: For the Divine Jamblichus has recorded, that Hermes
would have Materiality to have been produced from Essentiality (that is, the
Passive Principle of Matter from that Active Principle of the Deity:) And it is
very probable from hence, that Plato was also of the same opinion concerning
Matter; viz. because he is supposed to have followed Hermes and the Egyptians.
Which indeed is the more likely, if that be true which the same Proclus
affirms concerning Orpheus, (...), That Orpheus also did after the same
manner, deduce or derive Matter from the First Hypostasis of Intelligibles,
that is, from the Supreme Deity. We shall conclude here in the last place with
the Testimony of Damascius, in his Book of Principles writing after this manner
concerning the Egyptians, (...)^ Eudemus has given us no exact account of the
Egyptians, but the Egyptian Philosophers that have been in our times, have
declared the hidden truth of their Theology, having found in certain Egyptian
Writings, that there was according to them, One Principle of all things,
praised under the name of the Unknown Darkness, and that thrice repeated: Which
Unknown Darkness is a Description of that Supreme Deity, that is
Incomprehensible.

But that the Egyptians amongst their Many Gods did acknowledge One Supreme,
may sufficiently appear also, even from their vulgar Religion and Theology. In
which they had first a Peculiar and Proper Name for him as such. For as the
Greeks called the Supreme God (...), the Latins Jupiter or Jovis, so did the
Egyptians call him Hammon or Ammon according to Herodotus, whose Testimony to
this purpose has been already cited, and confirmed by Origin who was an
Egyptian born. Thus also Plutarch in his Book de Iside, (...)^ It is supposed
by most, that the proper name of Zeus or Jupiter ( that is, the Supreme Deity)
amongst the Egyptians, is Amous, which we Greeks pronounce Hammon. To the same
purpose Hesychius, (...), Ammous according to Aristotle is the same with Zeus.
Whence it came to pass that by the Latin Writers Hammon was vulgarly called
Jupiter Hammon. Which Hammon was not only used as a proper name for the Supreme
Deity by the Egyptians, but also by the Arabians and all the Africans,
according to that of Lucan, Quamvis Aethiopum populis Arabumque beatis
Gentibus, atque Indis, unus sit Jupiter Ammon.
Wherefore not only Marmarica (which is a part of Africa, wherein was that most
famous Temple of this Ammon) was from thence denominated Ammonia, but even all
Africa, as Stephanus informs us, was sometimes called Ammonis, from this God
Ammon, who has been therefore styled (...), the Libyan Jupiter.

Indeed it is very probable, that this word Hammon or Ammon, was at first
derived from Ham or Cham the son of Noah, whose Posterity was chiefly seated in
these African parts, and from whom Egypt was called, not only in the Scripture,
the Land of Ham, but also by the Egyptians themselves, as Plutarch testifies,
(...) or Chemia, and as St. Jerome, Ham; and the Coptites also to this very day
call it Chemi. Nevertheless this will not hinder, but that the Word Hammon for
all that, might be used afterward by the Egyptians, as a name for the Supreme
God, because amongst the Greeks, (...) in like manner, was supposed to have
been at first the name of a Man or Hero, but yet afterward applied to signify
the Supreme God. And there might be such a mixture of Herology or History,
together with Theology as well amongst the Egyptians, as there was amongst the
Greeks. Nay some learned men conjecture, and not without probability, that the
Zeus of the Greeks also was really the very same with that Ham or Cham the son
of Noah, whom the Egyptians first worshipped as an Hero or Deified Man; there
being several considerable agreements and correspondencies between the Poetic
Fables of Saturn and Jupiter, and the true Scripture-story, of Noah and Cham;
as there is likewise a great affinity betwixt the words themselves, for as Cham
signifies Heat or Fervor, so is (...) derived by the Greek Grammarians from
(...). And thus will that forementioned Testimony of Herodotus, in some sense
be verified, that the Greeks received the names of most of their Gods, even of
(...) himself, from the Egyptians.

Perhaps it may be granted also, that the Sun was sometime worshipped by the
Egyptians, under the Name of Hammon; it having been in like manner sometimes
worshipped by the Greeks under the Name of Zeus. And the word very well agrees
herewith, (...) in the Hebrew Language signifying not only Heat but the Sun;
from whence (...) Chamanim also was derived. Nevertheless it will not follow
from hence, that therefore the Visible Sun, was generally accounted by the
Egyptians the Supreme Deity, no more than he was amongst the Greeks. But as we
have often occasion to observe, there was in the Pagan Religion, a confused
Jumble, of Herology, Physiology, and Theology all together. And that the Notion
of this Egyptian God Ammon, was neither confined by them to the Sun, nor yet to
the whole Corporeal World or Nature of the Universe (as some have conceived) is
evident from hence, because the Egyptians themselves, interpreted it, according
to their own Language, to signify, That which was Hidden and Obscure, as both
Manetho an ancient Egyptian Priest, and Hecataeus (who wrote concerning the
Philosophy of the Egyptians) in Plutarch agree: (...)^ Manetho Sebennites
conceives the Word Amoun, to signify that which is Hidden. And Hecataeus
affirms that the Egyptians Use this Word when they call any one to them that
was distant or absent from them; Wherefore the First God, because he is
Invisible and Hidden, they, as it were Inviting him to approach near, and to
make himself Manifest and conspicuous to them, call him Amoun. And agreeably
hereunto, Jamblichus gives us this account of the true Notion of this Egyptian
God Ammon, (...)^ The Demiurgical Intellect, and President of Truth, as with
Wisdom it proceeds to Generation, and produces into Light, the Secret and
Invisible Powers of the hidden Reasons, is, according to the Egyptian Language,
called Hammon. Wherefore we may conclude, that Hammon amongst the Egyptians,
was not only the Name of the Supreme Deity, but also of such a one as was
Hidden, Invisible and Incorporeal.

And here it may be worth our observing, that this Egyptian Hammon was in all
Probability taken notice of in Scripture, though vulgar Interpreters have not
been aware thereof. For thus we understand that of Jeremy 46.25. The Lord of
Hosts, the God of Israel says, behold I will visit (...) (that is, not the
Multitude of Noe, but) Ammon (the God) of Noe, and Pharaoh and Egypt with her
(other) Gods and Kings, and all that trust in him; I will deliver them into the
hands of those that seek their lives, and into the hands of Nebuchadnezzar King
of Babylon. For the understanding of which place, we must observe, that
according to the Language of those ancient Pagans, when every Country or City,
had their Peculiar and Proper names, for the Gods presiding over them or
Worshipped by them, the several Nations and Places, were themselves commonly
denoted and signified, by the names of those their respective Gods. With which
kind of Language, the Scripture it self also complieth; as when the Moabites
are called in it, the People of Chemosh, Numbers 21. And when the Gods of
Damascus are said to have smitten Ahaz, because the Syrians smote him, 2 Chronicles.
28. Accordingly whereunto also, whatsoever was done or attempted against the
several Nations or Countries, is said to have been done or attempted against
their Gods. Thus Moab's Captivity is described, Jeremy 48. Thou shall be taken,
and Chemosh shall go into captivity. And the overthrow of Babylon is predicted
after the same manner, in the Prophecy of Isaiah Cap. 46. Bell boweth down,
Nebo stoopeth, themselves are gone into captivity. As also the same is
threatened in that of Jeremy, C. 51. I will visit Bell in Babylon, and will
bring out of his mouth, that which he has swallowed up, and the Nations shall
not flow unto him any more, for the Wall of Babylon shall be broken down. Now
Bell according to Herodotus, was a name for the Supreme God amongst the
Babylonians, as well as Ammon was amongst the Egyptians; who notwithstanding by
both of them was worshipped after an Idolatrous manner. And therefore as in
these latter places, by the Visiting and Punishing of Bell, is meant the
visiting and punishing of the Babylonians; so in that former place of Jeremy,
by the visiting of Ammon, and the Gods of Egypt, is understood, the visiting of
the Egyptians themselves; accordingly as it is there also expressed. No was, it
seems, the Metropolis of all Egypt; and therefore Ammon the Chief God of those
Ancient Egyptians, and of that City, was called Ammon of No. As likewise the
City No, is denominated from this God Ammon in the Scripture, and called both
No-Ammon, and Ammon-No. The former in the Prophecy of Nahum, Cap. 3. Art thou
better than No-Ammon? or that No in which the God Ammon is worshipped? Which is
not to be understood of the Oracle of Ammon in Marmarica, as some have imagined
(they taking No for an Appellative and so to signify Habitation;) it being
unquestionably the Proper name of a City in Egypt. The Latter in that of
Ezekiel, Cap. 30. I will pour out my fury upon Sin, the strength of Egypt, and
will cut off Hammon-No. In which place as by Sin is meant Pelusium, so
Hammon-No, by the Seventy, is interpreted Diospolis, the City of Jupiter; that
is, the Egyptian Jupiter, Hammon. Which Diospolis was otherwise called the
Egyptian Thebes, (ancietly the Metropolis of all Egypt) but whose Proper name
in the Egyptian Language, seems to have been No; which from the chief God there
worshipped, was called both No-Ammon and Hammon-No; as that God himself was
also denominated from the City, Ammon of No. In Phaedro.
And this is the rather probable, because Plato tells us expressly, that Ammon
was anciently the Proper or Chief God of the Egyptian Thebes or Diospolis,
where he speaks of Theuth or Thoth the Egyptian Hermes, in these words; (...)^
Thamus was then King over all Egypt, reigning in that great City (the
Metropolis thereof) which the Greeks call the Egyptian Thebes, and whose God
was Ammon. But whereas the Prophet Nahum (who seems to have written after the
completion of that judgment upon No, predicted both by Jeremy and Ezekiel)
describes the place, as situate among the Rivers, and having the Sea for its
Wall and Rampart; whence many Learned men have concluded, that this was rather
to be understood of Alexandria than Diospolis (notwithstanding that Alexandria
was not then in being, nor built till a long while after in Alexander the
Great's time.) This may very well, as we conceive, be understood of Egypt in
general, whose Metropolis this No was; that it was situate amongst the Rivers
and had the Seas for its Wall and Rampart; the Red and Mediterranean. And thus
much for the Egyptian Jupiter, or their Supreme Deity, called by them Hammon.

There is an excellent Monument of Egyptian Antiquity preserved by Plutarch and
others, from whence it may be made yet further Evident, that the Egyptians did
not suppose a Multitude of Unmade Self-existent Deities, but acknowledged One
Supreme, Universal and All-comprehending Numen. And it is that Inscription upon
the Temple at Sais, (...), I am all that Has been, Is, and Shall be, and my
Peplum or Veil, no mortal has ever yet uncovered; which though perhaps some
would understand thus, as if that Deity therein described, were nothing but the
Senseless Matter of the whole Corporeal Universe, according to that Opinion of
Chaeremon before mentioned and confuted; yet it is plain, that this could not
be the meaning of this Inscription: First, because the God here described, is
not a mere Congeries of disunited Matter, or Aggregation of Divided Atoms, but
it is some One thing which was All: According to that other Inscription upon an
Altar dedicated to the Goddess Isis, which we shall also afterward make use of,
Tibi, Vna, quae es Omnia; To thee who being One, art All Things. Again, in the
Deity here described, (...)^ Proclus of this Egyptian God, that it was both
Invisible and Manifest. In Timae. P. 30.
there is both a Veil or Outside, and also something Hidden and Recondite; the
sense seeming to be this, I am all that Was, Is, and Shall be; and the whole
World is nothing but my self Veiled; but my naked and unveiled Brightness, no
mortal could ever yet behold or comprehend: Which is just, as if the Sun should
say, I am all the Colors of the Rainbow (whose mild and gentle light may
easily be beheld) and they are nothing but my Simple and Uniform Luster,
variously refracted and abated; but my immediate Splendor and the Brightness
of my Face, no mortal can contemplate, without being either blinded or dazzled
by it. Wherefore this Description of the Deity, may seem not a little to
resemble that Description which God makes of himself to Moses, Thou shall see
my Back-parts, but my Face shall not be seen. Where there is also something
Exterior and Visible in the Deity, and something Hidden and Recondite,
Invisible and Incomprehensible to Mortals. And Philo thus glosseth upon those
words, P. 474. Pat.
(...)^ It is sufficient for a wise man to know God a Posteriori, or from his
Effects; but whosoever will needs behold the naked Essence of the Deity, will
be blinded with the transcendent Radiancy and Splendor of his Beams. Where, as
according to Philo, the Works of God, as manifesting the Attributes of his
Power, Goodness and Wisdom, are called the Back-parts of the Deity; so are they
here in this Inscription called the Peplum, the Veil and Exterior Garment of
it, or else God himself Veiled. Wherefore it is plain, that the Deity here
described, cannot be the mere Visible and Corporeal World as Senseless and
Inanimate, that being all Outside and Exposed to the View of Sense, and having
nothing Hidden or Veiled in it. But thirdly, this will yet be more evident, if
we do but take notice of the Name of this God, which was here described, and to
whom that Temple was dedicated; and that was in the Egyptian Language, (...) in
Procl. upon Plato's Tim. p. 30.
Neith, the same with (...) amongst the Greeks, and Minerva amongst the Latins;
by which is meant Wisdom or Understanding: from whence it is plain, that the
Inscription is to be understood not of such a God, as was merely Senseless
Matter (which is the God of the Atheists) but a Mind. Athenagoras tells us,
that the Pagan Theologers interpreted (...) or Minerva to be (...), Wisdom or
Mind passing and diffusing it self through all Things; than which there cannot
be a better Commentary on this Inscription. Wherefore it may be here observed,
that those Pagans who acknowledged God to be a Mind, and Incorporeal Being
secret from Matter, did notwithstanding frequently consider him, not
abstractly by himself alone, but concretely together with the Result of his
whole Fecundity, or as displaying the World from himself, and diffusing himself
through all things, and being in a manner All Things. Accordingly we learned
before from Horus Apollo, that the Egyptians by God, meant, a Spirit diffusing
it self through the World, and intimately pervading all things; and that they
supposed, that nothing at all could consist without God. And after this manner,
Jamblichus in his Mysteries, interprets the meaning of this Egyptian
Inscription: For when he had declared that the Egyptians, did both in their
Doctrine and their Priestly Hierurgies, exhort men to ascend above Matter, to
an Incorporeal Deity the Maker of all, he adds, (...)^ Hermes also propounded
this Method, and Bithys the Prophet interpreted the same to King Ammon, having
found it written in Hieroglyphick letters in the Temple of Sais in Egypt; as he
also there declared the name of that God, who extends or diffuses himself
through the whole World. And this was Neith, or Athenae, that God thus
described, I am all that Was, Is, and Shall be, and my Peplum or Veil no mortal
could ever uncover. (...)^ Sais and Athens, had one and the same Tutelar God.
Procl. in Tim. p. 30. Where also Theopompus affirms the Athenians to have
been a Colony of the Saites.
Where we cannot but take notice also, that whereas the Athena of the Greeks,
was derived from the Egyptian Neith, that she also was famous for her Peplum
too, as well as the Egyptian Goddess. Peplum (says Servius) est Proprie Palla
picta Faeminea, Minervae consecrata; Peplum is properly a womanish Pall or
Veil, embroidered all over, and consecrated to Minerva. Which Rite was
performed at Athens, in the Great Panathenaicks, with much Solemnity, when the
Statue of this Goddess, was also by those Noble Virgins of the City, who
embroidered this Veil, clothed all over therewith. From whence we may probably
conclude, that the Statue of the Egyptian Neith also, in the Temple of Sais,
had likewise agreeably to its Inscription, such a Peplum or Veil cast over it,
as Minerva or Artemis at Athens had; this Hieroglyphically to signify, that
the Deity was invisible and incomprehensible to mortals, but had Veiled it self
in this Visible Corporeal World, which is as it were the Peplum, the exterior
variegated or embroidered Vestment of the Deity. To all which Considerations
may be added in the last place, In Timae. p. 30.
what Proclus has recorded, that there was something more belonging to this
Egyptian Inscription, than what is mentioned by Plutarch; namely these words,
(...), And the Sun was the fruit or offspring which I produced; from whence it
is manifest, that according to the Egyptians, the Sun was not the Supreme
Deity, and that the God here described, was as Proclus also observes, (...), A
Demiurgical Deity the Creator of the whole World, and of the Sun. Which Supreme
Incorporeal Deity, was notwithstanding in their Theology, said to be All
Things, because it diffused it self thorough All.

Wherefore, whereas Plutarch cites this Passage out of Hecataeus, concerning
the Egyptians, (...), That they take the First God, and the Universe, for one
and the Same thing; the meaning of it cannot be, as if the First or Supreme God
of the Egyptians, were the Senseless Corporeal World, Plutarch himself in the
very next words declaring him to be, (...), Invisible and Hidden; whom
therefore the Egyptians, as inviting him to manifest himself to them, called
Hammon; as he elsewhere affirms, That the Egyptians First God or Supreme
Deity, did see all things, himself being not seen. But the forementioned
Passage must needs be understood thus, that according to the Egyptians, the
First God, and (...) or the Universe, were Synonymous expressions, often used
to signify the very same thing; because the First Supreme Deity, is that which
contains All Things, and diffuseth it self through All Things. And this
Doctrine was from the Egyptians derived to the Greeks, Orpheus declaring,
(...), that all things were One, and after him Parmenides and other
Philosophers, (...), that One was the Universe or All, and that (...) was
(...), that the Universe was Immovable, they meaning nothing else hereby, but
that the First Supreme Deity, was both One and All things, and Immovable. And
thus much is plainly intimated by Aristotle in these words, Metaph. L. 1.
(...). There are some who pronounced concerning the whole Universe, as being
but One Nature; that is, who called the Supreme Deity (...) or the Universe,
because that vertually contained All things in it.

Nevertheless (...) or the Universe, was frequently taken by the Pagan
Theologers also, as we have already intimated, in a more comprehensive sense,
for the Deity, together with all the extent of its Fecundity, God as displaying
himself in the World; or, for God and the World both together; the Latter being
looked upon, as nothing but an Emanation or Efflux from the Former. And thus
was the word taken by Empedocles in Plutarch, when he affirmed, (...), That the
World was not the Universe, but only a small part thereof. And according to
this sense was the God Pan understood both by the Arcadians and other Greeks,
not for the mere Corporeal World as Senseless and Inanimate, nor as endued with
a Plastic Nature only (though this was partly included in the Notion of Pan
also) but as proceeding from a Rational and Intellectual Principle, diffusing
it self through All; or for the whole System of Things, God and the World
together, as one Deity. For that the Arcadick Pan, was not the Corporeal World
alone, but chiefly the Intellectual Ruler and Governor of the same, appears
from this Testimony of Macrobius; Hunc Deum Arcades colunt, appellantes (...),
non sylvarum Dominum, sed universae substantiae Materialis Dominatorem: The
Arcadians worship this God Pan ( as their most ancient and honorable God)
calling him the Lord of Hyle, that is, not the Lord of the Woods, but the Lord
or Dominator over all Material Substance. And thus does Phornultus likewise
describe the Pan of the other Greeks; not as the mere Corporeal World, Senseless
and Inanimate, but as having a Rational and Intellectual Principle for the Head
of it, and presiding over it, that is, for God and the World both together, as
one System; the World being but the Efflux and Emanation of the Deity. The
lower parts of Pan (says he) were Rough and Goatish, because of the asperity
of the Earth, but his upper parts of a Humane Form, because the Either being
Rational and Intellectual, is the Hegemonick of the World: Adding hereunto,
that Pan was feigned to be Lustful or Lascivious, because of the Multitude of
Spermatick Reasons contained in the World, and the continual Mixtures and
Generations of things; to be clothed with the Skin of a Libbard, because of
the bespangled Heavens, and the beautiful variety of things in the World; to
live in a Desaert, because of the Singularity of the World; and Lastly, to be a
good Demon, by reason of the (...), that supreme Mind, Reason and
Understanding, that governs all in it. Pan therefore was not the mere Corporeal
World Senseless and Inanimate, but the Deity as displaying it self therein, and
pervading All things. Agreeably to which Diodorus Siculus determines, that
(...) and (...) were but two several Names for one and the same Deity, (as it
is well known that the whole Universe was frequently called by the Pagans
Jupiter also, as well as Pan.) And Socrates himself in Plato directs his Prayer
in a most devout and serious manner, to this Pan, that is, not the Corporeal
World or Senseless Matter, but an Intellectual Principle Ruling over all, or the
Supreme Deity diffusing it self through All; he therefore distinguishing him
from the Inferior Gods, (...)^ O Good (or Gracious) Pan; and ye other Gods,
who preside over this place; Grant that I may be Beautiful or Fair within, and
that those External things, which I have, may be such as may best agree with a
right Internal disposition of mind, and that I may account him to be rich that
is wise and just: The matter of which prayer, though it be excellent, yet is it
Paganically directed to Pan (that is the Supreme God) and the Inferior Gods
both together. Thus we see that as well according to the Greeks, as the
Egyptians, the First or Supreme God, and (...) or the Universe, were really the
same thing.

And here we cannot but by the way take notice of that famous and remarkable
Story of Plutarch's in his defect of Oracles, concerning Demons lamenting the
Death of the Great Pan. In the time of Tiberius (says he) certain persons
embarquing from Asia for Italy, toward the Evening sailed by the Echinades,
where being becalmed, they heard from thence a loud voice calling one Thamous
an Egyptian Mariner amongst them, and after the third time commanding him when
he came to the Palodes, to declare That the Great Pan was dead. He with the
advice of his company resolved, that if they had a quick gale when they came to
the Palodes, he would pass by silently, but if they should find themselves
there becalmed, he would then perform what the voice had commanded: But when
the ship arrived thither, there neither was any Gale of Wind nor agitation of
Water. Whereupon Thamous looking out of the hinder Deck, toward the Palodes,
pronounced these words with a loud voice, (...), The Great Pan is dead, which
he had no sooner done, but he was answered, with a Quire of many voices, making
a great Howling and Lamentation, not without a certain mixture of Admiration.
Plutarch, who gives much credit to this Relation, adds how Sollicitous Tiberius
the Emperor was, first concerning the truth thereof, and afterward, when he
had satisfied himself therein, concerning the Interpretation; he making great
Enquiry amongst his Learned men, who this Pan should be. But the only use which
that Philosopher makes of this Story is this, to prove that Demons having
Bodies as well as men, (though of a different kind from them and much more
longeve) yet were notwithstanding Mortal: he endeavoring from thence to salve
that Phenomenon of the Defect of Oracles, because the Demons who had formerly
haunted those places were now dead. But this being an idle Fancy of Plutarch's,
it is much more probably concluded, by Christian Writers; that this thing
coming to pass in the Reign of Tiberius when our Savior Christ was crucified,
was no other than a Lamentation of Evil Demons (not without a mixture of
Admiration) upon account of our Saviors Death, happening at that very time:
They not mourning out of Love for him that was dead, but as sadly presaging
evil to themselves from thence, as that which would threaten danger to their
Kingdom of Darkness, and a Period to that Tyranny and Domination which they had
so long exercised over Mankind; according to such Passages of Scripture as
these, Now is the Prince of this World judged; and Having spoiled
Principalities and Powers (by his Death upon the Cross) He triumphed over them
in it. Now our Savior Christ could not be called Pan, according to that Notion
of the word, as taken for nothing but the Corporeal World devoid of all manner
of Life, or else as endued only with a Plastic Nature; but this Appellation
might very well agree to him, as Pan was taken for the (...), that Reason and
Understanding by which all things were made, and by which they are all
governed, or for (...), that Divine Wisdom which diffuseth it self through all
things. Moreover Pan being used not so much for the naked and abstract Deity,
as the Deity as it were embodied in this Visible Corporeal World, might
therefore the better signify, God manifested in the Flesh, and clothed with a
Particular Humane Body (in which respect alone, he was capable of dying.)
Neither indeed was there any other Name, in all the Theology of the Pagans,
that could so well befit our Savior Christ as this.

We have now made it manifest, that according to the ancient Egyptian Theology,
(from whence the Greekish and European was derived) there was One Intellectual
Deity, One Mind or Wisdom, which as it did produce all things from it self, so
does (...), contain and comprehend the whole, and is it self in a manner All
things. We think fit in the next place to observe, how this Point of the Old
Egyptian Theology, viz. God's being All things, is every where insisted upon
throughout the Hermaick or Trismegistick Writings. We shall begin with the
Asclepian Dialogue or the (...), translated into Latin by Apuleius; in the
Entrance of which, the Writer having declared, Omnia Vnius esse, and Vnum esse
Omnia, that all things were of One, and that One was All things, he afterward
adds this explication thereof, Nonne hoc dixi, Omnia Unum esse, and Unum Omnia,
utpote quia in Creatore fuerint omnia, antequam creasset omnia? Nec immerito
Vnus est dictus Omnia, cujus membra sunt Omnia. Hujus itaque qui est Unus
Omnia, vel ipse est Creator omnium, in tota hac disputatione curato meminisse:
Have we not already declared, that All things are One, and One All things?
forasmuch as All things existed in the Creator, before they were made; Neither
is he improperly said to be All things, whose Members all things are. Be thou
therefore mindful in this whole disputation, of him who is One and All things,
or was the Creator of All. And thus afterward does he declare, that all
Created things were in the Deity before they were made, Idcirco non erant
quando nata non erant, sed in eo jam tunc erant unde nasci habuerunt, they did
not properly then exist before they were made, and yet at that very time, were
they in him from whom they were afterward produced. Again, he writes thus
concerning God, non spero totius Majestatis Effectorem, omnium rerum Patrem vel
Dominum, uno posse quamvis e multis composito nomine nuncupari. Hunc voca
potius omni nomine, siquidem sit Unus and Omnia; ut necesse sit aut Omnia
ipsius nomine, aut ipsum omnium nomine nuncupari. Hic ergo Solus Omnia, etc. I
cannot hope sufficienly to express, the Author of Majesty, and the Father and
Lord of all things, by any One Name, though compounded of never so many names.
Call him therefore by every Name, forasmuch as he is One and All things, P.
612. Colv.
so that of necessity, either All things must be called by His name, or he by
the Names of All things. And when he had spoken of the mutability of Created
things he adds, Solus Deus ipse In se, and A se, and Circum se, totus est
plenus atque persectus, isque sua firma stabilitas est; nec alicujus impulsu,
nec loco moveri potest, cum in eo sint Omnia, and in omnibus ipse est Solus:
God alone in himself, and from himself, and about himself, is altogether
perfect; and himself is his own stability. Neither can he be moved or changed,
by the impulse of any thing, since All things are in him, and he alone is in
All things. Lastly, to omit other places, Hic Sensibilis Mundus, P. 617.
receptaculum est omnium sensibilium specierum, ^ualitatum, vel corporum; quae
omnia sine Deo vegetari non possunt: Omnia enim Deus, and a Deo Omnia; and sine
hoc, nec Fuit aliquid, nec Est, nec Erit; Omnia enim ab eo, and in ipso, and
per ipsum -- Si totum animadvertes, vera ratione perdisces; Mundum ipsum
Sensibil^m, and quae in eo sunt omnia, a Superiore illo Mundo, quasi Vestimento
esse contecta: This Sensible World, is the Receptacle of all Forms, Qualities,
and Bodies, all which cannot be vegetated and quickened without God; for God is
All Things, and All things are from God, and all things the Effect of his Will;
and without God, there neither Was any thing, nor Is, nor Shall be; but all
things are from him, and in him, and by him -- And if you will consider things
after a right manner, you shall learn, that this sensible World, and all the
things therein, are covered all over, with that superior World (or Deity) as
it were with a Garment. As for the other Trismegistick Books of Ficinus his
Edition, the Third of them called (...), is thus concluded, (...)^ The Divinity
is the whole Mundane Compages, or Constitution: for Nature is also placed in
the Deity. In the Fifth Book written upon this Argument, (...), That the
Invisible God is must manifest, we read thus, (...)^ For there is nothing in
the whole World, which he is not, He is both the things that are, and the
things that are not; for the things that are, He has manifested, but the
things that are not, He contains within himself. And again, (...)^ He is both
Incorporeal and Omnicorporeal, for there is nothing of any Body, which he is
not; He is all things that are, and therefore he has all Names, because all
things are from one Father; and therefore he has no Name, because he is the
Father of all things. And in the close of the same Book, (...)^ For what shall
I praise thee? for those things which thou have made? or for those things which
thou have not made? for those things which thou have manifested, or for those
things which thou have hidden and concealed within thy self? And for what cause
shall I praise thee? because I am my own, as having something proper, and
distinct from thee? Thou art whatsoever I am, thou art whatsoever I do, or say,
for thou art All things, and there is nothing which thou art not; thou art that
which is made, and thou art that which is unmade. Where it is observable, that
before things were Made, God is said (...), to Hide them within himself; but
when they are made, (...), to Manifest and reveil them from himself. Book the
Eighth, (...)^ Understand that the whole World is from God, and in God; for God
is the Beginning, Comprehension and Constitution of all things. Book the Ninth,
(...)^ I would not say, that God Has all things, but rather declare the truth,
and say that he Is All things; not as receiving them from without, but as
sending them forth from himself. Again afterward in the same Book, (...)^
There shall never be a time, when any thing that is, shall cease to be, for
when I say any thing that Is, I say any thing of God; for God has all things
in him and there is neither any thing without God, nor God without any thing.
Book the Tenth, (...); What is God, but the very Being of all things that yet
are not, and the Subsistence of things that are. And again, (...), God is both
the Father and Good, because he is All things. Book the Eleventh, (...)^ God
acting immediately from himself, is always in his own work, Himself being that
which he makes; for if that were never so little separated from him, all would
of necessity fall to nothing and die. Again, (...), All things are in God, but
not as lying in a place. And further, since our own Soul can by Cogitation and
Fancy, become what it will, and where it will, any thing, or in any place,
(...)^ You may consider God in the same manner, as containing the whole World
within himself, as his own Conceptions and Cogitations. And in the Close of
that Chapter, that which is also thence cited by St. Cyril, is to the same
purpose, (...)^ Is God Invisible? Speak worthily of him, for who is more
manifest than he? for this very reason did he make all things, that thou
might see him through all things; This is the Virtue and Goodness of the
Deity, to be seen through all things. The Mind is seen in thinking, but God in
Working or Making. Book the Twelfth, (...)^ I have heard the good Demon (for he
alone, as the first begotten God, beholding all things, spoke Divine Words) I
have heard him sometimes saying, that One is All things. Again in the same
Chapter, (...)^ This whole World is intimately united to him, and observing the
order and will of its Father, has the fullness of Life in it, and there is
nothing in it through Eternity (neither Whole nor Part) which does not live;
for there neither is, nor has been, nor shall be, any thing Dead in the world.
The meaning is, that all things vitally depend upon the Deity, who is said in
Scripture, to quicken and enliven all things. (...)^ This is God, the Universe
or All. And in this Universe there is nothing which he is not: Wherefore there
is neither Magnitude nor Place nor Quality nor Figure nor Time about God, for
he is All or the Whole, (but those things belong to Parts.) And the Arcane
Cantion, though that Thirteenth Book to which it is subjoyned be
supposititious, yet harps much upon this Point of the Egyptian Theology, That
God is All: (...)^ I am about to praise the Lord of the Creation, the All and
the One. And again, All the Powers that are in me, praise the One and the All.
Book the Fifteenth, (...)^ If any one go about to separate the All from the
One, he will destroy the All, or the Universe, for All ought to be One. Book
the Sixteenth, (...)^ I will begin with a Prayer to him, who is the Lord and
Maker and Father and Bound of all things; and who being All things, is One, and
being One is All things; for the fullness of All things is One and in One. And
again, (...)^ All things are Parts of God, but if all things be Parts of God,
then God is All things; Wherefore He making All things, does, as it were, make
himself.

Now by all this we see, how well these Trismegistick Books, agree with that
Ancient Egyptian Inscription, in the Temple of Sais, That God is all that Was,
Is, and Shall be. Wherefore the Egyptian Theology thus undoubtedly asserting,
One God that was All things; it is altogether impossible that it should
acknowledge a Multitude of Self-existent, and Independent Deities.

Hitherto we have taken notice of Two several Egyptian Names, for One and the
same Supreme Deity; Hammon and Neith; but we shall find that besides these, the
Supreme God was sometimes worshipped by the Egyptians under other Names and
Notions also; as of Isis, Osiris and Sarapis. For first, though Isis have been
taken by some for the Moon, by others for the whole Earth, by others for Ceres
or Corn, by others for the Land of Egypt, (which things in what sense they were
Deified by the Egyptians, will be elsewhere declared) yet was she undoubtedly
taken also sometimes, for an Universal and All-comprehending Numen. For
Plutarch affirms, that Isis and Neith, were really one and the same God among
the Egyptians, and therefore the Temple of Neith or Minerva at Sais, where the
forementioned Inscription was found, is called by him, the Temple of Isis; so
that Isis as well as Neith or Minerva among the Egyptians, was there described,
as That God, who is All that Was, Is, and Shall be, and whose Veil no Mortal
has ever uncovered; that is, not a particular God, but an Universal and
All-comprehending Numen. And this may be yet further confirmed, from that
Ancient Inscription and Dedication to the Goddess Isis, still extant at Capua.

TIBI.
UNA. QUAE.
ES. OMNIA.
DEA. ISIS.
Where the Goddess Isis is plainly declared to be (...), One and All things,
that is, a Universal and All-comprehending Deity. And with this agrees also
that Oration of this Goddess Isis in Apuleius; Metam. l. 12.
En adsum tuis, commota, Luci, precibus, rerum Natura Parens, elementorum
omnium Domina, seculorum Progenies initialis: Summa numinum, Regina marium,
Prima Coelitum, Deorum Dearumque Facies uniformis; quae coeli luminosa culmina,
maris salubria flamina, inferorum deplorata silentia, nutibus meis dispenso.
Cujus Numen unicum multiformi specie, ritu vario, nomine multijugo totus
veneratur orbis: Behold here am I, moved by thy Prayers, Lucius, that Nature
which was the Parent of things; the Mistress of all the Elements; the Beginning
and Original of Ages; the Sum of all the Divine Powers; the Queen of the Seas;
the First of the Celestial Inhabitants; the Uniform Face of Gods and Goddesses;
which with my becks dispense the Luminous Heights of the Heavens, the wholesome
Blasts of the Sea, and the deplorable silences of Hell; whose only Divine
Power, the whole World worships and adores, in a Multiform manner, and under
Different Rites and Names. From which words it is plain, that this Goddess
Isis, was not the mere Animated Moon (which was rather a Symbol of her) but
that she was an Universal Deity, comprehensive of the whole Nature of things;
the One Supreme God, worshipped by the Pagans, under several Names, and with
different Rites. And this is the plain meaning of those last words Numen
Vnicum, etc. that the whole World worshippeth one and the same Supreme God, in
a multiform manner, with various Rites, and under many different Names. For
besides the Several Names of the other Pagans there mentioned, the Egypptians
worshipped it, under the Names of Hammon, Neith, and others that shall be
afterward declared. And thus was Isis again worshipped and invoked, as the
unicum Numen, or only Divine power, by Apuleius himself, in these following
Words; Tu sancta and humani generis Sospitatrix perpetua, dulcem matris
affectionem miseris tribuis, fatorum inextricabiliter contorta retractas litia,
fortunae tempestates mitigas, and stellarum noxios meatus cohibes: Te Superi
colunt, observant Inferi. Tu rotas orbem, luminas solemn, regis mundum, calcas
Tartarum. Tibi respondent sydera, gaudent numina, serviunt elementa: Tuo nutu
spirant flamina, etc. Thou holy and perpetual Savior of Mankind that art
always bountiful in cherishing Mortals, and do manifest the dear affections
of a M^^her to them in their Calamities, thou extricatest the involved threads
of Fate, mitigatest the tempests of Fortune, and restrainest the noxious
Influences of the Stars: the Celestial Gods worship thee, the Infernal Powers
obey thee; thou rollest round the Heavens, enlightnest the Sun, governest the
World, treadest upon Tartarus or Hell; the Stars obey thee, the Elements serve
thee, at thy beck the winds blow, etc. Where Isis is plainly supposed to be an
Universal Numen and supreme Monarch of the World. Neither may this hinder, that
she was called a Goddess as Neith also was; these Pagans making their Deities
to be indifferently of either Sex, Male or Female. But much more was Osiris
taken for the Supreme Deity, whose name was sometimes said, to have signified
in the Egyptian Language, (...), that which had many Eyes, sometimes (...), an
active and beneficent Force; (and whose Hieroglyphick was an Eye and a
Scepter;) the former signifying Providence and Wisdom, and the Latter Power and
Majesty (as Plutarch tells us) Who also is thus described in Apuleius, Deus
Deorum magnorum potior, and majorum summus, and Summorum Maximus, and Maximorum
Regnator, Osiris: That God who is the chiefest of the Greater Gods, and the
Greatest of the Chiefest, and which Reigns over the Greatest. Wherefore the
same Apuleius also tells us, that Isis and Osiris were really one and the same
Supreme Numen, though considered under different Notions and Worshipped with
different Rites, in these words, Quanquam connexa imo vero unica, ratio
Numinis, Religionisque esset, tamen Teletae discrimen esse maximum; though Isis
and Osiris be really One and the same Divine Power, yet are their Rites and
Ceremonies very different. The proper notion of Osiris, being thus declared by
Plutarch, (...), that First and Highest of all Beings, which is the same with
Good. Agreeably whereunto, Jamblichus affirms, (...), L. 5. p. 257.
that God as the Cause of all Good is called Osiris by the Egyptians. Lastly,
as for Sarapis, though Origin tells us, that this was a new upstart Deity, set
up by Ptolemy in Alexandria: yet this God in his Oracle to Nicocrion the King
of Cyprus, declares himself also to be a Universal Numen, comprehending the
whole World, in these words, (...), etc. to this Sense; The Starry Heaven is my
Head, the Sea my Belly, my Ears are in the Either, and the bright Light of the
Sun is my clear piercing Eye. And doubtless he was worshipped by many under
this Notion. For as Philarchus wrote thus concerning him, (...), That Sarapis
was the Name of that God, which orders and governs tbe whole World; so does
Plutarch himself conclude, that Osiris and Sarapis, were (...), both of them
Names of One God, and the same Divine Power. Accordingly whereunto Diodorus
Siculus determines, that these Three, Hammon, Osiris and Sarapis, were but
different names for one and the same Deity, or Supreme God. Notwithstanding
which, Porphyrius it seems, had a very ill conceit of that Power which
manifested it self in the Temple of this God Sarapis, above all the other Pagan
Gods, he suspecting it to be no other than the very Prince of evil Demons or
Devils, (...), Eusebius. Praep. L. 4. cap 23.
etc. We do not vainly or without ground suspect and conjecture, that the evil
Demons, are under Sarapis as their Prince and Head: this appearing (says he)
not only from those Rites of Appeasment used in the Worship of this God, but
also from the Symbol of him, which was a Three-headed Dog, signifying that Evil
Demon, which rules in those Three Elements, Water, Earth, and Air. Neither
indeed can it be doubted, but that it was an Evil Demon or Devil, that
delivered Oracles in this Temple of Sarapis as well as elsewhere among the
Pagans, however he affected to be worshipped as the Supreme God.

Besides all this, Eusebius himself from Porphyrius informs us, that the
Egyptians acknowledged One Intellectual Demiurgus, or Maker of the World, under
the name of Cneph, whom they worshipped in a Statue of Humane Form, and a
blackish Sky-colored Complexion; holding in his hand a Girdle and a Scepter,
and wearing upon his Head a Princely Plume, and thrusting forth an Egg out of
his Mouth. Praep. L. 3. c. 11. p. 115.
The reason of which Hieroglyphick is thus given, (...)^ Because that Wisdom
and Reason, by which the World was made, is not easy to be found out but
hidden and obscure. And because this is the Fountain of Life and King of all
things; and because it is Intellectually moved, signified by the Feathers upon
his head. Moreover by the Egg thrust out of the Mouth of this God, was meant
the World, created by the Eternal (...), and from this Cneph, was said to be
Generated or Produced Another God, whom the Egyptians call Phtha and the Greeks
Vulcan; of which Phtha more afterward. That the Egyptians were the most
eminent Asserters of the Cosmogonia or Temporary Beginning of the World, has
been already declared; for which cause the Scholiast upon Ptolemy thus
perstringeth them, (...), The Egyptians were wont to talk perpetually of the
Genesis or Generation of the World. And Asclepius an ancient Egyptian Writer in
his Myriogenesis, Scal Emend. Temp. l. 5. de condit. mundi.
affirms that according to the Egyptian Tradition, the Sun was made in Libra.
But that the Egyptians did not suppose the world to have been made by Chance,
as Epicurus and other Atheistical Philosophers did, but by an Intellectual
Demiurgus called by them Cneph is evident from this Testimony of Porphyrius.
Which Cneph was looked upon by them as an Unmade and Eternal Deity, and for
this very cause the Inhabitants of Thebais refused to worship any other God
besides him, as Plutarch informs us in these words, De Is. and Osir.
(...)^ Whilst the other Egyptians paid their proportion of Tax imposed upon
them, for the nourishment of those sacred Animals, worshipped by them, the
Inhabitants of Thebais only refused, because they would acknowledge no Mortal
God, and worshipped him only whom they call Cneph, an Unmade and Eternal Deity.

Having now made it undeniably manifest, that the Egyptians had an
acknowledgement amongst them of One Supreme Universal and Unmade Deity, we
shall conclude this whole Discourse with the Two following Observations; First
that a great part of the Egyptian Polytheism, was really nothing else but the
Worshipping of One and the same Supreme God, under many different Names and
Notions, as of Hammon, Neith, Isis, Osiris, Sarapis, Kneph, to which may be
added Phtha, and those other names in Jamblichus, of Eicton and Emeph. And that
the Pagans universally over the whole world did the like, was affirmed also by
Apuleius, in that forecited Passage of his, Numen Vnicum, multiformi specie,
ritu vario, nomine multijugo, totus veneratur orbis, the Whole World
worshippeth one only Supreme Numen in a multiform manner, under different names
and with different Rites. Which different names for one and the same Supreme
God, might therefore be mistaken by some of the sottish Vulgar amongst the
Pagans, as well as they have been by learned men of these later times, for so
many distinct Unmade and Self-existent Deities.

Nevertheless here may well be a Question started, whether amongst those
several Egyptian Names of God, some might not signify distinct Divine
Hypostases Subordinate; and particularly, whether there were not some Footsteps
of a Trinity, to be found in the old Egyptian Theology? For since Orpheus,
Pythagoras and Plato, who all of them asserted a Trinity of Divine Hypostases,
unquestionably derived much of their Doctrine from the Egyptians, it may
reasonably be suspected, that these Egyptians did the like before them. And
indeed Athanasius Kircherus makes no doubt at all hereof, but tells us that in
the Pamphylian Obelisk, that First Hieroglyphick of a Winged Globe, with a
Serpent coming out of it, was the Egyptian Hieroglyphick of a Triform Deity, or
Trinity of Divine Hypostases; he confirming the same, from the Testimony of
Abenephius an Arabian Writer, and a Chaldaick Fragment imputed to
Sanchuniathon; the Globe being said to signify, the First Incomprehensible
Deity without Beginning or End, Self-existent; the Serpent the Divine Wisdom
and Creative Virtue; and lastly the Wings, that Active Spirit, that cherishes,
quickneth, and enliveneth all things. How far credit is to be given to this, we
leave others to judge; but the clearest footsteps that we can find any where of
an Egyptian Trinity is in Jamblichus his Book, written concerning their
Mysteries; which whole place therefore is worth the setting down, (...) --
(...). According to another order or method, Hermes places the God Emeph or
Cneph.
, as the Prince and Ruler over all the Celestial Gods, whom he affirms to be
a Mind understanding himself and converting his Cogitations or Intellections
into himself. Before which Emeph or Cneph.
, he places One Indivisible, whom he calls Eicton, in which is the first
Intelligible, and which is worshipped only by silence. After which Two, Eicton
and Emeph or Cneph.
, the Demiurgick Mind and President of truth as with wisdom it proceeds to
Generations, and brings forth the hidden Powers of the occult Reasons into
light, is called in the Egyptian Language Ammon; as it Artificially effects all
things with truth, Phtha (which Phtha the Greeks attending only to the
Artificialness thereof call Hephestus or Vulcan) as it is productive of Good,
Osiris, besides other names that it has according to its other Powers and
Energies. In which Passage of Jamblichus we have plainly Three Divine
Hypostases, or universal Principles Subordinate, according to the Hermaick
Theology; First an Indivisible Unity called Eicton, Secondly a Perfect Mind
converting its Intellections into it self, called Emeph or Hemphta, and Thirdly
theimmediate Principle of Generation, called by several names, according to its
several Powers, as Phtha, Ammon, Osiris and the like: So that these Three Names
with others, according to Jamblichus, did in the Egyptian Theology, signify,
one and the same Third Divine Hypostasis. How well these Three Divine
Hypostases of the Egyptians, agree with the Pythagorick or Platonic Trinity,
of First, (...), Unity and Goodness it self, Secondly, (...), Mind, and Thirdly
(...), Soul, I need not here declare. Only we shall call to mind what has been
already intimated, that that Reason or Wisdom which was the Demiurgus of the
World, and is properly the Second of the forementioned Hypostases, was called
also amongst the Egyptians, by another name, Cneph; from whom was said to have
been produced or begotten the God Phtha, the Third Hypostasis of the Egyptian
Trinity; so that Cneph and Emeph are all one. Wherefore we have here plainly an
Egyptian Trinity of Divine Hypostases Subordinate, Eicton, Emeph (or Cneph) and
Phtha. We know not what to add more to this of Jamblichus, concerning an
Egyptian Trinity, unless we should insist upon those Passages which have been
cited by some of the Fathers to this purpose out of Hermaick or Trismegistick
Books, whereof there was one before set down out of St. Cyril; or unless we
should again call to mind, that Citation out of Damascius, (...), that
according to the Egyptians, there is One Principle of all things praised under
the name of the Unknown Darkness, and this Thrice repeated. Agreeably to which
Augustinus Steuchus produces another Passage out of the same Philosophic
Writer; that the Egyptians made, (...), the First Principle of all, to be
Darkness above all Knowledge and Understanding (or Unknown Darkness) they
Thrice repeating the same. Which the forementioned Steuchus takes to be a
clear acknowledgement of a Trinity of Divine Hypostases in the Egyptian
Theology.

Our Second Observation is this, That the Egyptian Theology as well as the
Orphick (which was derived from it) asserting One Incorporeal Deity, that is
All Things; as it is evident, that it could not admit a Multitude of
Self-existent and Independent Deities, so did the seeming Polytheism of these
Egyptians proceed also in great measure from this Principle of theirs not
rightly understood; they being led thereby, in a certain sense, (...) to
Personate and Deifie the Several Parts of the World, and Things of Nature,
bestowing the Names of Gods and Goddesses upon them. Not that they therefore
worshipped the Inanimate Parts of the World as such, Much less Things not
Substantial but mere Accidents, for so many Real, Distinct, Personal Deities;
but because conceiving that God who was All things, ought to be Worshipped in
All things (such especially as were most Beneficial to Mankind) they did,
according to that Asclepian and Trismegistick Doctrine beforementioned, Call
God by the Name of every thing, or Every thing by the Name of God. And that the
wiser of them very well understood that it was really One and the same Simple
Deity, that was thus worshipped amongst them by piecemeal, in the several
Parts of the World, and Things of Nature, and under different Names and
Notions, with different Ceremonies, De Is. and Os. 351.
is thus declared by Plutarch, (...)^ Isis is a Greek Word, which signifies
Knowledge; and Typhon is the Enemy to this Goddess; who being puffed up by
Ignorance and Error, does Distract and Discerp the Holy Doctrine (of the Simple
Deity) which Isis collects together again, and makes up into One* and thus
delivers it to those who are initiated into her sacred Mysteries, in order to
Deification. In which words, Plutarch intimates, that the Egyptian Fable, of
Osiris being Mangled and Cut in pieces by Typhon, did Allegorically signify
the Discerption and Distraction of the Simple Deity, by reason of the Weakness
and Ignorance of vulgar minds (not able to comprehend it altogether at once)
into several Names and Partial Notions, which yet True Knowledge and
Understanding, that is, Isis, makes up whole again and unites into One.

XIX. It is well known that the Poets, though they were the Prophets of the
Pagans, and pretending to a kind of Divine Inspiration, did otherwise embue the
minds of the Vulgar, with a certain Sense of Religion, and the Notions of
Morality, yet these notwithstanding were the grand Depravers and Adulterators
of the Pagan Theology. For this they were guilty of upon several Accounts. As
First, Their attributing to the Gods, in their Fables concerning them, all
manner of Humane Imperfections, Passions and Vices. Which abuse of theirs, the
wiser of the Pagans were in all ages highly sensible of and offended with, as
partly appears from these Free Passages vented upon the Stage, -- (...) Eur^p.
in Ion^.

(...)^
(...)
(...);
-- Si quis est mortalium
Qui scelera patrat, exigunt poenam Dei:
At nonne iniquum est, vos, suas leges quibus
Gens debet hominum, jure nullo vivere?
To this sense: Since mortal men are punished by the Gods for transgressing
their Laws, is it not unjust, that ye Gods who write these Laws, should your
selves live without Law? And again, -- (...)
(...)
(...)^
-- Nulla nos posthac notet
Censura, siquando ista quae superos decent
Imitamur homines. Culpa ad auctores redit.
Let men no longer be blamed for imitating the Evil Actions of the Gods; for
they can only be justly blamed, who teach men to do such things by their
Examples.

Secondly, the Poets were further guilty of Depraving the Religion and Theology
of the Pagans, by their so frequently Personating and Deifying all the Things
of Nature, and Parts of the World, and calling them by the Names of those Gods,
that were supposed to preside over them; that is, of the several Divine Powers
manifested in them. This Plutarch taxes the Poets with, where giving directions
for young men's reading of their VVritings, he thus seasonably cautions against
the danger of it, (...). -- (...)^ It is very profitable and necessary if we
would receive good from the Writings of the Poets and not hurt; that we should
understand how they use the names of the Gods in different senses. Wherefore
the Poets sometimes use the names of the Gods, properly, as intending to
signify thereby the Gods themselves, and sometimes again they use them
Improperly and Equivocally, for those Powers which the Gods are the Givers and
Dispensers of, or the Things which they Preside over. As for example, Vulcane
is sometimes used by the Poets, for that God or Divine Power which presides
over Fire and the Arts that operate by Fire, and sometimes again the word is
taken by them for Fire it self. So Mars in like manner, is sometimes used for
the God which presides over Military Affairs, and sometimes again it signifies
nothing else but War. An instance whereof is there given by Plutarch out of
Sophocles. (...),
(...)^
Mars (O Mulieres) caecus hirsuto suis
Velut ore frendens, cuncta commiscet mala.
And we might give this other instance of the same from Virgil, -- Furit toto
Mars impius orb. For the God of War, that is, the Divine Providence that
presides over Military Affairs, could not be called Impious or Wicked, but it
is War it self that is there so styled.

Indeed we shall afterward make it appear, that the first Original of this
business, proceeded from a certain Philosophic Opinion amongst the Pagans, That
God was diffused throughout the whole World, and was himself in a manner All
Things; and therefore ought to be Worshipped in All Things; but the Poets were
principally the men, who carried it on thus far, by Personating the several
Inanimate Parts of the World and Things of Nature, to make such a Multitude of
distinct Gods and Goddesses of them. Which Humor, though it were chiefly
indulged by them, (...), only for the delight and pleasure of the Reader,
besides gratifying their own Poetic Phancies; yet was it a matter of Dangerous
Cons^quence, as the same Plutarch gravely and soberly advizes, in his Book de
Iside, it begetting in some gross and irrational Superstition (that is, in our
Christian Language, Idolatry) and carrying others on to downright Impiety and
Atheism. But this will be afterward also again insisted on.

Wherefore in the next place, we shall observe that the Poets did also
otherwise deprave the Theology of the Pagans, so as to make it look somewhat
more Aristocratically, and this principally Two manner of ways; First by their
speaking so much of the Gods in General and without Distinction, and
attributing the Government of the Whole World to them in Common, so as if it
were managed and carried on, Communi Consilio Deorum, by a Common Council and
Republic of Gods, wherein all things were determined by a Majority of Votes,
and as if their Jupiter or Supreme God were no more amongst them than a Speaker
of a House of Lords or Commons, or the Chairman of a Committee. In which they
did indeed attribute more to their Inferior Deities, than according to their
own Principles they ought.

And Secondly (which is the Last Depravation of the Pagan Theology by these
Poets) by their making those that were really nothing else but several Names
and Notions of one and the same Supreme Deity, according to its several Powers
manifested in the World, or the different Effects produced by it; to be so many
really distinct Persons and Gods; insomuch as sometimes to be at odds and
variance with one another and even with Jupiter himself. This St. Basil seems
to take notice of, in his Oration, How Young men may be profited by the
Writings of the Greeks, (...)^ But least of all will we give credit to the
Poets, where they discourse concerning the Gods, and speak of them as Many
(Distinct and Independent) Persons, and that not agreeing amongst themselves
neither, but siding several ways, and perpetually quarrelling with one another.

Notwithstanding all which Extravagancies and Miscarriages of the Poets, we
shall now make it plainly to appear, that they really asserted, not a Multitude
of Self-existent and Independent Deities; but One only Unmade Deity, and all
the other, Generated or Created Gods. This has been already proved concerning
Orpheus from such Fragments of the Orphick Poems, as have been owned and
attested by Pagan Writers: but it would be further evident, might we give
credit to any of those other Orphick Verses, that are found cited by Christians
and Jews only (and we cannot reasonably conclude all these to be counterfeit
and supposititious) amongst which we have this for one, (...), There is One
only Unmade God, and all other Gods and Things, are the Offspring of this One.
Moreover when God in the same Orphick Fragments, is styled (...), both Father
and Mother of all things (accordingly as it was observed before) that both the
Orphick and Egyptian Theology, made the Supreme Deity especially, to be (...),
Hermaphroditical, or Male and Female together; This, as Clemens Alexandrinus
rightly interprets the meaning of it, was to signify, (...), the Production of
things out of nothing or from the Deity alone, without any Preexistent or
Self-existent Matter.

But we shall pass from Orpheus to Homer. Now it is certain that Homer's Gods,
were not all Eternal, Unmade and Self-existent, he plainly declaring the
contrary concerning the Gods in general; that they had a Genesis, that is, a
Temporary Production, as in that forecited Verse of his (...), etc. The Ocean
from whence the Gods were Generated, Where by Gods are meant all the Animated
parts of the world superior to men, but principally (as Eustathius observes)
the Stars, (...), Gods (says he) are here put for Stars. And as the same
Philologer further adds, the Gods or Stars, do by a Synechdoche signify All
Things, or the Whole World, (...), a Part being put for the Whole, accordingly
as the same Poet elsewhere declares his sense, speaking likewise of the Ocean,
-- (...), Which was the Original of all things, or from whence ( not only the
Gods but also) all other things were Generated. Wherefore the full meaning of
Homer was this, That the Gods or Stars, together with this whole Visible World,
had a Temporary Production, and were at first made out of the Ocean, that is,
out of the Watery Chaos. So that Homer's Theogonia as well as Hesiod's, was one
and the same thing with the Cosmogonia, his Generation of Gods, the same with
the Generation or Creation of the World, both of them having in all probability
derived it from the Mosaic Cabala, or Tradition. And Eustathius tells us,
that, according to the Ancients, Homer's (...), described Il. s. was (...), an
obscure signification of the Cosmogenia or Cosmogonia.

Nevertheless though (...) or the Gods in general, be by Homer, thus generated
from the Ocean or Watery Chaos, yet this is to be understood only of the
Inferior Gods, and He is supposed to be distinguished from them, who in the
same Poet is frequently called, (...), God by way of eminency (to whom he
plainly ascribes Omnipotence) and (...) or Jupiter, whom he styles (...), the
most powerful of all, and (...), the First and Chiefest of the Gods, and (...)
and (...), the Highest of Gods and Governors, and whom he affirms infinitely
to transcend the Gods, Il. th. (...). And to reign as well over Gods as Men,
Il. a. -- (...). Lastly, whom he makes to be (...), the Father of the Gods as
well as Men, that is, nothing less than the Creator of them and the whole
World. He therefore who thus produced the Gods and Stars, out of the Ocean or
Watery Chaos, must needs be excluded out of that number of Gods, so as not to
have been himself Generated or made out of it. Thus have we before observed,
that (...), or the Gods in general, are frequently taken, both by Homer and
other Greek Writers, in way of distinction from (...) or Jupiter, that is, for
the Inferior Gods only.

It is true indeed that others of the Pagan Gods besides Jupiter, were by the
Latins in their solemn Rites and Prayers, styled Patres, Fathers; and as
Jupiter is nothing else but Jovis Pater, contracted into one word, so was Mars
called by them Marspiter, and Saturnus, Janus, Neptunus and Liber had the like
addition also made to their names, Saturnuspater, Januspater, Neptunuspater,
Liberpater; and not only so, but even their very Heroes also (as for example,
Quirinus) had this honorable title of Father bestowed on them, All which
appears from those Verses of Lucilius, Vt nemo sit nostrum quin aut Pater
Optimus Divum,
Aut Neptunus Pater, Liber, Saturnus Pater, Mars,
Janus, Quirinus Pater nomen dicatur ad unum
Notwithstanding which, here is a great difference to be be observed, that
though those other Gods were called Fathers, yet none of them was ever called,
either by the Greeks, (...), or by the Latins, Pater Optimus Divum, save only
(...) or Jupiter, the Supreme Deity.

And that Homer was thus generally understood by the Pagans themselves to have
asserted a Divine Monarchy, or One Supreme Deity ruling over All, may further
appear from these following Citations. Plutarch in his Platonic Questions,
(...)^ Zenocrates called Jupiter, Hypaton, or the Highest, but before him Homer
styled that God, who is the Prince of all Princes, (...), the Highest of Rulers
or Governors. Again the same Plutarch de Iside and and Osiride, P. 371.
(...)^ The Egyptians when they described Osiris by those Hieroglyphics of an
Eye and a Scepter, did by the former of them signify Providence, and by the
latter Power; as Homer when he calls that (...) or Jupiter, who rules and
reigns over all things, (...) and (...), seems by the word (...), to denote
his Power and Sovereignty, but by (...) his Wisdom and Knowledge. P. 96.
To Plutarch may be added Proclus, who upon Plato's Timaeus, having proved that
according to that Philosopher, there was (...), One only Maker of the whole
World, affirms the same likewise of that Divine Poet Homer (as he there styles
him) (...)^ That he also throughout all his Poesy, praises Jupiter, as the
Highest of all Rulers, and the Father both of Gods and Men, and attributes all
Demiurgical Notions to him. Whereupon he concludes in this manner, (...)^ And
thus we have made it manifest, that all the Greekish Theology, universally
ascribes to (...) or Jupiter, the Making of all things. Lastly, Aristotle
himself confirms the same with his Testimony, where he writes of the Paternal
Authority after this manner, De Rep. L. 1. c. 12
(...), -- (...), (...)^ The Paternal Power or Authority over Children, is a
Kingly Authority: Wherefore Homer when he intended to set forth Jupiter 's
Kingly Power over all, very well called him the Father of Men and Gods. For he
that is a King by Nature, ought both to differ from those that he reigns
over, and also to be of the same kind with them; as the Senior is to the
Junior, and he that Begets to his Offspring. Where Aristotle's sense seems
to be this, That Jupiter had therefore a Natural and not acquired Kingly Power
over all the Gods, because they were all his Offspring and Begotten by him, as
well as Men. In which Passage therefore Aristotle plainly accquits and frees
Homer from all suspicion of Atheism.

As for Hesiod, if we had not already sufficiently proved from his Theogonia,
that all his Gods (that is his Inferior Deities) were Generated and Made, as
well as Men, it might be made unquestionably evident, from this Verse of his in
his Opera, (...), When the Gods and Mortal men, were both together, alike made
or Generated. Where the word (...) is thus interpreted by the Greek Scholiasts,
(...) and (...), i. e. The Gods and Men, were both alike made from the same
Root or Stock. And though it follows immediately after, (...)
(...)^
That first of all a Golden Age of men was made by the Immortal Gods; Yet
Moschopulus there notes, (...)^ The Immortal Gods made; the true meaning (says
he) is, that Jupiter alone made, this First golden Age of Men; as may be proved
from other places in the same Poet; and though he speak of the Gods in general
yet does he but transfer that, which was the work of One upon all of the like
kind. And there are several other Instances, of this Poets using (...) for
(...), Gods for God. But it is possible that Hesiod's meaning might be the same
with Plato's, that though the Inferior Mundane Gods were all made at first by
the Supreme God, as well as Men, yet they being made something sooner than Men,
did afterward contribute also to the Making of men.

But Hesiod's Theogonia or Generation of Gods, is not to be understood
universally neither, but only of the Inferior Gods, that (...) or Jupiter
being to be excepted out of the number of them, whom the same Hesiod as well as
Homer, makes to be the Father of Gods, as also the King of them, in these
words, (...)
(...).
And attributes the Creation of all things to him, as Proclus writes upon this
place, (...), etc. By whom all Mortal men are, (...), by whom all things are,
and not by chance; the Poet by a Synechdoche, here ascribing the making of all
to Jupiter. Wherefore Hesiod's Theogonia is to be understood of the Inferior
Gods only, and not of (...) or Jupiter, who was the Father and Maker of them
(though out of a Watery Chaos) and himself therefore (...), Self-existent or
Unmade.

In like manner, that Pindar's Gods were not Eternal, but Made or Generated, is
plainly declared by him in these words, (...) Nem, Od. 6*

(...)
(...)^
Vnum Hominum, Vnum Deorum genus,
Et ex Vnaspiramus
Matre utrique.
There is one kind both of Gods and Men, and we both breath from the same
Mother, or spring from the same Original. Where by the common Mother both of
Gods and Men, the Scholiast understands the Earth and Chaos, taking the Gods
here for the Inferior Deities only, and principally the Stars.

This of Pindar's therefore is to be understood, of all the other Gods, That
they were made as well as men out of the Earth or Chaos, but not of that
Supreme Deity, whom the same Pindar elsewhere calls, (...), the most Powerful
of the Gods, and (...), the Lord of all things, and (...), the Cause of every
thing, and (...), that God who is the best Artificer, or was the Framer of the
whole World, and as Clemens Alexandrinus tells us, (...), or the Universe.
Which God also, according to Pindar, Cheiron instructed Achilles to worship
principally, above all the other Gods. Pyth. Od. 6.
-- (...)
(...),
(...)^
The sense of which words is thus declared by the Scholiast, (...)^ That he
should honor and worship the Loud-sounding Jupiter, the Lord of Thunder and
Lightning, transcendently above all the other Gods. Which by the way confutes
the Opinion of those who contend, that the Supreme God, as such, was not at all
Worshipped by the Pagans.

However this is certain concerning these Three, Homer, Hesiod and Pindar; that
they must of necessity either have been all absolute Atheists, in acknowledging
no Eternal Deity at all, but making senseless Chaos, Night and the Ocean, the
Original of all their Gods without exception, and therefore of Jupiter himself
too, that King and Father of them, or else assert One only Eternal Unmade
Self-existent Deity; so as that all the other Gods were Generated or Created by
that One. Which latter doubtless was their genuine sense; and the only reason
why Aristotle and Plato might possibly sometime have a suspicion of the
contrary, seems to have been this, their not understanding that Mosaic
Cabbala, which both Hesiod and Homer followed, of the World's, that is, both
Heaven and Earth's, being made at first out of a Watery Chaos; for thus is the
Tradition declared by St. Peter, Ep. 2. Chapter 3.

There might be several remarkable Passages to the same purpose, produced out
of those two Tragic Poets, Aeschylus and Sophocles; which yet because they
have been already cited, by Justin Martyr, Clemens Alexandrinus, and others; to
avoid unnecessary tediousness, we shall here pass by. Only we think fit to
observe concerning that one famous Passage of Sophocles, (...),
(...),
(...), etc.
Vnus profecto, Vnus est tantum Deus,
Coeli solique machinam qui condidit,
Vadumque Ponti coerulum, and vim Spiritus* etc.
There is in truth, One only God, who made Heaven and Earth, the Sea, Air and
Winds, etc. After which follows also, something against Image Worship; That
though this be such as might well become a Christian, and be no where now to be
found in those extant Tragedies of this Poet (many whereof have been lost) yet
the sincerity thereof, cannot reasonably be at all suspected by us, it having
been cited by so many of the Ancient Fathers in their Writings against the
Pagans, as particularly, Justin Martyr, Athenagoras, Clemens Alexandrinus,
Justin Martyr, Eusebius, Cyril and Theodoret; of which number, Clemens tells
us, that it was attested likewise, by that ancient Pagan Historiographer
Hecataeus. But there are so many Places to our purpose, in Euripides, that we
cannot omit them all; In his Supplices we have this, wherein all men's Absolute
Dependence upon Jupiter, or one Supreme Deity, is fully acknowledged, (...)
(...),
(...).
Miseros quid Homines, O Deum Rex and Pater,
Sapere arbitramur? Pendet e nutu tuo
Res nostra, facimusque illa quae visum tibi.
We have also this excellent Prayer to the Supreme Governor of Heaven and
Earth, cited out of the same Tragedian, (...),
(...)
(...)^
(...),
(...),
(...)^
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...)^
Tibi (Cunctorum Domino) Vinum,
Salsamque Molam fero, seu Ditis,
Tu, sive Jovis nomine gaudes:
Tu namque Deos Superos inter,
Sceptrum tractas Sublime Jovis;
Idem Regnum Terestre tenes.
Tu Lucem animis infunde Virum,
Qui scire volunt, quo sata Mentis
Lucta sit ortu, Quae Causa Mali;
Cui Coelicolum rite litando
Requiem sit habere laborum.
Where we may observe that (...) and (...), Jupiter and Pluto, are both of them
supposed to be Names, equally belonging to One and the same Supreme God. And
the Sum of the Prayer is this, That God would infuse Light into the Souls of
men, whereby they might be enabled to know, What is the Root, from whence all
their Evils spring, and by what means they may avoid them.

Lastly, there is another Devotional Passage, cited out of Euripides, which
conteins also a clear acknowledgment of One Self-existent Being, that
comprehends and governs the whole World, (...)
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...)^
Thou Self-sprung Being, that do All Enfold,
And in thine Arms, Heavens Whirling Fabric hold!
Who art Encircled with resplendent Light,
And yet lie Mantled over in Shady Night!
About whom, the Exultant Starry Fires,
Dance nimbly round, in Everlasting Gyres.
For this sense of the Second and Third Verses, which we think the Words will
bear, and which agrees with that Orphick Passage -- (...), That God being in
himself a most bright and dazeling Light, is respectively to us, and by reason
of the Weakness of our Understanding, covered over with a Thick Cloud; as also
with that in the Scripture, Clouds and Darkness are round about him; I say,
this sense, we chose rather to follow, as more Rich and August, than that other
Vulgar one, though Grammatically and Poetically good also; That Successive Day
and Night, together with a Numberless Multitude of Stars, perpetually dance
round about the Deity.

Aristophanes in the very beginning of his Plutus distinguishes betwixt (...)
and (...), Jupiter and the Gods, (...), etc. And we have this clear Testimony
of Terpander cited by Clemens Alexandrinus, (...), Thou Jupiter who art the
Original of all things, Thou Jupiter who art the Governor of all. And these
following Verses are attributed to Menander. (...)
(...),
(...)^
Rerum universarum Imperatorem and Patrem,
Solum perpetuo colere suppliciter decet,
Artificem tantae and Largitorem copiae.
Where men are exhorted to Worship the Supreme God only, as the sole Author of
all Good, or at least transcendently above all the other Gods. There are also
Two remarkable Testimonies, one of Hermesianax an ancient Greek Poet, and
another of Aratus, to the same purpose; which shall both be reserved for other
places.

Wherefore we pass from the Greek to the Latin Poets, where Ennius first
appears, deriving the Gods in General (who were all the Inferior Deities) from
Erebus and Night, as supposing them all to have been Made or Generated out of
Chaos, nevertheless acknowledging One who was -- Divumque Hominumque Pater,
Rex, both Father and King of Gods and Men, that is, the Maker or Creator of the
whole World, who therefore made those Gods together with the World out of
Chaos, himself being Unmade.

Plautus in like manner sometimes distinguishes betwixt Jupiter and the Gods,
and plainly acknowledges One Omniscient Deity, Est profecto Deus, qui quae nos
gerimus, auditque and videt. Cap. Act. 2. Sc. 2.
Which Passage very much resembles that of Manlius Torquatus in Livy, Est
Coeleste Numen, Es Magne Jupiter; a strong Asseveration of One Supreme and
Universal Deity. And the same Plautus in his Rudens clearly asserts one Supreme
Monarch and Emperor over All, whom the Inferior Gods are subservient to, Qui
Gentes omnes Mariaque and Terras movet,
Ejus sum Civis civitate Coelitum;
Qui est Imperator Divum atque Hominum Jupiter,
Is nos per gentes alium alia disparat,
Hominum qui facta, mores, pietatem and fidem
Noscamus. --
Qui falsas lites falsis testimoniis
Petunt, quique in jure abjurant pecuniam,
Eorum referimus nomina exscripta ad Jovem.
Cotidie Ille scit, quis hic quaerat malum.
Iterum Ille eam rem judicatam judicat.
Bonos in aliis tabulis exscriptos habet.
Atque hoc scelesti illi in animum inducunt suum
Jovem se placare posse donis, hostiis;
Sed operam and sumptum perdunt, quia
Nihil Ei acceptum est a perjuris supplicii.
Where Jupiter the Supreme Monarch of Gods and Men, is said to appoint other
Inferior Gods under him, over all the parts of the Earth, to observe the
Actions, Manners and Behaviors of men every where; and to return the names
both of bad and good to him. Which Jupiter judges over again all unjust
Judgments, rendering a righteous retribution to all. And though wicked men
conceit that he may be bribed with sacrifices, yet no worship is acceptable to
him from the Perjurious. Notwithstanding which this Poet afterward jumbles the
Supreme and Inferior Gods all together, after the usual manner, under that one
general name of Gods, because they are all supposed to be Co-governours of the
World; Facilius, siqui pius est, a Diis supplicans,
Quam qui scelestus est, inveniet veniam sibi.
Again the same Poet elsewhere brings in Hanno the Carthaginian, Poen. Act. 5.
Sc. 4.
with this form of Prayer addressing himself to Jupiter or the Supreme God,
Jupiter, qui genus colis alisque Hominum, per quem vivimus
Vitale aevum; quem penes spes, vitaeque sunt Hominum Omnium,
Da diem hunc sospitem, quaeso, rebus meis agundis.


In the next place, we have these Verses of Valerius Soranus, an ancient and
eminent Poet, full to the purpose, recorded by Varro, Jupiter Omnipotens, Regum
Rex ipse Deumque,
Progenitor Genitrixque Deum; Deus UNUS and OMNIS.
To this sense: Omnipotent Jupiter, the King of Kings and Gods, and the
Progenitor and Genitrix, the both Father and Mother of those Gods; One God and
all Gods. Where the Supreme and Omnipotent Deity is styled Progenitor and
Genitrix Deorum, after the same manner as he was called in the Orphick Theology
(...) and (...), that expression denoting the Gods and all other Things, to
have been produced from him alone, and without any prexistent matter. Moreover
according to the tenor of this Ethnic Theology, that One God was All Gods and
Every God, the Pagans supposed, that when ever any Inferior Deity was
worshipped by them, the Supreme was therein also at once worshipped and
honored.

Though the sense of Ovid has been sufficiently declared before, yet we cannot
well omit some other Passages of his, as that grateful and sensible
acknowledgment, Quod loquor and spiro, Coelumque and lumina Solis
Aspicio (possumne ingratus and immemor esse?)
Ipse dedit.
And this in the Third of his Metamorph. Ille Pater Rectorque Deum, cui Dextra
trisulcis
Ignibus armata est, qui Nutu concutit Orbem.


Virgil's Theology also may sufficiently appear from his frequent
acknowledgment of an Omnipotent Deity, and from those Verses of his before
cited out of Aen. 6. wherein he plainly asserts One God to be the Original of
all things, at least as a Soul of the World; Servius Honoratus there
paraphrazing thus, Deus est quidam Divinus Spiritus, qui per quatuor fusus
elementa, gignit universa, God is a certain Spirit, which infused through the
Four Elements, begets all things. Nevertheless, we shall add from him this
also of Venus her Prayer to Jupiter, Aen. 1. -- O qui res Hominumque Deumque,
Aeternis regis imperiis, and fulmine terres!
Which Venus again, Aen. 10. bespeaks the same Jupiter after this manner, O
Pater, O Hominum Divumque Aeterna Potestas! Where we have this Annotation of
Servius, Divumque Aeterna Potestas, propter aliorum Numinum discretionem,
Jupiter is here called the Eternal Power of the Gods, to distinguish him from
all the other Gods that were not Eternal, but Made or Generated from him.

Neither ought, Horace to be left out, in whom we read to the same purpose,
Lib. 1. Od. 12. Quid prius dicam solitis Parentis
Laudibus? Qui res Hominum and Deorum,
Qui Mare and Terras, variisque mundum
Temperat horis.
Vnde nil majus generatur ipso,
Nec viget quicquam simile aut secundum;
Proximos illi tamen occupavit
Pallas honores.
And again, Lib. 3. Od. 4. Qui Terram inertem, qui mare Temperat
Ventosum, and Vrbes, Regnaque Tristia;
Divosque, Mortalesque turmas,
Imperio regit VNVS aequo.
Where from those words of Horace, Solitis Parentis Laudibus, it appears that
the One Supreme Deity, the Parent and Maker of all things, was then wont to be
celebrated by the Pagans as such, above all the other Gods. And whereas those
Pagans vulgarly ascribed the Government of the Seas particularly to Neptune, of
the Earth and Hades or Inferi (which are here called Tristia Regna) to Pluto,
these being here attributed by Horace to One and the same Supreme and Universal
Deity, it may well be concluded from thence, that Jupiter, Neptune, and Pluto,
were but Three several Names or Notions, of One Supreme Numen, whose
sovereignty notwithstanding was chiefly signified by Jupiter. Which same is to
be said of Pallas or Minerva too, that signifying the Eternal Wisdom, that it
was but another name of God also, though looked upon as inferior to that of
Jupiter and next in dignity to it: unless we should conclude it to be a Second
Divine Hypostasis, according to the Doctrine of the Pythagoreans and Platonists
(probably not unknown to Horace) as also to that Scripture Cabbala, I was set
up from everlasting, or ever the Earth was, when there were no Depths, I was
brought forth, etc. But of this more afterward.

Lastly, we shall conclude with Manilius who lived in the same Augustean age,
and was a zealous opposer of that Atheistical Hypothesis of Epicurus and
Lucretius, as appears from these Verses of his, Quis credat tantas operum sine
Numine Moles,
Ex Minimis caecoque creatum foedere mundum?
Wherefore he also plainly asserts One Supreme Deity the Framer and Governor
of the whole World in this manner, Lib. 2. Namque canam tacita Naturam mente
potentem,
Infusumque Deum Coelo, Terrisque, Fretoque,
Ingentem aequali moderantem foedere molem,
Totumque alterno consensu vivere mundum,
Et rationis agi motu; quum SPIRITVS VNVS
Per cunctas habitet parts, atque irriget Orbem,
Omnia pervolitans, Corpusque Animale figuret, etc.
And again, Hoc opus immensi constructum corpore mundi,
Vis Animae Divina regit, Sacroque Meatu,
Conspirat Deus, and tacita ratione gubernat.
And, Lib. 4. -- Faciem Caeli non invidet Orbi
Ipse Deus, vultusque suos, corpusque recludit,
Semper volvendo, seque ipsum inculcat and offert;
Vt been cognosci possit, monstretque videndo
Qualis eat, doceatque suas attendere Leges.
Ipse vocat nostros animos ad Sydera Mundus,
Nec patitur, quia non condit, sua Jura latere.
Where notwithstanding, we confess, that the whole Animated World, or rather
the Soul thereof, is, according to the Stoical Doctrine, made by Manilius to be
the Supreme Numen.

XX. We now pass from the Poets of the Pagans to their Philosophers. A Modern
Writer concerning the Religion of the Gentiles, affirms this to have been the
Opinion of very eminent Philosophers, That even all the Minor Gods of the
Pagans, did exist of themselves from Eternity Unmade, they giving many reasons
for the same. But how far from truth this is, will (as we conceive) appear
sufficiently, from the Sequel of this Discourse. And we cannot conclude
otherwise but that this Learned Writer, did mistake that Opinion of Aristotle
and the latter Platonists, concerning the Eternity of the World and Gods, as if
they had therefore asserted the Self-existence of them; the contrary whereunto
has been already manifested. Wherefore we shall now make it unquestionably
evident by a Particular Enumeration, That the Generality of the Pagan
Philosophers who were Theists, however they acknowledged a Multiplicity of
Gods, yet asserted One only Self-existent Deity, or a Universal Numen, by whom
the World and all those other Gods were Made. There being only some few
Ditheists to be excepted, (such as Plutarch and Atticus) who out of a certain
Softness and Tenderness of Nature, that they might free the One Good God, from
the Imputation of Evils, would needs set up besides him, an Evil Soul or Demon
also in the World Self-existent, to bear all the blame of them.

And indeed Epicurus is the only Person that we can find, amongst the reputed
Philosophers; who though pretending to acknowledge Gods, yet professedly
opposed Monarchy, and verbally asserted a Multitude of Eternal Unmade
Self-existent Deities: but such, as had nothing at all to do either with the
Making or Governing of the World. The reason whereof was, because he would by
no means admit the World to have been made by any Mind or Understanding.
Wherefore he concluded, Naturam Rerum, haud Divina Mente Coortam, Lucret. l. 3.
That there was no God the (...) or Framer of the World. But nevertheless that
he might decline the Odium of being accounted an Atheist, he pretended to
assert a Multitude of Gods Unmade and Incorruptible, such as were unconcerned
in the Fabric of the World. Wherein first it is evident, that he was not
serious and sincere, because he really admitting no other Principles of things
in his Philosophy, besides Atoms and Vacuum, agreeably thereunto, could
acknowledge no other Gods, than such as were compounded out of Atoms, and
therefore Corruptible. And thus does Origin declare the Doctrine of Epicurus,
not indeed as he pretended to hold it, but as according to the tenor of his
Principles, Lib. 4. cont. C. p. 169.
he must have held it, had he really asserted any Gods at all, (...), Epicurus
his Gods being compounded of Atoms, an^ ^^e^efore by their very constitution
Corruptible, are in continual labor and toil, struggling with their Corruptive
Principles. Nevertheless if Epicurus had in good earnest asserted such a
Commonwealth of Gods, as were neither Made out of Atoms, nor yet Corruptible;
so long as he denied the World to have been Made by any Mind or Wisdom (as we
have already declared) he ought not to be reckoned amongst the Theists but
Atheists.

Thales the Milesian was one of the most Ancient Greek Philosophers, who that
he admitted a Plurality of Gods in some sense, is evident from that saying of
his cited by Aristotle, (...), All things are full of Gods. But that
notwithstanding he asserted One Supreme and only Unmade or Self-existent Deity,
is also manifest from that other Apothegm of his in Laertius, (...)^ God is the
Oldest of all things, because he is Unmade. From whence it may be concluded,
that all Thales his other Gods were Generated, and the Offspring of One sole
Unmade Deity.

Pherecydes Syrus was Thales his contemporary, of whom Aristotle in his
Metaphysics has recorded, that he affirmed (...), that the First Principle
from whence all other things were Generated, was the Best or an Absolutely
Perfect Being; So as that in the Scale of Nature things did not ascend upwards
from the most Imperfect to the more Perfect Beings, but on the contrary descend
downwards, from the most Perfect, to the less Perfect. Moreover Laertius
informs us, that this was the Beginning of one of Pherecydes his Books, (...)^
Jupiter, and Time, and the Earth always were. Where notwithstanding in the
following words, he makes the Earth to be dependent upon Jupiter. Though some
reading (...) here instead of (...), seem to understand him thus; that Jupiter
and Saturn, really one and the same Numen, was always from Eternity. However
there is in these words an acknowledgment of One Single and Eternal Deity.

Pythagoras was the most eminent of all the ancient Philosophers, who that he
was a Polytheist as well as the other Pagans, may be concluded from that
Beginning of the Golden Verses (though not written by him) (...),
(...)^
(...).
Wherein men are exhorted in the first place to worship the Immortal Gods, and
that accordingly as they were appointed by Law, after them the Heroes, and last
of all the Terrestrial Demons. And accordingly Laertius gives this account of
Pythagoras his Piety, (...)^ That he conceived men ought to worship, both the
Gods, and the Heroes; though not with equal honor. And who these Gods of
Pythagoras were, the same Writer also declares, (...)^ That they were in part
at least, the Sun, and Moon, and Stars.

Notwithstanding which, that Pythagoras acknowledged One Supreme and Universal
Numen, which therefore was the Original of all those other Gods, may partly
appear from that Prayer in the Golden Verses, which, whether written by
Philolaus or Lysis or some other Follower of Pythagoras, were undoubtedly
ancient and agreeable to his Doctrine. (...)^ Salmas. Praef* in Tab. Ceb. Arab.

(...)^
Jupiter alme, malis jubeas vel solvier omnes:
Omnibus utantur vel quonam daemone monstra.
Upon which Hierocles thus writes, (...)^ It was the manner of the
Pythagoreans to honor the Maker and Father of this whole Universe, with the
name of Dis and Zen, it being just, that he who gives Being and Life to all,
should be denominated from thence: And again afterward, (...)^ This very name
Zeus, is a convenient symbol or image of the Demiurgical Nature. And they who
first gave names to things, were by reason of a certain wonderful Wisdom of
theirs, a kind of excellent Statuaries; they by those several Names, as Images,
lively representing the natures of things. Moreover that this Pythagorick
Prayer was directed to the Supreme Numen and King of Gods, Jamblichus thus
declares in his Protrepticks, (...)^ Here is an excellent exhortation of these
Golden Verses, to the pursuit of Divine Felicity, mingled together with Prayers
and the Invocation of the Gods, but especially of that Jupiter who is the King
of them. Moreover the same might further appear from those Pythagorick
Fragments that are still extant, as that of Ocellus Lucanus, and others who
where Moralists, in which as Gods are sometimes spoken of plurally, so also is
God often singularly used, for that Supreme Deity which contains the whole.

But this will be most of all manifest, from what has been recorded concerning
the Pythagorick Philosophy and its making a Monad the First Principle. It is
true indeed that the Writer de Placitis Philosophorum, does affirm, Pythagoras
to have asserted Two Substantial Principles Self-existent, a Monad and a Dyad;
by the former of which as God is confessed to have been meant, so the latter of
them is declared with some uncertainty, it being in one place interpreted to be
a Demon, or a Principle of Evil, (...), etc. Pythagoras his First Principle is
God and Good, which is the Nature of Unity, and a perfect Mind; but his other
Principle of Duality, is a Demon or Evil: But in another place expounded to be
Matter, Lib. 1. cap. 3.
(...)^) Pythagoras his Principles, were a Monad and Infinite Duality: The
former of them an Active Principle, Mind or God; the latter Passive and Matter.
And Plutarch in some other Writings of his declares that the First Matter did
not exist alone by it self Dead and Inanimate, but acted with an irrational
Soul; and that both these together made up that wicked Demon of his. And
doubtless, this Book De Placitis Philosophorum, was either written by Plutarch
himself, or else by some Disciple and Follower of his according to his
Principles. Wherefore this account which is therein given of the Pythagorick
Doctrine, was probably infected with that private Conceit of Plutarch's; That
God and a wicked Demon, or else Matter together with an Irrational Soul,
Self-existent, were the First Principles of the Universe. Though we do
acknowledge, that others also besides Plutarch, have supposed Pythagoras to
have made Two Self-existent Principles, God and Matter, but not animate, nor
informed, as Plutarch supposed, with any Irrational or wicked Soul.

Notwithstanding which, it may well be made a Question, Whether Pythagoras by
his Dyad, meant Matter or no; because Malchus or Porphyrius, in the Life of
Pythagoras, thus interprets those Two Pythagorick Principles, P. 203.
of Unity and Duality; (...)^ The Cause of that Sympathy, Harmony, and
Agreement, which is in things, and of the conservation of the Whole, which is
always the same and like it self, was by Pythagoras called Unity or a Monade
(that Unity which is in the things themselves being but a participation of the
First Cause:) But the reason of Alterity, Inequality and unconstant
Irregularity in things was by him called a Dyad. Thus acording to Porphyrius,
by the Pythagorick Dyad, is not so much meant Matter, as the Infinite and
Indeterminate Nature, and the Passive Capability of Things. So that the Monade
and Dyad of Pythagoras, seem to have been the same with Plato's (...) and
(...), his Finite and Infinite in his Philebus; the Former of which Two only is
Substantial, that First most simple Being, the cause of all Unity and the
Measure of all things.

However if Pythagoras his Dyad be to be understood of a Substantial Matter, it
will not therefore follow, that he supposed Matter to be Self-existent and
Independent upon the Deity, since according to the best and most ancient
Writers, his Dyad was no Primary but a Secondary Thing only, and derived from
his Monad, the sole Original of all things. Thus Diogenes Laertius tells us,
that Alexander who wrote the Successions of Philosophers, affirmed he had found
in the Pythagorick Commentaries, (...)^ That a Monade was the Principle of all
things, but that from this Monade was derived infinite Duality, as Matter for
the Monade to work upon, as the Active Cause. With which agrees Hermias,
affirming this to be one of the greatest of all the Pythagorick Mysteries, that
a Monade was the sole Principle of all things. Accordingly whereunto Clomens
Alexandrinus, Strrm. 5 P 611.
cites this Passage out of Thearidas an ancient Pythagorean in his Book
concerning Nature, (...), The true Principle of all things was only One; for
this was in the beginning One and Alone. Which words also seem to imply the
World to have had a Novity of Existence or beginning of Duration. And indeed,
however Ocellus Lucanus write, yet that Pythagoras himself, did not hold the
Eternity of the World, may be concluded from what Porphyrius records of him,
where he gives an Account of that his superstitious abstinence from Beans,
(...)^ That at the beginning, things being confounded and mingled together, the
Generation and Secretion of them afterward proceeded by degrees, Animals and
Plants appearing; at which time also from the same putrified Matter, sprung up
both Men and Beans.

Pythagoras is generally reported to have held a Trinity of Divine Hypostases:
and therefore when St. Cyril affirms Pythagoras to have called God (...), the
Animation of the whole Heavens, and the Motion of all things; adding that God
was not, as some supposed, (...), without the Fabric of the World, but whole
in the whole, this seems properly to be understood, of that Third Divine
Hypostasis of the Pythagorick Trinity, namely the Eternal Psyche. Again when
God is called in Plutarch according to Pythagoras, (...), Mind it self, this
seems to be meant properly of his Second Hypostasis; the Supreme Deity
according to him being something above Mind or Intellect. In like manner when
in Cicero, Pythagoras his Opinion concerning the Deity is thus represented,
Deum esse animum, per naturam rerum omnium intentum and commeantem, ex quo
Animi nostri carperentur, That God was a Mind passing through the whole Nature
of things, from whom our Souls were, as it were, decerped or cut out. And
again, Ex universa mente Divina, delibatos esse animos nostros; this in all
probability was to be understood also either of the Third or Second Divine
Hypostasis, and not of the First, which was properly called by him, (...) and
(...), a Unity and Monade, Met. L. 1. c, 6.
and also as Plutarch tells us, (...), Goodness it self. Aristotle plainly
affirms that some of the ancient Theologers amongst the Pagans made (...) or
Love, to be the First Principle of all things, that is, the Supreme Deity; and
we have already showed, that Orpheus was one often hese. For when (...) and
(...), Delightful Love, and that which is not blind, but full of Wisdom and
Counsel, is made by him to be (...) and (...), Self-perfect and the Oldest of
all Things, it is plain that he supposed it to be nothing less than the Supreme
Deity. Wherefore since Pythagoras is generally affirmed, to have followed the
Orphick Principles, we may from hence presume that he did it in this also.
Though it be very true, that Plato who called the Supreme Deity (...), as well
as Pythagoras, did dissent from the Orphick Theology in this, and would not
acknowledge Love for a name of the Supreme Deity; as when in his Symposion in
the person of Agatho he speaks thus: (...)^ Though I should readily grant to
Phaedrus many other things, yet I cannot consent to him in this, that Love was
Older than Saturn and Japet, but on the contrary I do affirm him to be the
Youngest of the Gods; as he is always youthful. They who made Love Older than
Saturn as well as Japhet, supposed it to be the Supreme Deity; wherefore Plato
here on the contrary affirms Love not to be the Supreme Deity or Creator of
all, but a Creature; a Certain Junior God, or indeed as he afterward adds, not
so much a God as a Demon; it being a thing which plainly implies Imperfection
in it. Love (says he) is a Philosopher, whereas (...), no God philosophizeth,
nor d^sires to be made wise, because he is so already. Agreably with which
Doctrine of his, Plotinus determines that Love is peculiar to that middle rank
of Beings, called Souls, (...), etc. Every Soul is a Venus, which is also
intimated by Venus her Nativity, and Loves being begotten with her; wherefore
the Soul being in its right natural state, Loves God desiring to be united with
him, which is a pure, heavenly and virgin Love; but when it descends to
Generation, being courted with these Amorous allurements here below, and
deceived by them, it changes that its Divine and Heavenly Love, for another
Mortal one; but if it again shake off these lascivious and wanton Loves, and
keep it self chaste from them, returning back to its own Father, and Original,
it will be rightly affected as it ought. But the reason of this difference
betwixt the Orpheists and Plato, that the former made Love to be the Oldest of
all the Gods, but the latter to be a Junior God or Demon, proceeded only from
an Equivocation in the word Love. For Plato's Love was the Daughter of Penia,
that is, Poverty and Indigency, together with a mixture of (...) or Riches, and
being so as it were compounded of Plenty and Poverty, was in plain language, no
other than the Love of Desire, which as Aristotle affirms is (...),
accompanied with Grief and Pain. But that Orphick and Pythagorick Love, was
nothing else but (...) and (...), Infinite Riches and Plenty, a Love of
Redundancy and Overflowing Fullness, delighting to communicate it self, which
was therefore said to be, the Oldest of all things and most Perfect, that is,
the Supreme Deity; according to which notion also in the Scripture it self, God
seems to be called Love, though the word be not there, (...) but (...). But to
say the Truth, Parmenides his Love (however made a Principle somewhere by
Aristotle) seems to be neither exactly the same with the Orphick, nor yet with
the Platonic Love, it being not the Supreme Deity, and yet the First of the
Created Gods; which appears from Simplicius his connecting these Two Verses of
his together in this manner, (...), (...), (...)^ In the midst of these
Elements is that God which governs all things, and whom Parmenides affirms
to be the cause of Gods, writing thus, God first of all created Love, before
the other Gods. Wherefore by this Love of Parmenides, is understood nothing
else, but the Lower Soul of the World, together with a Plastic Nature, which
though it be the Original of Motion and Activity in this Corporeal World, yet
is it but a Secondary or Created God. Before whose Production, Necessity is
said by those Ethnic Theologers to have reigned; the true meaning whereof
seems to be this, that before that Divine Spirit moved upon the Waters and
brought things into an orderly System, there was nothing but the Necessity of
Material Motions, unguided by any orderly Wisdom or Method for Good (that is,
by Love) in that confused and floating Chaos.

But Pythagoras it seems, did not only call the Supreme Deity a Monad, but
also a Tetrad or Tetractys, for it is generally affirmed, that Pythagoras
himself was wont to swear hereby; though Porphyrius and Jamblichus, and others
write, that the Disciples of Pythagoras swore by Pythagoras, who had delivered
to them the Doctrine or Cabala of this Tetractys. Which Tetractys also in the
Golden Verses, is called (...), the Fountain of the Eternal Nature, an
expression that cannot properly belong to any thing but the Supreme Deity. And
thus Hierocles, (...)^ There is nothing in the whole World, which does not
depend upon the Tetractys, as its Root and Principle. For the Tetrad is, as we
have already said, the Maker of all things; the Intelligible God, the Cause of
the Heavenly and Sensible God, that is of the Animated World or Heaven. Now the
Latter Pythagoreans and Platonists, endeavor to give Reasons, why God should
be called Tetras or Tetractys, from certain Mysteries in that Number Four, as
for example, First, because the Tetrad is (...), the Power of the D^cad, it
virtually containing the whole Decade in it, which is all Numbers or Beings;
but the bottom of this Mystery is no more than this, that One, Two, Three, and
Four, added all together, make up Ten. Again because the Tetrad is an
Arithmetical Mediety, betwixt the Monad and the Hebdomad, which Monad and
Hebdomad are said to agree in this, that as the Monad is Ingenit or Unmade, it
being the Original and Fountain of all Numbers, so is the Hebdomad said to be,
not only (...) but (...), a Motherless as well as Virgin Number. Wherefore the
Tetrad lying in the middle betwixt the Ingenit Monad, and the Motherless Virgin
Hebdomad; and it being both begotten and begetting, say they, must needs be a
very Mysterious number and fitly represent the Deity. Whereas indeed it was
therefore unfit to represent the Deity, because it is begotten by the
Multiplication of another Number; as the Hebdomade therefore does not very
fitly symbolize with it neither; because it is barren or begets nothing at all
within the Decad, for which cause it is called a Virgin. Again it is further
added, that the Tetrad fitly resemb^es that which is Solid, because as a Point
answers to a Monad, and a Line to a Dyad, and a Supersicies to a Triad (the
first and most simple figure being a Triangle) so the Tetrad properly
represents the Solid, the first Pyramid being found in it. But upon this
consideration, the Tetrade could not be so fit a Symbol of the Incorporeal
Deity neither as of the Corporeal World. Wherefore these things being all so
trifling, slight and fantastical, and it being really absurd for Pythagoras to
call his Monade a Tetrade; the late conjecture of some Learned men amongst us,
seems to be much more probable, that Pythagoras his Tetractys was really
nothing else but the Tetragrammaton, or that proper name of the Supreme God
amongst the Hebrews, consisting of Four Letters or Consonants. Neither ought it
to be wondered at, that Pythagoras (who besides his traveling into Egypt,
Persia, and Chaldea, and his sojourning at Sidon, is affirmed by Josephus,
Porphyrius and others, to have conversed with the Hebrews also) should be so
well acquainted with the Hebrew Tetragrammaton, since it was not unknown to the
Hetrurians and Latins, their Jove being certainly nothing else. And indeed it
is the opinion of some Philologers, that even in the Golden Verses themselves,
notwithstanding the seeming repugnancy of the Syntax, it is not Pythagoras that
is sworn by, but this Tetractys or Tetragrammaton, that is, Jova or Jehovah,
the Name of God, being put for God himself, according to that received Doctrine
of the Hebrews (...), That God and his Name are all one; as if the meaning of
those words (...)
(...). --
were this; By the Tetragammaton or Jovah, who has communicated [himself, or]
The Fountain of the Eternal Nature, to our Humane Souls; for these according to
the Pythagorick Doctrine, were said to be ex Mente Divina carptae and
delibatae, i. e. nothing but Derivative Streams from that first Fountain of the
Divine Mind.

Wherefore we shall now sum up all concerning Pythagoras in this Conclusion of
St. Cyril's, (...)^ C^nt. Jul. l. 1.
Behold we see, clearly, that Pythagoras held there was One God of the whole
Universe, the Principle and Cause of all things, the Illuminator, Animator and
Quickener of the Whole, and Original of Motion; from whom all things were
derived, and brought out of Nonentity into Being.

Next to Pythagoras in order of time, was Xenophanes the Colophonian, the Head
of the Eleatick Sect of Philosophers, who that he was an Asserter both of Many
Gods and One God, sufficiently appears from that Verse of his before cited, and
attested both by Clemens Alexandrinus, and Sextus the Philosopher, (...), There
is One God, the Greatest both amongst Gods and Men. Concerning which greatest
God, this other Verse of Xenophanes is also vouched, (...)^ That he moves the
whole world without any labor or toil, merely by Mind. Besides which, Cicero
and others tell us, that this Xenophanes philosophizing concerning the Supreme
Deity, was wont to call it (...), One and All, as being One most Simple Being
that virtually contains all things. But Xenophanes his Theosophy, or Divine
Philosophy, is most fully declared by Simplicius out of Theophrastus in this
manner, (...), In Aristo^. Phys. F. ^. and 6.
(...) -- (...), etc. Theophrastus affirms, that Xenophanes the Colophonian
Parmenides his Master, made One Principle of all things, he calling it One and
All, and determining it to be neither Finite nor Infinite (in a certain sense)
and neither Moving nor Resting. Which Theophrastus also declares, that
Xenophanes in this, did not write as a Natural Philosopher or ^hysiologer, but
as a Metaphysician or Theologer only; Xenophanes his One and All, being nothing
else but God. Whom he proved to be One solitary Being from hence, because God
is the Best and Most Powerful of all things, and there being many degrees of
Entity, there must needs be something Supreme to rule over all. Which Best and
most Powerful Being can be but One. He also did demonstrate it to be Unmade, as
likewise to be neither Finite nor Infinite (in a certain sense;) as he removed
both Motion and Rest from God. Wherefore when he says that God always
remains or rests the same, he understands not this, of that Rest which is
opposite to Motion, and which belongs to such things as may be moved; but of a
certain other Rest which is both above that Motion and its Contrary. From
whence it is evident, that Xenophanes supposed (as Sextus the Philosopher also
affirms) God to be Incorporeal, a Being unlike to all other things, and
therefore of which no Image could be made. And now we understand, that
Aristotle dealt not ingenously with Xenophanes, when from that expression of
his, that God was (...), or Spheryform, he would infer, that Xenophanes made
God to be a Body, and nothing else but the Round Corporeal World Animated;
which yet was repugnant also to another Physical Hypothesis of this same
Xenophanes, (...), that there were Infinite Suns and Moons; by which Moons he
understood Planets, affirming them to be all habitable Earths, as Cicero tells
us. Wherefore as Simplicius resolves, God was said to be (...), or Spheryform,
by Xenophanes, only in this sense, as being (...), every way like and uniform.
However it is plain that Xenophanes asserting One God who was All or the
Universe, could not acknowledge a Multitude of Partial Self-existent Deities.

Heraclitus was no Clear but a Confounded Philosopher (he being neither a Good
Naturalist nor Metaphysician) and therefore it is very hard or rather
impossible, to reconcile his Several Opinions with one another. Which is a
thing the less to be wondered at, because amongst the rest of his Opinions, this
also is said to have been One; That Contradictories may be true; and his
writings were accordingly as Plato intimates, stuffed with Unintelligible
Mysterious Nonsense. For First he is affirmed to have acknowledged no other
Substance besides Body, and to have maintained, That All things did Flow, and
nothing Stand, or remain the same; and yet in his Epistles (according to the
common opinion of Philosophers at that time) does he suppose the Prae and
Post-existence of Humane Souls in these words, (...), etc. My soul seems to
vaticinate and presage its approaching dismission and freedom from this its
prison; and looking out as it were through the cracks and cranies of this body,
to remember those its native Regions or Countries, from whence descending, it
was clothed with this Flowing Mortal Body; which is made up and constipated of
Phlegm, Choler, Serum, Blood, Nerves, Bones and Flesh. And not only so, but he
also there acknowledges the Souls Immortality, which Stoics, allowing its
Permanency after Death, for some time at least, and to the next Conflagration,
did deny, (...)^ This Body shall be fatally changed to something else, but my
Soul shall not die or perish, but being an Immortal thing, shall fly away
mounting upwards to Heaven; those Etherial Houses shall receive me, and I shall
no longer converse with men but Gods. Again though Heraclitus asserted the
Fatal Necessity of all things, yet notwithstanding was he a strict Moralist,
and upon this account highly esteemed by the Stoics, who followed him in this
and other things; and he makes no small pretense to it himself, in his Epistle
to Hermodorus, (...)^ I have also had my difficult Labors and Conflicts as
well as Hercules; I h^ve conquered Pleasures, I have conquered Riches, I have
conquered Ambition; I have subdued Cowardice and Flattery; neither Fear nor
Intemperance can control me; Grief and Anger are afraid of me, and fly away
from me. These are the Victories for which I am crowned, not by Eurystheus, but
as being made Master of my self. Lastly though Heraclitus made Fire to be the
First Principle of all things and has some odd Passages imputed to him, yet
notwithstanding was he a Devout Religionist, he supposing that Fiery Matter of
the whole Universe, Animantem esse and Deum, to be an Animal and God. And as he
acknowledged Many Gods, according to that which Aristotle records of him,
That when some passing by had espied him sitting in a smoaky Cottage, he
bespake them after this manner, Introite, nam and hic Dii sunt, Come in, I
pray, for here there are Gods also, he supposing all places to be full of Gods,
Demons and Souls; so was he an undoubted Asserter of One Supreme Numen, that
governs all things, and that such as could neither be represented by Images,
nor confined to Temples. For after he had been accused of Impiety by Euthycles,
he writes to Hermodorus in this manner, (...) -- (...)^ But O you unwise and
unlearned! teach us first what God is, that so you may be believed in accusing
me of Impiety: Tell us where God is? Is he shut up within the Walls of Temples?
Is this your Piety to place God in the dark, or to make him a Stony God? O you
unskilful! know ye not, that God is not made with hands, and has no basis or
fulcrum to stand upon, nor can be enclosed within the Walls of any Temple; the
whole World, variegated with Plants, Animals and Stars, being his Temple. And
again, (...)^ Am I Impious, O Euthycles, who alone know what God is? Is there
no God without Altars? or are Stones the only witnesses of him? No, his own
Works give testimony to him, and principally the Sun; Night and Day bear
witness of him; the Earth bringing forth fruits, declares him; the Circle of
the Moon, that was made by him, is a Heavenly Testimony of him.

In the next place Anaxagoras the Clazomenian Philosopher comes to be
considered, whose Predecessors of the Ionick Order (after Thales) as
Anaximander, Anaximenes and Hippo, were (as has been already observed)
Materialists and Atheists; they acknowledging no other Substance besides Body,
and resolving all things into the Motions, Passions, and Affections of it.
Whence was that cautious advice given by Jamblichus, Symb. 36. p. 359.
(...)^ Prefer the Italick Philosophy, which contemplates Incorporeal
Substances by themselves, before the Ionick, which principally considers
Bodies. And Anaxagoras was the first of these Ionicks who went out of that
Road, for seeing a necessity of some other Cause, besides the Material (Matter
being not able, so much as to move it self, and much less if it could, by
Fortuitous Motion, to bring it self into an Orderly System and Compages;) he
therefore introduced Mind into the Cosmopoeia, as the Principal Cause of the
Universe; which Mind is the same with God. Orat. 15.
Thus Themistius, speaking of Anaxagoras, (...)^ He was the first (that is,
amongst the Ionick Philosophers) who brought in Mind and God, to the
Cosmopoeia, and did not derive all things from Senseless Bodies. And to the same
purpose Plutarch in the Life of Pericles, (...), The other Ionick Philosophers
before Anaxagoras, made Fortune and blind Necessity, that is, the Fortuitous
and Necessary Motions of the Matter, to be the only Original of the World, but
Anaxagoras was the first who affirmed a pure and sincere Mind to preside over
all. Anaxagoras therefore supposed Two Substantial Self-existent Principles of
the Universe, one an Infinite Mind or God, the other an Infinite Homoiomery of
Matter, or Infinite Atoms; not Unqualified, such as those of Empedocles and
Democritus, which was the most Ancient and Genuine Atomology; but Similar, such
as were severally endued with all manner of Qualities and Forms, which
Physiology of his therefore was a spurious kind of Atomism. Anaxagoras indeed,
did not suppose God to have created Matter out of nothing, but that he was
(...), the Principle of its Motion, and also (...), the Regulator of this
motion for Good, and consequently the Cause of all the Order, Pulchritude, and
Harmony of the World: for which reason this Divine Principle, was called also
by him, not only Mind but Good; it being that which act- the Sake of Good.
Wherefore according to Anaxagoras, First, the World was not Eternal but had a
Beginning in time, and before the World was made, there was from Eternity an
Infinite Congeries of Similar and Qualified Atoms, Self-existent, without
either Order or Motion; Secondly, The World was not afterward made by Chance,
but by Mind or God, first moving the Matter, and then directing the Motion of
it so, as to bring it into this orderly System and Compages. So that (...) was
(...), Mind the first Maker of the World, and (...), Mind, that which still
governs the same, the King and Sovereign Monarch of Heaven and Earth. Thirdly,
Anaxagoras his Mind and God, was purely Incorporeal; to which purpose his words
recorded by Simplicius are very remarkable, In Arist (...) L. 1. Fol. 33. c. 2.
(...) (...)^ Mind is mingled with nothing, but is alone by it self and
separate, for if it were not by it self secret from Matter, but mingled
therewith, it would then partake of all things, because there is something of
all in every thing; which things mingled together with it would hinder it, so
that it could not master or conquer any thing, as if alone by it self; for Mind
is the most Subtle of all things, and the most Pure, and has the knowledge of
all things, together with an absolute Power over all. Lastly, Anaxagoras did
not suppose a Multitude of Unmade Minds, coexistent from Eternity, as so many
partial Causes and Governors of the World, but only One Infinite Mind or God,
ruling over All.

Indeed it may well be made a Question, whether or no besides this Supreme and
Universal Deity, Anaxagoras did acknowledge any of those other Inferior Gods,
then Worshipped by the Pagans? because it is certain, that though he asserted
Infinite Mind to be the Maker and Governor of the whole World, yet he was
accused by the Athenians for Atheism, and besides a Mulct imposed upon him,
Banished for the same; the true ground whereof was no other than this, because
he affirmed the Sun to be nothing but a Mass of Fire, and the Moon and Earth,
having Mountains and Valleys, Cities and Houses in it; and probably concluded
the same of all the other Stars and Planets, that they were either Fires, as
the Sun, or Habitable Earths, as the Moon; wherein, supposing them not to be
Animated, he did consequently deny them to be Gods. Which his Ungodding of the
Sun, Moon and Stars was then looked upon by the Vulgar as nothing less than
absolute Atheism, they being very prone to think, that if there were not Many
Understanding Beings Superior to Men, and if the Sun, Moon, and Stars were not
such, and therefore in their Language Gods; there was no God at all. Neither
was it the Vulgar only who condemned Anaxagoras for this, but even those Two
grave Philosophers Socrates and Plato did the like; the First in his Apology
made to the Athenians, where he calls this opinion of Anaxagoras Absurd; the
Second in his Book of Laws, where he complains of this Doctrine as a great
Inlet into Atheism, in this manner: (...)^ De Leg. L. 10 p. 886.
When You and I, endeavoring by Arguments to prove that there are Gods, speak
of the Sun and Moon, Stars and Earth, as Gods and Divine Things, our young men
presently, being principled by these new Philosophers, will reply; that these
are nothing but Earth and Stones (Senseless and Inanimate Bodies) which
therefore cannot mind nor take notice of any Humane affairs. Where we may
observe these Two things, First, that nothing was accounted truly and properly
a God amongst the Pagans, but only what was endued with Life and Understanding.
Secondly, that the taking away of those Inferior Gods of the Pagans, the Sun,
Moon, and Stars, by denying them to be Animated, or to have Life and
Understanding in them, was according to Plato's Judgment, then the most ready
and effectual way to introduce Absolute Atheism.

Moreover it is true, that though this Anaxagoras were a professed Theist, he
asserting an Infinite Self-existent Mind, to be the Maker of the whole World,
yet he was severely taxed also, by Aristotle and Plato, as one not
thorough-paced in Theism, and who did not so fully, as he ought, adhere to his
own Principles. For whereas, to assert Mind to be the Maker of the World, is
really all one, as to assert Final Causality for things in Nature, as also that
they were made after the Best manner; Anaxagoras when he was to give his
particular account of the Phenomenon, did commonly betake himself to Material
Causes only, and hardly ever make use of the Mental or Final Cause, but when he
was to seek and at a loss; then only bringing in God upon the Stage. P. 97.
Steph.
Socrates his discourse concerning this in Plato's P^aedo, is very well worth
our taking notice of: Hearing one sometime read (says he) out of a Book of
Anaxagoras, (...), that Mind was the Orderer and Cause of all things, I was
exceedingly pleased herewith, concluding that it must needs follow from thence,
that All things were ordered and disposed of as they should and after the best
manner possible; and therefore the Causes even of the things in Nature (or at
least the grand Strokes of them) ought to be fetched from the (...), That which
is Absolutely the Best. But when afterward I took Anaxagoras his Book into my
hand, greedily reading it over, I was exceedingly disappointed of my
expectation, finding therein no other Causes assigned, but only from Airs, and
Ethers, and Waters, and such like Physical and Material things. And he seemed
to me to deal, just as if one having affirmed that Socrates did all by Mind,
Reason and Understanding; afterward undertaking to declare the Causes of all my
Actions, as particularly of My Sitting here at this time, should render it
after this manner; Because forsooth my Body is compounded of Bones and Nerves,
which Bones being solid, have Joints in them at certain distances, and Nerves
of such a nature, as that they are capable of being both Intended and Remitted:
Wherefore my Bones being lifted up in the Joints and my Nerves some of them
intended and some remitted, was the cause of the bending of my Body, and of my
sitting down in this place. He in the mean time neglecting the true and proper
Cause hereof, which was no other than this; Because it seemed good to the
Athenians, to condemn me to die, as also to my self most Just, rather to submit
to their censure and undergo their punishment, than by slight to escape it; for
certainly otherwise, these Nerves and Bones of mine, would not have been here
now in this posture, but amongst the Megarensians and Beotians; carried thither
(...), by the Opinion of the Best; had I not thought it Better to submit to the
sentence of the City, than to escape the same by flight. Which kind of
Philosophers (says he) do not seem to me, to distinguish betwixt the True and
Proper Cause of things, and the Cause Sine qua non, that without which they
could not have been effected. And such are they, who devise many odd Physical
Reasons for the firm Settlement of the Earth, without any regard to that Power
which orders all things for the Best, (as having (...), a Divine Force in it;)
but thinking to find out an Atlas far more strong and immortal, and which can
better hold all things together; (...)^ Good and Fit, being not able, in their
Opinions, to Hold, or Bind any Thing.

From which passage of Plato's we may conclude, that though Anaxagoras were so
far convinced of Theism, as in Profession to make One Infinite Mind the Cause of
all things, Matter only excepted, yet he had notwithstanding too great a Tang
of that Old Material and Atheistical Philosophy of his Predecessors, still
hanging about him, who resolved all the Phenomenon of Nature, into Physical,
and nothing into Mental or Final Causes. And we have the rather told this long
story of him, because it is so exact a Parallel with the Philosophic Humor of
some in this present Age, who pretending to assert a God, do notwithstanding
discard all Mental and Final Causality, from having any thing to do with the
Fabric of the World; and resolve all, into Material Necessity, and Mechanism;
into Vortices, Globuli and Striate Particles, and the like. Of which Christian
Philosophers we must needs pronounce, that they are not near so good Theists as
Anaxagoras himself was, though so much condemned by Plato and Aristotle;
forasmuch as he, did not only assert God to be the Cause of Motion, but also
the Governor, Regulator and Methodizer of the same, for the production of this
Harmonious System of the World, and therefore (...), the Cause of Well and Fit.
Whereas these utterly reject the Latter, and, only admitting the Former, will
needs suppose Heaven and Earth, Plants and Animals, and all things whatsoever
in this orderly Compages of the World, to have resulted merely from a certain
Quantity of Motion, or Agitation, at first impressed upon the Matter, and
determined to Vortex.

XXXI. The Chronology of the old Philosophers having some uncertainty in it, we
shall not Scrupulously concern our selves therein, but in the next place
consider Parmenides, Xenophanes his Auditor and a Philosophic Poet likewise,
but who conversing much with two Pythagoreans, Amenias and Diochoetes, was
therefore looked upon as one that was not a little addicted to the Pythagorick
Sect. That this Parmenides acknowledged Many Gods, is evident from what has
been already cited out of him; notwithstanding which he plainly asserted also,
One Supreme, making him, as Simplicius tells us, (...), the Cause of all those
other Gods, of which Love is said to have been first produced. Which Supreme
Deity, Parmenides as well as Xenophanes called, (...), One that was All, or the
Universe; but adding thereunto of his own, that it was also (...), Immovable.

Now though it be true, that Parmenides his Writings being not without
obscurity, some of the Ancients, who were less acquainted with Metaphysical
Speculations, understood him Physically; as if he had asserted the whole
Corporeal Universe, to be all but One Thing, and that Immovable, thereby
destroying together with the Diversity of things, all Motion, Mutation, and
Action; which was plainly to make Parmenides not to have been a Philosopher but
a Mad man. Yet Simplicius, a man well acquainted with the Opinions of Ancient
Philosophers, and who had by him a Copy of Parmenides his Poems, (then scarce,
but since lost) assures us that Parmenides dreamt of no such matter, and that
he wrote (...), or (...), not concerning a Physical Element or Principle, but
concerning the True Ens, or the Divine Transcendency: Adding, that though some
of those Ancient Philosophers did not distinguish, (...), Natural things from
Supernatural; yet the Pythagoreans, and Xenophones, and Parmenides, and
Empedocles, and Anaxagoras, did all (...), handle these Two distinctly; (...),
however, by reason of their obscurity it were not perceived by many; for which
cause they have been most of them misrepresented, not only by Pagans, but also
by Christian Writers. For as the same Simplicius informs us, Parmenides
propounded Two several Doctrines, one after another; the First concerning
Theological and Metaphysical things, called by him (...), Truth, the Second
concerning Physical and Corporeal things, which he called (...), Opinion. The
Transition betwixt which, was contained in these Verses of his, (...)
(...)
(...).
In the Former of which Doctrines, Parmenides asserted One Immovable
Principle; but in the Latter, Two movable ones, Fire and Earth. He speaking of
Souls also as a certain Middle or Vinculum, betwixt the Incorporeal and the
Coporeal World, and affirming that God did, (...), sometimes send and translate
Souls, from the Visible to the Invisible Regions, and sometimes again, on the
contrary from the Invisible to the Visible. From whence it is plain, that when
Parmenides asserted his One and All Immovable, he spoke not as a Physiologer,
but as a Metaphysician and Theologer only. Which indeed was a thing so evident,
that Aristotle himself, though he had a mind to obscure Parmenides his sense,
that he might have a fling at him in his Physics, yet could not altogether
dissemble it. For when he thus begins, There must of necessity be either One
Principle or Many; and if there be but One, then must it either be Immovable,
as Parmenides and Melissus affirm, or else Movable, (...), as the Naturalists
or Physiologers; he therein plainly intimates, that when Parmenides and
Melissus, made One Immovable the Principle of all things, they did not write
this as Physiologers. And afterward he confesses, that this Controversy,
whether there were One Immovable Principle, does not belong to Natural
Philosophy, but to some other Science. But this is more plainly declared by him
elsewhere, writing concerning Parmenides and Melissus after this manner. (...)^
Though it be granted that Parmenides and Melissus otherwise said well, yet we
must not imagine them to have spoken Physically. For this, that there is
something Unmade and Immovable, does not so properly belong to Physics, as to
a certain other Science which is before it.

Wherefore Parmenides as well as Xenophones his Master, by his One and All,
meant nothing else, but the Supreme Deity, he calling it also Immovable. For
the Supreme Deity was by these Ancient Philosophers styled, First (...) and
(...) a Unity and Monad, because they conceived, that the First and most
Perfect being and the beginning of all things, must needs be the most Simple.
Thus Endorus in Simplicius declares their sense; (...)^ These Ancients
affirmed, that the One or Unity, was the first Principle of All, Matter it self
as well as other things being derived from it, they meaning by this One, that
Highest or Supreme God, who is over all. And Syrianus to the same purpose,
(...)^ Those Divine Men, called God The One, as being the cause of Unity to all
things, as likewise he was of Being and Life. And Simplicius concludes, that
Parmenides his (...), his One Ens, was a certain Divine Principle Superior to
Mind or Intellect, and more Simple, ^. 31. ^r.
(...)^ It remains therefore, that that Intelligible, which is the Cause of
all things, and therefore of Mind and Understanding too, in which all things
are contained and comprehended compendiously and in a way of Unity, I say that
this was Parmenides his One Ens or Being.

In the next place, Parmenides with the others of those Ancients, called also
his (...), his One Ens or First most Simple Being, All, or the Universe;
because it virtually contained all things, and as Simplicius writes, (...), All
things are from this One, distinctly displayed. For which cause, in Plato's
Parmenides, this One is said to be, (...), distributed into All things, that
are Many. But that Parmenides by his (...), One-All, or the Universe, did not
understand the Corporeal World, is evident from hence, In Phys. F 17* 2.
because he called it (...) or Indivisible, and as Simplicius observes,
supposed it to have no Magnitude; because that which is Perfectly One, can have
no Parts.

Wherefore it may be here observed, that this expression of (...), One being
All, has been used in very different Senses; for as Parmenides and Xenophanes
understood it of the Supreme Deity; that One most Perfect and most Simple
Being, was the Original of all things, so others of them meant it
Atheistically, concerning the most Imperfect and Lowest of all Beings, Matter
or Body, they affirming all things to be nothing but One and the same Matter,
diversely modified. Thus much we learn from that place of Aristotle's in his
Metaphysics, L 1. c. 7.
(...), They who affirm One to be All in this sense, as if All things were
nothing but one and the same Matter, and that corporeal and endued with
magnitude, it is manifest that they err sundry ways. But here is a great
Difference betwixt these Two to be observed, in that, the Atheistical asserters
of One and All (whether they meant Water or Air by it, or something else) did
none of them suppose their One and All to be Immovable but Movable; but they
whose Principle was One and all Immovable (as Parmenides, Melissus and Zeno)
could not possibly mean any thing else thereby, but the Deity; that there was
one most Simple, Perfect, and Immutable Being Incorporeal, which virtually
contained All Things, and from which All things were derived. But Heraclitus,
who is one of those who are said to have affirmed (...), that One was All, or
that the Universe was but One Thing; might possibly have taken both those
senses together (which will also agree in the Stoical Hypothesis) that All
things were both from One God, and from One Fire; they being both alike
Corporeal Thei^^s, who supposed an intellectual Fire, to be the First Principle
of All Things.

And though Aristotle in his Physics quarrel very much with Parmenides and
Melissus, for making One Immovable Principle, yet in his Metaphysics, himself
does plainly close with it and own it as very good Divinity, that there is One
Incorporeal and Immovable Principle of All Things, and that the Supreme Deity
is an Immovable Nature, L. 6. c. 1. and L. 13. c. 7.
(...)^ If there be any such Substance as this, that is separate (from Matter,
or Incorporeal) and Immovable (as we shall afterward endeavor to show that
there is) then the Divinity ought to be placed here, and this must be
acknowledged to be the First and most Proper Principle of all. But lest any
should suspect, that Aristotle, if not Parmenides also, might for all that,
hold Many such Immovable Principles, or Many Eternal, Uncreated and
Self-existent Beings, as so many Partial Causes of the World, Simplicius
assures us, (...), i. e. that though diverse of the Ancient Philosophers
asserted a Plurality of Movable Principles (and some indeed an Infinity) yet
there never was any Opinion entertained amongst Philosophers, of Many, or More
than One, Immovable Principles. From whence it may be concluded, that no
Philosopher ever asserted, a Multitude of Unmade Selfexistent Minds, or
Independent Deities, as Coordinate Principles of the World.

Indeed Plotinus seems to think that Parmenides in his Writings, by his (...),
or Ens, did frequently mean a Perfect Mind or Intellect, there being no True
Entity (according to him) below that which Understands (which Mind, though
Incorporeal, was likened by him to a Sphere, because it comprehends all within
it self, and because Intellection is not from without, but from within.) But
that when again, he called his On or Ens, One, he gave occasion thereby to
some, to quarrel with him, as making the same both One and Many; Intellect
being that which conteins the Ideas of all things in it. Wherefore Parmenides
his whole Philosophy (says he) was better digested and more exactly and
distinctly set down in Plato's Parmenides, where he acknowledges, Three
Unities Subordinate, or a Trinity of Divine Hypostases; (...)^ En. 5. L. 1. c.
8.
Parmenides in Plato, speaking more exactly, distinguishes Three Divine Unities
Subordinate; The First of that which is Perfectly and most Properly One; the
Second of that which was called by him, One-Many; the Third of that which is
thus expressed, One and Many. So that Parmenides did also agree in this
acknowledgment of a Trinity of Divine or Archical Hypostases. Which Observation
of Plotinus is, by the way, the best Key, that we know of, for that Obscure
Book of Plato's Parmenides. Wherefore Parmenides thus asserting a Trinity of
Divine Hypostases, it was the First of those Hypostases, that was properly
called by him, (...), One the Universe or all: That is, One most Simple Being,
the Fountain and Original of all. And the Second of them (which is a Perfect
Intellect) was it seems by him called, in way of distinction (...) or (...),
One-Many or One-All Things. By which All Things are meant, the Intelligible
Ideas of Things, that are all contained together in One Perfect Mind. And of
those was Parmenides to be understood also, when he affirmed, That all Things
did stand, and nothing flow; not of Singular and Sensible Things, which, as the
Heracliticks rightly affirmed, do indeed all flow; but of the Immediate Objects
of the Mind, which are Eternal and Immutable; Aristotle himself acknowledging,
that no Generation nor Corruption belongs to them; since there could be no
Immutable and Certain Science, unless there were some Immutable, Necessary and
Eternal Objects of it. Wherefore, as the same Aristotle also declares, Met. L.
4, c. 5.
the true Meaning of that Controversy, betwixt the Heracliticks and
Parmenideans, Whether All Things did flow or Some things stand? was the same
with this, Whether there were any other Objects of the Mind, besides Singular
Sensibles, that were Immutable; and consequently, Whether there were any such
thing, as Science or Knowledge which had a Firmitude and Stability in it? For
those Heracliticks who contended, that the only Objects of the Mind, were
Singular and Sensible things, did with good reason consequently thereupon deny,
that there was any Certain and Constant Knowledge, since there can neither be
any Definition of Singular Sensibles, (as Aristotle writes) nor any
Demonstration concerning them. But the Parmenideans on the contrary, who
maintained the Firmitude and Stability of Science, did as reasonably conclude
thereupon, that besides Singular Sensibles; there were other Objects of the
Mind, Universal, Eternal and Immutable, which they called the Intelligible
Ideas, all originally contained in One Archetypal Mind or Understanding, and
from thence participated by Inferior Minds and Souls. But it must be here
acknowledged, that Parmenides and the Pythagoreans, went yet a step further,
and did not only suppose those Intelligible Ideas, to be the Eternal and
Immutable Objects of all Science, but also as they are contained in the Divine
Intellect, to be the Principles and Causes of all other things. For thus
Aristotle declares their Sense, (...), and again, Met. L. ^. c. ^.
(...)^ The Ideas are the Causes of all other things; and, the Essence of all
other things below, is imparted to them from the Ideas, as the Ideas
themselves, derive their Essence from the First Unity. Those Ideas in the
Divine Understanding, being looked upon by these Philosophers, as the Paradigms
and Patterns of all Created things. Now these Ideas being frequently called by
the Pythagoreans, Numbers, we may from hence clearly understand the Meaning of
that seemingly monstrous Paradox or puzzling Griphus of theirs, that Numbers
were the Causes and Principles of all things, or that All things were made out
of Numbers; it signifying indeed no more than this, that All things were made
from the Ideas of the Divine Intellect, called Numbers; which themselves also
were derived from a Monad or Unity; Aristotle somewhere intimating this very
account of that Assertion, (...), That Numbers were the Causes of the Essence
of other things, namely, because (...), the Ideas were Numbers. Though we are
not ignorant, how the Pythagoreans made also all the Numbers within the Decad,
to be Symbols of Things. But besides these Two Divine Hypostases already
mentioned, Parmenides seems to have asserted also a Third, which because it had
yet more Alterity, for distinction sake was called by him, neither (...), One
the Universe or All; nor (...), One-All Things; but (...), One and All things;
and this is taken by Plotinus to be the Eternal Psyche, that actively produces
All Things, in this Lower World, according to those Divine Ideas.

But that Parmenides by his One-All Immovable, really understood nothing else
but the Supreme Deity, In Arist. Phys. fol. 7. and 17. and 31.
is further unquestionably evident from those Verses of his cited by
Simplicius, but not taken notice of by Stephanus in his Poesis Philosophica, of
which we shall only set down some few here. -- (...),
(...)^
(...);
(...),
(...)^ etc.
In which together with those that follow, the Supreme Deity is plainly
described, as One Single, Solitary, and most Simple Being, Unmade or
Self-existent, and Necessarily Existing, Incorporeal and devoid of Magnitude,
altogether Immutable or Unchangeable, whose Duration therefore was very
different from that of ours, and not in a way of Flux or Temporary Succession,
but a Constant Eternity, without either Past or Future. From whence it may be
observed, that this Opinion of a Standing Eternity, different from that Flowing
Succession of Time, is not so Novel a Thing, as some would persuade, nor was
first excogitated by Christian Writers, Schoolmen or Fathers, it being at least
as old as Parmenides; from whom it was also afterward received and entertained
by the best of the other Pagan Philosophers; however it has been of late so
much decried, not only by Atheistical Writers, but other Precocious and
Conceited Wits also, as Nonsense and Impossibility.

It is well known that Melissus held forth the very same Doctrine with
Parmenides, of One Immovable, that was All, which he plainly affirmed to be
Incorporeal likewise, as Parmenides did; (...), Simplic. Ar. Phys. f. 19.
Melissus also declared, that his One Ens must needs be devoid of Body, because
if it had any Crassities in it, it would have Parts. But the only Difference
that was between them was this, that Parmenides called this One Immovable that
was All, (...), Finite or Determined, but Melissus (...), Infinite. Which
Difference notwithstanding was in Words only, there being none at all, as to
the reality of their Sense; whilst each of them endeavored in a different way,
to set forth the greatest Perfection of the Deity; there being an Equivocation
in those words Finite and Infinite, and both of them signifying in one sense
Perfection, but in another Imperfection. And the Disagreeing Agreement of these
two Philosophers with one another, Parmenides and Melissus; as also of
Xenophanes with them both concerning the Deity, is well declared by Simplicius
after this manner; Ar. Phys. f. 7.
(...)^ Perhaps it will not be improper for us to digress a little here, and to
gratify the studious and inquisitive Reader, by showing how those Ancient
Philosophers, though seeming to dissent in their Opinions concerning the
Principles, did notwithstanding harmoniously agree together. As first of all,
they who discoursed concerning the Intelligible and First Principle of All;
Xenophanes, Parmenides and Melissus; of whom Parmenides called it One Finite
and Determined; because as Unity must needs exist before Multitude, so that
which is to all things the cause of Measure, Bound and Determination, ought
rather to be described by Measure and Finitude, than Infinity; as also that
which is every way perfect, and has attained its own end, or rather is the end
of all things (as it was the beginning) must needs be of a Determinate Nature;
for that which is imperfect and therefore indigent, has not yet attained its
Term or Measure. But Melissus, though considering the Immutability of the Deity
likewise, yet attending to the Inexhaustible perfection of its Essence, the
Vnlimitedness and Vnboundedness of its Power, declares it to be Infinite, as
well as Ingenit or Unmade. Moreover Xenophanes looking upon the Deity, as the
Cause of All things and above All things, placed it above Motion and Rest, and
all those Antitheses of Inferior Beings, as Plato likewise does in the first
Hypothesis of his Parmenides; whereas Parmenides and Melissus, attending to its
Stability and constant Immutability, and its being perhaps above Energy and
Power, praised it as Immovable. From which of Simplicius it is plain, that
Parmenides when he called God, (...), Finite and Determined, was far from
meaning any such thing thereby, as if he were a Corporeal Being of Finite
Dimensions, as some have ignorantly supposed; or as if he were any way limited
as to Power and Perfection; but he understood it in that sense, in which (...)
is taken by Plato, as opposite to (...), and for the Greatest Perfection, and
as God is said to be (...), The Term and Measure of All Things. But Melissus
calling God (...), Infinite, in the sense before declared, as thereby to
signify his Inexhaustible Power and Perfection, his Eternity and
Incorruptibility, does therein more agree with our present Theology, and the
now received manner of speaking. We have the rather produced all this, to show
how Curious the ancient Philosophers were, in their Enquiries after God, and
how exact in their Descriptions of him. Wherefore however Anaximanders
Infinite, were nothing but Eternal Senseless Matter (though called by him the
(...), the Divinest thing of all) yet Melissus his (...), or Infinite, was the
true Deity.

With Parmenides and Melissus fully agreed Zeno Eleates also, Parmenides his
Scholar, that One Immovable, was All, or the Original of All things, he meaning
thereby nothing else, but the Supreme Deity. For though it be true, that this
Zeno did excogitate certain Arguments against the Local Motion of Bodies,
proceeding upon that Hypothesis of the Infinite Divisibility of Body, one of
which was famously known by that name of Achilles, because it pretended to
prove that it was impossible (upon that Hypothesis) for the Swift-footed
Achilles, ever to overtake the creeping Snail; (which Arguments of his, whether
or no they are well answered by Aristotle; is not here to our purpose to
enquire) yet all this was nothing else, but Lusus Ingenii, a sportful exercise
of Zeno's Wit, he being a subtle Logician and Disputant, or perhaps an
Endeavor also, to show how puzling and perplexing to humane Understanding, the
conception even of the most vulgar and confessed Phenomenon of Nature may be.
For that Zeno Eleates by his One Immovable that was All, meant not the
Corporeal World, no more than Melissus, Parmenides, and Xenophanes, is evident
from Aristotle writing thus concerning him; (...), Zeno by his one Ens which
neither was moved, nor moveable, means God. Moreover the same Aristotle
informs us, that this Zeno endeavored to Demonstrate, that there was but One
God, from that Idea which all men have of him, as that which is the Best, the
Supreme and most Powerful of all, De Xenoph. Zc. and Gor.
or as an absolutely Perfect Being; (...)^ If God be the Best of All things,
then he must needs be One. Which Argument was thus pursued by him; (...) (...)^
This is God and the Power of God, to prevail, conquer and rule over all.
Wherefore by how much any thing falls short of the Best, by so much does it
fall short of being God. Now if there be supposed more such Beings, whereof
some are Better, some worse, those could not be all Gods, because it is
Essential to God not to be transcended by any; but if they be conceived to be
so many Equal Gods; then would it not be the nature of God to be the Best, one
Equal being neither better nor worse than another, Wherefore if there be a God,
and this be the nature of him, then can there be but One. And indeed otherwise
he could not be able to do whatever he would.

Empedocles is said to have been an Emulator of Parmenides also, which must be
understood of his Metaphysics, because in his Physiology (which was Atomical)
he seems to have transcended him. Now that Empedocles acknowledged One Supreme
and Universal Numen and that Incorporeal too, P. 26.
may be concluded from what has been already cited out of his Philosophic
Poems. Besides which the Writer De Mundo (who though not Aristotle yet was a
Pagan of good antiquity) clearly affirms, that Empedocles derived all things
whatsoever, from One Supreme Deity; (...), (...), etc. All the things that are
upon the Earth and in the Air and Water, may truly be called the works of God,
who rules over the World. Out of whom, according to the Physical Empedocles,
proceed all things that were, are, and shall be, viz. Plants, Men, Beasts and
Gods. Which notwithstanding we conceive, to be rather true as to Empedocles his
sense, than his words, he affirming, as it seems, in that cited place, that all
these things were made, not immediately out of God, but out of Contention and
Friendship; because Simplicius who was furnished with a Copy of Empedocles his
Poems, twice brings in that cited Passage of his in this connection, (...),
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
Things are divided and segregated by Contention, but joined together by
Friendship; from which Two (Contention and Friendship) all that was, is, and
shall be, proceeds; as trees, men and women, beasts, birds and fishes, and last
of all the long lived and honorable Gods. Wherefore the sense of Empedocles
his words here was this; that the whole created World, together with all things
belonging to it, viz. Plants, Beasts, Men and Gods, was made from Contention
and Friendship. Nevertheless, since according to Empedocles Contention and
Friendship, did themselves depend also upon one Supreme Deity, which he with
Parmenides and Xenophanes called, (...), or The Very One; the Writer De Mundo
might well conclude, that according to Empedocles, all things whatsoever, and
not only men, but Gods, were derived from One Supreme Deity. And that this was
indeed Empedocles his sense, appears plainly from Aristotle in his
Metaphysics, (...), L. 3. c. 4.
(...), etc. Empedocles makes Contention to be a certain Principle of
Corruption and Generation: Nevertheless he seems to generate this Contention it
self also from the Very One (that is, from the Supreme Deity.) For all things
according to him are from this Contention, God only excepted; he writing after
this manner, From which (that is, Contention and Friendship) all the things
that have been, are and shall be (Plants, Beasts, Men and Gods) derived their
Original. For Empedocles it seems supposed, that were it not for (...) Discord
or Contention, all things would be One: So that according to him, all things
whatsoever proceeded from Contention or Discord, together with a mixture of
Friendship, save only the Supreme God, who has therefore no Contention at all
in him, because he is Essentially (...), Unity it self and Friendship. From
whence Aristotle takes occasion to quarrel with Empedocles, as if it would
follow from his Principles, that the Supreme and most Happy God, was the Least
wise of all, as being not able to know any thing besides himself, or in the
World without him, Met. L. 3. c. 4.
(...), (...), etc. This therefore happens to Empedocles, that according to his
Principles, the most Happy God, is the least Wise of all other things, for he
cannot know the Elements, because he has no Contention in him; all Knowledge
being by that which is like; himself writing thus; We know Earth by Earth,
Water by Water, Air by Air, and Fire by Fire; Friendship by Friendship, and
Contention by Contention. But to let this pass; Empedocles here making the Gods
themselves to be derived from Contention and Friendship, the Supreme Deity, or
most Happy God, only excepted, (who has no Contention in him, and from whom
Contention and Friendship themselves were derived) plainly acknowledged both
One Unmade Deity, the Original of all things under the name of (...), The very
One, and many other Inferior Gods, generated or produced by him; they being
Juniors to Contention, or Discord, as this was also Junior to Unity, the First
and Supreme Deity. Which Gods of Empedocles, that were begotten from Contention
(as well as Men and other things) were doubtless the Stars and Demons.

Moreover we may here observe, that according to Empedocles his Doctrine, the
true Original of all the Evil, both of Humane Souls and Demons (which he
supposed alike Lapsable) was derived from that (...), Discord and Contention,
According to that (...). P. 23.
that is necessarily contained in the Nature of them, together with the the Ill
Use of their Liberty, both in this Present and their Pre-existent State. So
that Empedocles here trod in the footsteps of Pythagoras, whose Praises he
thus loudly sang forth in his Poems, (...), Porphyr. de Vit. Pyth. p. 194.

(...),
(...), etc.
Horum de numero quidam praestantia norat
Plurima, Mentis Opes Amplas sub pectore servans,
Omnia Vestigans Sapientum Docta Reperta, etc.


XXII. Before we come to Socrates and Plato, we shall here take notice of some
other Pythagoreans, and Eminent Philosophers, who clearly asserted One Supreme
and Universal Numen, though doubtless acknowledging withal, Other Inferior
Gods: P. 23.
Philo in his Book De Mundi Opificio, writing of the Hebdomad or Septenary
Number, and observing that according to the Pythagoreans, it was called both a
Motherless and Virgin Number, because it was the only number within the Decad,
which was neither Generated, nor did it self Generate, tells us that therefore
it was made by them a Symbol of the Supreme Deity, (...)^ The Pythagoreans
likened this Number, to the Prince and Governor of All Things, or the Supreme
Monarch of the Universe, as thinking it to bear a resemblance of his
Immutability; which Fancy of theirs was before taken notice of by us. However
Philo hereupon, occasionally cites this Remarkable Testimony of Philolaus the
Pythagorean, (...)^ God (says he) is the Prince and Ruler over all, always
One, Stable, Immovable, Like to himself, but Unlike to every thing else. To
which may be added what in Stobaeus is further recorded, out of the same
Philolaus, Ecl. Phys. p. 44.
(...)^ This World was from Eternity and will remain to Eternity, One governed
by One, which is Cognate and the Best. Where notwithstanding he seems, with
Ocellus, to maintain the Worlds Pre-eternity. And again, (...)^ Wherefore, said
Philolaus, the World might well be called the Eternal Energy or Effect of God,
and of Successive Generation.

Jamblichus in his Protrepticks cites a Passage out of Archytas another
Pythagorean, to the same purpose, (...), C. 4. p. 20.
etc. Whosoever is able to reduce all kinds of things under One and the same
Principle, this man seems to me, to have found out an excellent Specula, or
high Station, from whence he may be able to take a Large View and Prospect of
God, and of all other things; and he shall clearly perceive that God is the
Beginning, and End, and Middle of All things, that are performed according to
Justice and Right Reason. Upon which words of Archytas, Jamblichus thus
glosseth; Archytas here declares the End of all Theological Speculation, to be
this, not to rest in Many Principles, but to reduce all things under One and
the same Head. Adding (...), That this knowledge of the first Unity, the
Original of All things, is the end of all Contemplation. Moreover Stobaeus
cites this out of Archytas his Book of Principles, viz. That besides Matter and
Form, Ecl. Ph. p. 82.
(...), etc. There is another more necessary cause, which Moving, brings the
Form to the Matter, and that this is the First and most Powerful Cause, which
is fitly called God. So that there are Three Principles, God, Matter, and Form;
God the Artificer and Mover, and Matter that which is moved, and Form the Art
introduced into the Matter. In which same Stobean Excerption it also follows
afterward, (...), That there must be something better than Mind, and that this
thing better than Mind, is that which we (properly) call God.

P. 32.
Ocellus also in the same Stobaeus thus writes, (...)^ Life contains the
bodies of Animals, the Cause of which Life is the Soul; Concord contains Houses
and Cities, the cause of which Concord is Law; and Harmony contains the whole
World, the cause of which Mundane Harmony is God. P. 45.
And to the same purpose Aristaeus, (...), As the Artificer is to Art, so is
God to the Harmony of the world. There is also this passage in the same
Stobaeus cited out of an anonymous Pythagorean, P. 8.
(...), God is the Principle, and the First thing; and the World (though it be
not the Supreme God) yet is it Divine.

Timaeus Locrus a Pythagorean Senior to Plato, in his Book concerning Nature,
or the Soul of the World (upon which Plato's Timaeus was but a kind of
Commentary) plainly acknowledges both One Supreme God the Maker and Governor
of the whole World, and also Many other Gods his Creatures and subordinate
Ministers; in the close thereof, writing thus concerning the punishment of
wickedmen after this life, (...)^ All these things, has Nemesis decreed, to be
executed in the second Circuit by the Ministry of Vindictive Terrestrial Demons
that are Overseers of humane affairs; to which Demons, that Supreme God the
Ruler over all, has committed the Government and Administration of the World.
Which world is completed and made up, of Gods, Men, and other Animals, all
Created according to the best Pattern of the Eternal and Unmade Idea. In which
words of Timaeus, there are these Three several Points of the Pagan Theology
contained; First, that there is One Supreme God, Eternal and Unmade, the
Creator and Governor of the whole World, and who made it according to the Best
Pattern or Exemplar of his own Idea's and Eternal Wisdom. Secondly, that this
World Created by God, is compounded and made up of other Inferior Gods, Men,
and Brute Animals. Thirdly, that the Supreme God has committed the
Administration of our Humane Affairs to Demons and Inferior Gods, who are
constant inspectors over us, some of which he also makes use of for the
punishment of wicked men after this life. Moreover in this Book of Timaeus
Locrus the Supreme God is often called, (...), and sometime (...), God in way
of eminency; sometime (...), Mind, sometime (...), The Very Good sometime
(...), The Principle of the Best things, sometime (...), The Maker of the
Better, (Evil being supposed not to proceed from him;) sometime (...), the Best
and most Powerful Cause, sometime (...), The Prince and Parent of all things.
Which God, according to him, is not the Soul of the World neither, but the
Creator thereof, he having made the World an Animal, and a Secondary Generated
God; (...), God willing to make the world the Best, that it was capable of,
made it a Generated God, such as should never be destroyed by any other Cause
but only by that God himself who framed it, if he should ever will to dissolve
it. But since it is not the part of that which is good to destroy the Best of
Works, the World will doubtless ever remain Incorruptible and Happy; the best
of all Generated things, made by the Best Cause, looking not at Patterns
Artificially framed without him, but the Idea and Intelligible Essence, as the
Paradigms, which whatsoever is made conformable to, must needs be the Best, and
such as shall never need to be mended. Moreover he plainly declares, that this
Generated God of his, the World, was produced in Time, so as to have a
Beginning, (...), Before the Heaven was made, existed the Idea, Matter, and God
the Opifex of the Best. Wherefore whatever Ocellus and Philolaus might do, yet
this Timaeus held not the Worlds Eternity; wherein he followed, not only
Pythagoras himself (as we have already showed) but also the generality of the
first Pythagoreans, Met. L. 1. c. 7.
of whom Aristotle pronounces without exception, (...), that they Generated the
World. Timaeus indeed in this Book, seems to assert the Pre-eternity of the
Matter, Strom. 5. p. 60*
as if it were a Self-existent Principle together with God, and yet Clemens
Alexandrinus cites a passage out of him looking another way, (...)^ Would you
hear of one only Principle of all things amongst the Greeks? Timaeus Locrus in
his Book of Nature, will bear me witness thereof; he there in express words
writing thus, There is One Principle of All Things Unmade; for if it were made
it would not be a Principle, but that would be the Principle, from whence it
was made. Thus we see that Timaeus Locrus asserted One Eternal and Unmade God,
the maker of the whole World, and besides this, another Generated God, the
World it self Animated, with its several Parts; the difference betwixt both
which Gods, is thus declared by him, (...)^ That Eternal God, who is the
Prince, Original, and Parent of all these things, is seen only by the Mind, but
the other Generated God, is visible to our eyes, viz. this world and those
parts of it which are Heavenly, that is, the Stars, as so many particular Gods
contained in it. But here it is to be observed, that that Eternal God, is not
only so called by Timaeus, as being without beginning, but also as having a
distinct kind of duration from that of Time, which is properly called Aeon or
Eternity, he therein following Parmenides, (...)^ Time is but an Image of that
Unmade Duration, which we call Eternity; wherefore as this sensible World was
made according to that Eternal Exemplar or Pattern of the Intelligible World,
so was Time made together with the World, as an Imitation of Eternity.

Page 233.
It has been already observed, that Onatus another Pythagorean, took notice of
an Opinion of some in his time, that there was One only God, who comprehended
the whole World, and no other Gods besides, or at least, none such as was to be
religiously worshipped; himself in the mean time asserting, That there was both
One God, and Many Gods; or besides One Supreme and Universal Numen, Many other
Inferior and Particular Deities, to whom also men ought to pay Religious
Worship. Now his further account of both these Assertions, Stob. Ecl. Phys. p.
5.
is contained in these following words; (...)^ They who maintain that there is
only One God, and not Many Gods, are very much mistaken, as not considering
aright, what the Dignity and Majesty of the Divine Transcendency chiefly
consists in, namely, in Ruling and Governing those which are like to it (that
is, Gods) and in excelling or surmounting Others, and being Superior to them.
But all those other Gods, which we contend for, are to that First and
Intelligible God, but as the Dancers to the Coryphaeus or Choragus, and as the
Inferior Common Soldiers, to the Captain or General; to whom it properly
belongs, to follow and comply with their Leader and Commander. The work
indeed is common or the same to them both, to the Ruler and them that are
Ruled; but they that are ruled, could not orderly conspire and agree together
into one work, were they destitute of a Leader, as the Singers and Dancers
could not conspire together into one Dance and Harmony, were they destitute of
a Coryphaeus, nor Soldiers make up one orderly Army were they without a Captain
or Commander.

And as the Supreme God is here called by Onatus, the Coryphaeus of the Gods,
so is he in like manner by the Writer De Mundo, styled the Coryphaeus of the
World, or the Praecentor and Presultor of it, in these words, (...)^ As in a
Chorus, when the Coryphaeus or Precentor has begun, the whole Quire compounded
of men, and sometimes of women too, follows, singing every one their part,
some in higher and some in lower notes, but all mingling together into one
complete Harmony; so in the world God, as the Coryphaeus, the Praecentor and
Praesultor, beginning the Dance and Music, the Stars and Heavens move round
after him according to those numbers and measures, which he prescribes them,
all together making up one most excellent Harmony.

It was also before observed, that Ecphantus the Pythagorean, and Archelaus the
Successor of Anaxagoras (who were both of them Atomists in their Physiology)
did assert the World to have been Made at First, and still to be governed by
One Divine Mind; Page 26.
which is more than some Atomists of ours in this present age, who
notwithstanding pretend to be very good Theists, will acknowledge. We shall in
the next place, mention Euclides Megarensis, the Head of that Sect called
Megarick, and who is said to have been Plato's Master for some time, after
Socrates his death; whose Doctrine is thus set down by Laertius, (...)^ Which
we understand thus, That Euclides (who followed Xenophanes and Parmenides) made
the First Principle of all things, to be One the very Good, called sometimes
Wisdom, sometimes God, sometimes Mind, and sometimes by other Names; but that
he took away all that is Opposite to Good, denying it to have any Real Entity;
that is, he maintained, that there was no Positive Nature of Evil, or that Evil
was no Principle. And thus do we also understand that of Cicero, when he
represents the Doctrine of the Megaricks after this manner, Id bonum solum
esse, quod esset Vnum, and Simile, and Idem, and Semper; to wit, that they
spoke this concerning God, that Good or Goodness it self is a Name properly
belonging to him, who is also One, and Like, and the Same, and Always; and
that the true Good of man, consists in a Participation of, and Conformity
with this First Good. Which Doctrine Plato seems to have derived from him, he
in like manner, calling the Supreme Deity, by those Two Names, (...) and (...),
the One, and the Good, and concluding true humane Felicity to consist, in a
Participation of the First Good, or of the Divine Nature.

In the next place we shall take notice of Antisthenes, who was the Founder
also of another Sect, to wit, the Cynick; for he in a certain Physiological
Treatise, Cic. De N.D.L. 1.

De Ira D.c. 11^


is said to have affirmed, Esse Populares Deos Multos, sed Naturalem Vnum, That
though there were many Popular Gods, yet there was but One Natural God: Or, as
it is expressed in Lactantius, Vnum esse Naturalem Deum, quamvis Gentes and
Vrbes suos habeant Populares; That there was but One Natural God, though
Nations and Cities had their Several Popular Ones. Wherefore Velleius the
Epicurean in Cicero quarrels with this Antisthenes, as one who destroyed the
Nature of Gods, because he denied a Multitude of Independent Deities, such as
Epicurus pretended to assert. For this of Antisthenes, is not so to be
understood, as if he had therein designed to take away all the Inferior Gods
of the Pagans, which had he at all attempted, he would doubtless have been
accounted an Atheist, as well as Anaxagoras was; but his meaning was, only to
interpret the Theology of the Pagans, concerning those other Gods of theirs,
that were or might be looked upon, as Absolute and Independent; that these,
though Many Popular Gods, yet indeed were but One and the same Natural God,
called by several Names. As for example, when the Greeks worshipped Zeus, the
Latins Jovis, the Egyptians Hammon, the Babylonians Bell, the Scythians
Pappaeus; these were indeed many Popular Gods, and yet nevertheless all but One
and the same Natural God. So again when in the self same Pagan Cities and
Countries, the respective Laws thereof, made mention of several Gods, as
Supreme and Absolute in their several Territories, as Jupiter in the Heavens,
Juno in the Air, Neptune in the Sea; or as being Chief in several kinds and
Functions, as Minerva for Learning, Bellona for War, etc. (for this Aristotle
takes notice of in his Book against Zeno, (...), That according to the Laws of
Cities and Countries, one God was Best for one thing, and another for another)
Antisthenes here declared concerning these also, that they were indeed Many
Popular or Civil Gods, but all really One and the same Natural God.

To Antisthenes might be added Diogenes Sinopensis, of whom it is recorded by
Laertius, that observing a Woman too superstitiously worshipping the Statue or
Image of a God, endeavoring to abate her Superstition, he thus bespake her,
(...); Take you not care, O Woman, of not behaving your self unseemly, in the
sight of that God, who stands behind you? for all things are full of him:
Thereby giving her occasion, more to mind and regard, that Supreme and
Universal Numen, that fills the whole World, and is every where.

XXIII. It has been frequently affirmed, that Socrates died a Martyr for One
only God, in opposition to those Many Gods of the Pagans; and Tertullian for
one, writes thus of him, Propterea damnatus est Socrates, quia Deos
destruebat; Socrates was therefore condemned to die, because he destroyed the
Gods. And indeed that Socrates asserted one Supreme God, the Maker and
Governor of the whole World, is a thing not at all to be doubted. In his
discourse with Aristodemus in Xenophon's first Book of Memoirs, he convinced
him, that the things of this world were not made by Chance, but by Mind and
Counsel, (...), I am now convinced from what you say, that the things of this
world, were the workmanship of some wise Artificer, who also was a Lover of
animals. And so he endeavored to persuade him, that that Mind and
Understanding which is in us, was derived from some Mind and Understanding in
the Universe, as well as that Earth and Water which is in us, from the Earth
and Water of the Universe, (...)^ Do you think that you only have Wisdom in
your self, and that there is none any where else in the whole World without
you? though you know that you have but a small Part in your Body, of that vast
Quantity of Earth which is without you; and but a little of that Water and
Fire, and so of every other thing that your Body is compounded of, in respect
of that great Mass and Magazine of them which is in the World. Is Mind and
Understanding therefore the only thing, which you fancy you have some way or
other luckily got and snatched unto your self, whilst there is no such thing
any where in the world without you; all those infinite things thereof being
thus orderly disposed by Chance. And when Aristodemus afterward objected, that
he could not see any Artificer that made the World, as he could those
Artificers which made all other humane things, Socrates thus replies, (...)^
Neither do you see your own Soul, which rules over your Body; so that you might
for the same reason conclude, your self to do nothing by Mind and Understanding
neither, but all by Chance, as well as that all things in the World are done by
Chance. Again when he further disputed in this manner, against the necessity of
Worshipping the Deity, (...)^ I despise not the Deity, O Socrates, but think
him to be a more magnificent Being, than that he should stand in need of my
worship of him. Socrates again answers, (...), How much the more Magnificent
and Illustrious that Being is, which takes care of you, so much the more in all
reason ought it to be Honored by you. Lastly, Aristodemus discovering his
disbelief of Providence, as a thing which seemed to him Incredible if not
Impossible, that one and the same Deity should be able to mind all things at
once, Socrates endeavors to cure this disbelief of his in this manner; (...)^
Consider, Friend, I pray you, if that Mind which is in your Body does order and
dispose it every way as it pleases; why should not that Wisdom which is in the
Universe, be able to order all things therein also, as seems best to it? and
if your Eye can discern things several miles distant from it, why should it be
thought impossible for the Eye of God, to behold all things at once? Lastly, if
your Soul can mind things both here and in Egypt, and in Sicily; why may not
the Great Mind or Wisdom of God, be able to take care of all things in all
places? And then he concludes, that if Aristodemus* would diligently apply
himself to the worship of God, he should at length be convinced, (...)^ That
God is such and so great a Being, as that he can at once see all things, and
hear all things, and be present every where, and take care of all affairs.
Moreover Socrates in his discourse with Euthydemus in Xenophon's Fourth Book,
speaks thus concerning that invisible Deity which governs the whole world;
(...)^ The other Gods giving us good things, do it without visibly appearing to
us; and that God who Framed and Contains the whole world (in which are all
good and excellent things) and who continually supplieth us with them, He
though he be seen to do the Greatest things of all, yet notwithstanding is
himself Invisible and Unseen. Which ought the less to be wondered at by us,
because the Sun, who seems manifest to all, yet will not suffer himself to be
exactly and distinctly viewed, but if any one boldly and impudently gaze upon
him, will deprive him of his sight: As also because the Soul of Man, which most
of all things in him partaketh of the Deity, though it be that which manifestly
rules and reigns in us, yet is it never seen, (...), Which Particulars he that
considers, ought not to despise Invisible Things, but to honor the Supreme
Deity, taking notice of his Power from his Effects. Where we have (...), as
also before (...), plainly put for the Supreme Deity. And we did the rather set
down these passages of Socrates here, concerning God and Providence, that we
might shame those who in these latter days of ours are so Atheistically
inclined, if at least they have any Pudor or Shame left in them.

But notwithstanding Socrates his thus clear acknowledging One Supreme and
Universal Numen, it does not therefore follow, that he rejected all those other
Inferior Gods of the Pagans, as is commonly conceived. But the contrary
thereunto appears, from these very passages of his now cited, wherein there
is mention made of other Gods besides the Supreme. And how conformable Socrates
was to the Pagan Religion and Worship, may appear from those Last Dying words
of his (when he should be most serious) after he had drunk the poison, Cont.
C^ls. l. 6. c 277
wherein he required his friends to offer a Votive Cock for him to Aesculapius:
For which Origin thus perstringeth him, (...)^ And they who had Philosophized
so excellently concerning the Soul, and discoursed concerning the happiness of
the future state to those who live well, do afterward sink down from these
Great, High and Noble things, to a superstitious regard of Little, Small and
Trifling Matters, such as the Paying of a Cock to Aesculapius. Where
notwithstanding, Origin does not charge Socrates with such gross and downright
Idolatry, as he does elsewhere, for his sacrificing to the Pythian Apollo, who
was but an Inferior Demon. And perhaps some may excuse Socrates here, as
thinking that he looked upon Aesculapius no otherwise, than as the Supreme
Deity, called by that Name, as exercising his Providence over the Sickness and
Health or Recovery of Men, and that therefore he would have an Eucharistick
Sacrifice offered to him in his behalf, as having now cured him at once of all
diseases by Death. However Plato informs us, that Socrates immediately before
he drunk his Poison, did, (...)^ pray (not to God, but to the Gods, that is, to
the Supreme and Inferior Gods both together, as in Plato's Phaedrus he did to
Pan and the other Tutelar Gods of that place) that his Translation from hence
into the other world might be happy to him. And Xenophon in his Memoirs,
informs us, that Socrates did both in his Words and Practice, approve of that
Doctrine of the Pythian Apollo, That the Rule of Piety and Religion, ought to
be the Law of every Particular City and Country; he affirming it to be a Vanity
for any man to be singular herein. Lastly, in his own Apology, as written by
Plato, he professes to acknowledge, the Sun, Moon and Stars, for Gods;
condemning the contrary Doctrine of Anaxagoras, as Irrational and Absurd.
Wherefore we may well conclude this Opinion, of Socrates his being Condemned
for denying the Many Gods of the Pagans, or of his being a Martyr for One only
God, to be nothing but a Vulgar Error.

But if you therefore demand, what that accusation of Impiety really was, which
he was charged with, Socrates himself in Plato's Euthyphro, will inform you,
that it was for his free and open condemning those Traditions concerning the
Gods, wherein Wicked, Dishonest and Unjust Actions, were imputed to them. For
when Euthyphro having accused his own Father, as guilty of Murder (merely for
committing a Homicide into prison who happened to die there) would justify
himself from the examples of the Gods, namely Jupiter and Saturn, because
Jupiter the Best and Justest of the Gods, had committed his Father Saturn to
Prison for devouring his sons; as Saturn himself also had castrated his Father
Caelius for some miscarriages of his Socrates thus bespeaks him, (...), etc. Is
not this the very thing, O Euthyphro, for which I am accused? namely because
when I hear any one affirming such matters as these concerning the Gods, I am
very loath to believe them, and stick not Publicly to declare my dislike of
them? And can you, O Euthyphro, in good earnest think, that there are indeed
Wars and Contentions amongst the Gods, and that those other things were also
done by them, which Poets and Painters commonly impute to them? such as the
Peplum or Veil of Minerva, which in the Panathenaicks is with great pomp and
ceremony brought into the Acropolis, is embroidered all over with? Thus we see,
that Socrates though he asserted one Supreme Deity, yet he acknowledged
notwithstanding other Inferior created Gods, together with the rest of the
Pagans, honoring and worshipping them; only he disliked those Poetic Fables
concerning them (believed at that time by the Vulgar) in which all manner of
Unjust and Immoral Actions were Fathered on them; which together with the Envy
of many, was the only true reason, why he was then accused of Impiety and
Atheism.

It has been also affirmed by many, that Plato really asserted One only God
and no more, and that therefore whenever he speaks of Gods Plurally, he must
be understood to have done this, not according to his own Judgment, but only in
a way of Politic Compliance with the Athenians, and for fear of being made to
drink poison in like manner as Socrates was. In confirmation of which opinion,
there is also a Passage cited out of that Thirteenth Epistle of Plato's to
Dionysius, wherein he gives this as a Mark, whereby his Serious Epistles, and
such as were written according to the true sense of his own mind, might by his
friends be distinguished from those which were otherwise; (...), When I begin
my Epistles with God, then may you conclude I write seriously, but not so when
I begin with Gods. And this place seems to be therefore the more Authentic,
because it was long since produced by Eusebius to this very purpose, Praep. Ev.
l. 11. c. 13.
namely to prove that Plato acknowledged One Only God; (...)^ It is manifest,
that Plato really acknowledged One only God, however in compliance with the
Language of the Greeks, he often spoke of Gods Plurally; from that Epistle of
his to Dionysius, wherein he gives this Symbol or Mark, whereby he might be
known to write seriously, namely, when he began his Epistles with God, and not
with Gods.

Notwithstanding which, we have already manifested out of Plato's Timaeus,
that he did in good earnest assert a Plurality of Gods; by which Gods of his
are to be understood, Animated or Intellectual Beings Superior to Men, to whom
there is an Honor and Worship from men due. He therein declaring, not only the
Sun, and Moon, and Stars, but also the Earth it self (as Animated) to be a God
or Goddess. P. 40. S^r.
For though it be now read in our Copies, (...), that the Earth was the Oldest
of all the Bodies within the Heavens, yet it is certain that anciently it was
read otherwise, (...), The Oldest of the Gods; not only from Proclus and
Cicero, but also from Laertius writing thus: (...), Though Plato 's Gods were
for the most part Fiery, yet did he suppose the Earth to be a God or Goddess
too, affirming it to be the Oldest of all the Gods within the Heavens, Made or
Created to distinguish day and night, by its Diurnal Circumgyration upon its
own Axis, in the Middle or Center of the World. For Plato when he wrote his
Timaeus, acknowledged only the Diurnal Motion of the Earth, though afterward
he is said to have admitted its Annual too. And the same might be further
evinced from all his other writings, but especially his Book of Laws (together
with his Epinomis) said to have been written by him in his old age, in which he
much insists upon the Godships of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and complains that
the young Gentlemen of Athens, were then so much infected with that Anaxagorean
Doctrine, which made them to be nothing but Inanimate Stones and Earth, as also
he approves of that then vulgarly received Custom of Worshipping the Rising and
Setting Sun and Moon, as Gods, to which in all probability he conformed
himself; (...)^ De Leg. 10. p.
The Prostrations and Adorations that are used both by the Greeks, and all
Barbarians, toward the Rising and Setting Sun, and Moon (As well in their
Prosperities as Adversities) declare them to be unquestionably esteemed Gods.
Wherefore we cannot otherwise conclude, but that this Thirteenth Epistle of
Plato to Dionysius, though extant it seems before Eusebius his time, yet was
Supposititious and counterfeit by some Zealous but Ignorant Christian. As there
is accordingly, a (...), or Brand of Bastardy prefixed to it in all the
Editions of Plato's Works.

However though Plato acknowledged and worshiphed Many Gods, yet is it
undeniably evident, that he was no Polyarchist, but a Monarchist, an assertor
of One Supreme God, the only (...), or Self-originated Being; the maker of the
Heaven and Earth, and of all those other Gods. For first it is plain that
according to Plato, the Soul of the whole World was not it self Eternal, much
less Self-existent, but Made or produced by God in time, though indeed before
its Body, the World, from these words of his; Plat. Tim. p. 34.
(...)^ God did not fabricate, or make the Soul of the world, in the same
order, that we now treat concerning it, that is After it, as Junior to it; but
that which was to rule over the world as its Body, being more excellent, he
made it First, and Seniour to the same. Upon which account Aristotle quarrels
with Plato as contradicting himself, in that he affirmed the Soul to be a
Principle, and yet supposed it not to be Eternal, but Made together with the
Heaven: (...)^ Arist. Met. L. 14. c. 6.
Neither is it possible for Plato, here to extricate himself, who sometimes
declares the Soul to be a Principle, as that which Moves it self, and yet
affirms it again not to be Eternal, but made together with the Heaven. For
which cause some Platonists conclude, that Plato asserted a Double Psyche, one
the Third Hypostasis of his Trinity, and Eternal, the other Created in Time
together with the World, which seems to be a Probable Opinion. Wherefore since
according to Plato, the Soul of the World, which is the chief of all his
Inferior Gods, was not Self-existent but Made or Produced by God in time, all
those other Gods of his, which were but Parts of the World, as the Sun, Moon,
Stars and Demons, must needs be so too. But lest any should suspect, that Plato
might for all that, suppose the World and its Gods not to have been made by One
only Unmade God, but by a Multitude of Coordinate Self-existent Principles, or
Deities conspiring; we shall observe that the contrary hereunto, is plainly
declared by him, in way of answer to that Quaere, Whether or no there were Many
and infinite Worlds (as some Philosophers had maintained) or only One? he
Resolving it thus, (...), Tim. p. 31.
etc. (...)^ Whether have we rightly affirmed, that there is only One Heaven,
(or World) or is it more agreeable to reason to hold Many or Infinite? We say
there is but One, if it be made agreeable to its Intellectual Paradigm,
containing the Ideas of all Animals and other things in it; For there can be
but One Archetypal Animal, which is the Paradigm of all created Beings;
wherefore that the World may agree with its Paradigms in this respect of
Solitude or Onliness, therefore is it not Two nor Infinite, but
One-only-begotten. His meaning is, that there is but One Archetypal Mind, the
Demiurgus or Maker of all things, that were produced; and therefore but One
World.

And this One God which according to Plato, was the Maker of the whole World,
is frequently called by him in his Timaeus and elsewhere, (...), God or The
God, by way of Excellency; sometimes (...), The Architect or Artificer of the
World; sometimes (...), the Maker and Father of this Universe, whom it is hard
to find out, but impossible to declare to the Vulgar; again, (...), the God
over all; (...), the Creator of Nature; (...), the sole Principle of the
Universe; (...), the Cause of all things; (...), Mind the King of all things;
(...), that Sovereign Mind, which orders all things and passes through all
things; (...), The Governor of the Whole; (...), that which always is and was
never made; (...), the First God; (...), and (...), The Greatest God, and the
Greatest of the Gods; (...), He that Generated or Produced the Sun; (...), De
Rep. L. 10.
He that makes Earth, and Heaven, and the Gods; and does all things both in
Heaven, and Hell, and under the Earth: Again, he by whose Efficiency the Things
of the World, In S^phist.
(...), were afterward made when they were not Before; or from an Antecedent
Nonexistence brought forth into Being. This Philosopher somewhere intimating,
that it was as easy for God to produce those Real Things, the Sun, Moon, Stars
and Earth, etc. from himself, as it is for us to produce the Images of our
selves and whatsoever else we please, D Rep. L. 18.
only by interposing a Looking-glass. Lastly he is called (...), He that
Causes or produces both All other things, and even Himself; the meaning
whereof is this, He that is (...), (as the same Plato also calls him) a
Self-originated Being, and from no other Cause besides Himself, but the Cause
of All other things. Neither does Lactantius Firmianus himself refuse, to speak
of God after this very manner; that Scipsum secit, and that he was, Ex Seipso
procreatus, and propterea Talis, Qualem se esse voluit; that He made Himself,
and that, being Procreated from Himself, He therefore was every way such, as he
Willed himself to be. Which unusual and bold strain of Theology, is very much
insisted upon by Plotinus in his Book, (...), En. 6. L. 8* P. 749.
Concerning the Will of the First One, or Unity. He there writing thus of the
Supreme God, (...); He is the Cause of himself, and he is from Himself, and
Himself is for Himself. And again (...)^ This is He, who is the Maker of
himself; and is Lord over himself; (in a certain sense) for he was not made
that, which Another willed him to be, but he is that which he wills himself
to be. Moreover, (...), P. 751.
etc. The Supreme Deity loving himself as a Pure Light, is himself what he
loved; Thus as it were begetting and giving subsistence to himself, he being a
standing Energy. Wherefore since God is a Work or Energy, and yet he is not the
Work or Energy of any other Being, he must needs be (in some sense) his own
Work or Energy; so that God is not, that which he happened to be; but that
which he wills himself to be. Thus also a little before, (...)^ P. 743.
We must of necessity make Will and Essence the same in the First Being.
Wherefore since his Willing is from himself, his Being must needs be from
himself too; the consequence of which Ratiocination is this, that He made
himself. For if his volition be from himself, and his own work, and this be the
same with his Hypostasis or Substance; he may be then said to have given
subsistence to himself. Wherefore he is not what he happened to be, but what he
willed himself to be. But because this is so unusual a Notion, we shall here
set down yet one or two passages more of this Philosophers concerning it;
(...)^ P. 747.
The Essence of the Supreme God, is not without his Will, but his Will and
Essence are the same; so that God concurreth with Himself, himself willing to
be as he is, and being that which he wills; and his Will and Himself being
one and the same. For Himself is not One thing (as happening to be that whichhe
is) and that he would will to be Another: For what could God will to be, but
that which he is? And if we should suppose, that it were in his own choice, to
be what he would, and that he had liberty to change his Nature into whatsoever
else he pleased, it is certain that he would neither will to be any thing else,
besides what he is, nor complain of himself as being now that which he is, out
of necessity, he being indeed no other but that, which himself has willed and
does always will to be. For his Will is his Essential Goodness, so that his
Will does not follow his Nature but concur with it; in the very Essence of
this Good there being contained his Choice, P. 755.
and Willing of himself to be such. Lastly, (...)^ God is all Will, nor is
there any thing in him which he does not Will, nor is his Being before his
Will, but his Will is Himself, or he Himself the first Will. So that he is as
he would himself, and such as he would, and yet his will did not Generate or
Produce any thing, that was not before. And now we may in all Probability
conclude; that Lactantius derived this Doctrine from Plato and Plotinus; which
how far it is to be either allowed of or excused, we leave others to judge;
only we shall observe, that as the word (...), frequently attributed to God by
Christians as well as Pagans, seems to imply as much; so the Scope and Drift of
Plotinus in all this, was plainly no other, than partly to set forth the
Self-existence of the Supreme Deity after a more lively manner; and partly to
confute that odd Conceit, which some might possibly entertain of God, as if he
either Happened by Chance, to be what he is; or else were such by a Certain
Necessity of Nature, and had his Being imposed upon him: whereas, he is as much
every way, what he would Will and Choose to be, as if he had Made himself by his
own Will and Choice. Neither have we set down all this, only to give an account
of that one Expression of Plato's, That God causes Himself and all things, but
also to show how punctually precise, curious and accurate, some of these Pagans
were, in there Speculations concerning the Deity.

To return therefore to Plato; Though some have suspected that Trinity, which
is commonly called Platonic, to have been nothing but a mere Figment and
Invention of some later Platonists, yet the contrary hereunto seems to be
unquestionably evident, that Plato himself really asserted such a Trinity of
Universal and Divine Hypostases, which have the nature of Principles. For
first, whereas in his Tenth Book of Laws, he professedly opposing Atheists,
undertakes to prove the Existence of a Deity, he does notwithstanding there
ascend no higher than to the Psyche, or Universal Mundane Soul, as a
Self-moving Principle, and the immediate or proper Cause of all that Motion
which is in the World. And this is all the God, that there he undertakes to
prove. But in other places of his Writings he frequently asserts, above the
Self-moving Psyche an Immovable and Standing Nous or Intellect, which was
properly the Demiurgus, or Architectonick Framer of the whole World. And
lastly, above this Multiform Intellect, he plainly asserts yet a higher
Hypostasis, One most Simple and most absolutely Perfect Being; which he calls
(...), in opposition to that Multiplicity which speaks something of
Imperfection in it, and (...), Goodness it self, as being above Mind and
Understanding; the First Intelligible, and an Infinite Fecundity together with
overflowing Benignity. And accordingly in his Second Epistle to Dionysius, does
he mention a Trinity of Divine Hypostases, all together. Now the words (...)
and (...), God and the Divinity in Plato, seem sometimes to comprehend this
whole Trinity of Divine Hypostases, as they are again sometimes severally
applied to Each of them, accordingly as we have already observed, that Zeus or
Jupiter in Plato, is not always taken for the First and Highest Hypostasis in
his Trinity, but sometimes the Second Hypostasis of Mind or Intellect is meant
thereby, and sometimes again his Third Hypostasis of the Universal and Eternal
Psyche; nevertheless the First of these Three Hypostases, is that which is
properly called by the Platonists, (...), the Fountain of the Godhead, and by
Plato himself, (...) The King of All things, about whom are All things, and for
whose sake are All things, and the Cause of all Good and Excellent Things.

And this First Divine Hypostasis, which in Plato's Theology, is properly
(...), the Original Deity, is largely insisted upon by that Philosopher in the
Sixth of his Politics, under the Name and Title of (...), The Good; but
principally there illustrated by that Resemblance of the Sun, called by that
Philosopher also, a Heavenly God, and said to be the Offspring of this Highest
Good, and something Analogous to it in the Corporeal World, (...); This is the
same in the Intelligible World, to Intellect (or Knowledge) and Intelligibles,
that the Sun is in the Sensible World, to Sight and Visibles. For, as the Sun
is not Sight, but only the Cause of it; nor is that Light, by which we see, the
same with the Sun it self, but only (...), a Sun-like Thing; so neither is the
Supreme and Highest Good (properly) Knowledge, but the Cause of Knowledge; nor
is Intellect (precisely considered as such) the Best and Most Perfect Being,
but only (...), a Boniform Thing. Again, As the Sun gives to things not only
their Visibility, but also their Generation; so does that the Highest Good; not
only cause the Cognoscibility of things, but also their very Essences and
Beings. (...), This Highest Good being not it self properly Essence, but above
Essence, transcending the same, both in respect of Dignity and Power. Which
Language and Conceit of Plato's, some of the Greek Fathers seem to have
entertained, yet so as to apply it to the whole Trinity, when they call God
(...), or Super-essential. But the meaning of that Philosopher, was as we
conceive, no other than this, that this Highest Good, has no Particular
Characteristick upon it, limiting and determining of it, it being the Hidden
and Incomprehensible Sourse of all things. In the Last place, we shall observe,
that this First Divine Hypostasis of the Platonic Trinity, is by that
Philosopher called, (...), The Father of the Prince and Cause of All things.
Wherein we cannot but take notice of an Admirable Correspondency, betwixt the
Platonic Philosophy and Christianity, in that the Second Hypostasis of both
their Trinities (called also sometimes (...) by the Platonists, as well as
(...)) is said to be the Immediate Cause of All things; and the Demiurgus, the
Architect, Maker or Artificer of the Whole World.

Now to Plato we might here join Xenophon, because he was his Equal, and a
Socratick too; (though it seems there was not so good Correspondence betwixt
them) which Xenophon, however in sundry places of his Writings, he acknowledge
a Plurality of Gods, yet does he give plain Testimony also of One Supreme and
Universal Numen, as this particularly, (...)^ He that both agitates all things,
and establishes the Frame of the whole world, though he be manifest to be
great and powerful, yet is he, as to his Form Inconspicuous.

XXIV. In the next place we come to Aristotle: Who that he acknowledged more
Gods than One (as well as the other Pagans) appears from his using the word so
often Plurally. As particularly in this Passage of his Nicomachian Ethics, L.
10. c. 8.
(...)^ That Perfect Happiness is a Speculative or Contemplative Energy, maybe
made manifest from hence; because we account the Gods most of all Happy. Now
what Moral Actions can we attribute to them? Whether those of Justice amongst
one another; as if it were not ridiculous to suppose the Gods to make Contracts
and Bargains among themselves, and the like. Or else those of Fortitude and
Magnanimity? As if the Gods had their Fears, Dangers and Difficulties to
encounter withal. Or those of Liberality? as if the Gods had some such thing as
Money too, and there were among them Indigent to receive Alms. Or Lastly, shall
we attribute to them the Actions of Temperance? but would not this be a
Reproachful Commendation of the Gods, to say, that they conquer and master
their vicious Lusts and appetites? Thus running through all the Actions of
Moral Virtue, we find them to be small and mean and unworthy of the Gods. And
yet we all believe the Gods to live, and consequently to Act; unless we should
suppose them perpetually to sleep as Endymion did. Wherefore if all Moral
Actions, and therefore much more Mechanical Operations be taken away from that
which Lives and Understands, what is there left to it besides Contemplation? To
which he there adds a further Argument also of the same thing. Because other
Animals, who are deprived of Contemplation, partake not of Happiness. For to
the Gods all their Life is Happy; to men so far forth, as it appoacheth to
Contemplation; but brute Animals, that do not at all contemplate, partake not
at all of Happiness. Where Aristotle plainly acknowledges a Plurality of Gods,
and that there is a certain Higher Rank of Beings above Men. And by the way we
may here observe, how from those words of his, (...), All men suppose the Gods
to live; and from what follows in him; that Opinion of some late Writers may be
confuted, that the Pagans generally worshipped, the Inanimate Parts of the
World as true and proper Gods: Aristotle here telling us, that they Universally
agreed in this, that the Gods were Animals, Living and Understanding Beings,
and such as are therefore capable of Contemplation. Moreover Aristotle in his
Politics, L. 5. c. 11.
writing of the means to conserve a Tyranny, as he calls it; sets down this for
one amongst the rest. (...)^ For a Prince or Monarch, to seem to be always,
more than ordinarily sedulous about the Worship of the Gods: because men are
less afraid of suffering any Injustice from such Kings or Princes, as they
think to be Religiously disposed, and devou^ly affected toward the Gods.
Neither will they be so apt to make conspiracies against such, they supposing
that the Gods will be their Abettors and Assistants. Where the word (...),
seems to be taken in a good sense, and in way of Commendation, for a Religious
Person; though we must confess, that Aristotle himself, does not here write so
much like a (...), as a Mere Politician. Likewise in his First Book De Coelo,
he writes thus, C. 3.
(...), etc. All men have an Opinion or Persuasion That there are Gods. And
they who think so, as well Bvrbarians as Greeks, attribute the Highest place to
that which is Divine, as supposing the Immortal Heavens, to be most accommodate
to Immortal Gods. Wherefore if there be any Divinity, as unquestionably there
is, the Body of the Heavens must be acknowledged to be of a different kind from
that of the Elements. And in the following Book he tells us again, That it is
most agreeable (...), to that Vaticination, which all men have in their minds
concerning the Gods, to suppose the Heaven to be a Quintessence, distinct from
the Elements, and therefore Incorruptible. Where Aristotle affirms, that men
have generally (...), a Vaticination in their Minds, concerning Gods; to wit,
that Themselves are not the Highest Beings, but that there is a Rank of
Intellectual Beings, superior to men; the chief of which is the Supreme Deity;
concerning whom there is indeed, the Greatest (...) or Vaticination of all.

We acknowledge it to be very true, that Aristotle does not so much insist upon
Demons, as Plato and the generality of Pagans in that Age did, and probably he
had not so great a Belief of their Existence: though he does make mention of
them also, as when in his Metaphysics, speaking of Bodies compounded of the
Elements, he instanceth in (...), Animals and Demons, and elsewhere he
insinuates them to have Airy Bodies, in these words, (...), De An. L. 1.
some perhaps would demand a Reason, why the Soul that is in the Air, is better
and more immortal than that in Animals. However, whether Aristotle believed
these Lower Demon-Gods or no, it is certain that he acknowledged a Higher kind
of Gods, namely the Intelligences, of all the Several Spheres, if not also the
Souls of them and the Stars; which Spheres being according to the Astronomy
then received, Forty Seven in number, he must needs acknowledge at least so
many Gods. Besides which, Aristotle seems also to suppose another sort of
Incorporeal Gods, without the Heavens, where according to him, there is neither
Body, nor Place, nor Vacuum, De Coel. L. 1. c. 9.
nor Time; in these words, (...)^ They who exist there, are such as are neither
apt to be in a Place, nor to wax old with Time, nor is there any change at all
in those things above the Highest Sphere, but they being impassible and
unalterable, lead the best and most self-sufficient Life, throughout all
Eternity. But this Passage is not without suspicion of being Supposititious.

Notwithstanding all which, that Aristotle did assert One Supreme and Universal
Numen, is a thing also unquestionable. For though it be granted that he uses
the Singular (...), as likewise (...) and (...), many times Indefinitly, for a
God in General, or any Divine Being; and that such places as these have been
oftentimes mistaken by Christian Writers, as if Aristotle had meant the Supreme
God in them; yet it is nevertheless certain, that he often uses those words
also Emphatically, for One only Supreme God. L. 1.
As in that of his Metaphysics, (...)^ God seems to be a Cause and certain
Principle to all things. L. 1. c. 3.
And also in his De Anima, where he speaks of the Soul of the Heavens, and its
Circular Motion: (...)^ Neither is that a good Cause of the Circular Motion of
the Heavens, which they (that is the Platonists) call the (...), because it is
Better, that it should be so than otherwise; as if God therefore ought, to have
made the Soul of the World such, as to move the Heaven circularly, because it
was better for it to move so than otherwise; but this being a Speculation that
properly belongs to some other Science, we shall no further pursue it in this
place. Thus afterward again in the same Book, (...)^ It follows from
Empedocles his Principles, that God must needs be the Most Unwise of all, he
alone being ignorant of that (out of which all other things are compounded)
(...), or Contention (because himself is nothing but (...), Unity and
Friendship) whereas Mortal Animals may know or conceive all things, they being
compounded of all. Which same Passage, we have again also in his Metaphysics,
from whence it was before cited to another purpose. To these might be added
another place out of his Book, of Generation and Corruption, (...)^ God has
filled up the Whole or Universe, and constantly supplies the same, having made
a Continual Successive Generation. Lastly, (...) is sometimes plainly used by
Aristotle also, not for The Divinity in general, or Any thing that is Divine,
but for that One Supreme Deity, the Governor of the whole World. Thus in that
Passage of his Rhetoric to Alexander, Cap. 1. p. 609. P.
(...)^ This is that wherein we Men differ from other Animals having recieved
the greatest honor from God, that though they be endued with Appetite and
Anger and other Passions, as well as we, yet we alone are furnished with Speech
and Reason.

Over and besides which, Lib. 14. c. 10. Par.
Aristotle in his Metaphysics (as has been already observed) professedly
opposes that Imaginary Opinion of Many Independent Principles of the Universe,
that is, of Many Unmade Self-existent Deities; he confuting the same from the
Phenomenon, because (...), All things are plainly Coordered to One, the whole
world conspiring into One agreeing Harmony; whereas if there were many
Principles or Independent Deities, the System of the World must needs have been
(...), Incoherent and Inconspiring, like an Ill-agreeing Drama, botch'd up of
Many Impertinent Intersertions. Whereupon Aristotle concludes after this
manner, (...), (...). But Things will not be ill administered (which was then it
seems a kind of Proverbial Speech) and according to Homer, the Government of
Many is not Good, (nor could the affairs of the World be evenly carried on
under it) wherefore there is One Prince or Monarch over all. From which Passage
of Aristotle's, it is evident, that though he asserted (...), a Multiplicity of
Gods in the Vulgar Sense, as has been already declared, yet he absolutely
denied (...), and (...), a Polyarchy or Mundane Aristocracy, that is, a
Multiplicity of First Principles and Independent Deities. Wherefore though
Aristotle doted much upon that Whimsey of his, of as many Intelligibles, or
Eternal and Immovable Minds (now commonly called Intelligences) as there are
Movable Spheres of all kinds in the Heavens (which he sticks not also sometimes
to call Principles;) yet must he of necessity be interpreted to have derived
all these, from One Supreme Universal Deity, which, as Simplicius expresses
it, is (...), the Principle of Principles; and which comprehends and contains
those Inferior Deities under it, after the same manner, as the Primum Mobile
or Highest Sphere, contains all the Lesser Spheres within it. Because otherwise
there would not be (...), One Prince or Monarch over the whole; but the
Government of the World would be a Polychoerany or Aristocracy of Gods,
concluded to be an Ill Government. Moreover as Plotinus represents Aristotle's
sense, it is not conceivable that, (...). 5. L. 1. c. ^
so many Independent Principles, should thus constantly Conspire, (...), into
one Work, that Agreeable Symphony, and Harmony of the Whole Heaven. As there
could not be any reason neither, why there should be just so many of these
Intelligences, as there are Spheres and no more; and it is absurd to suppose,
(...), that the First Principles of the Universe happened by Chance.

Now this Highest Principle, as it is (...), An Immovable Essence, is by
Aristotle in the First place, supposed to be (...), the Principle of Motion in
the Universe, or at least of that Chiefest Motion of the Primum Mobile or
Highest Sphere (which according to the Astronomy of those times seems to have
been the Sphere of Fixed Stars) by whose Rapid Circumgyration, all the other
Spheres and Heavens, were imagined to be carried round, from East to West. Met.
L. 14. c. 8. p. 1003. P.
And accordingly the Supreme Deity, is by Aristotle called, (...), The First
Immovable Mover, or the Mover of the Primum Mobile, and whole Heaven. Which
First Mover being concluded by him to be but One, he does from thence infer the
Singularity of the Heaven or World, (...)^ Met. L. 14. c. 8.
There is One Numerically, First Immovable Mover and no more; and therefore
there is but One Movable neither, that is, but One Heaven or World. In which
Doctrine of Aristotle's, there seems to be a Great Difference, betwixt his
Philosophy and that of Plato's; in that Plato makes the Principle of Motion in
the Heavens and Whole World, to be a Self-moving Soul, but Aristotle supposes
it to be an Immovable Mind or Intellect. Nevertheless, according to Aristotle's
Explication of himself, the Difference betwixt them is not great, if any at
all; Aristotle's Immovable Mover being understood by him, not to move the
Heavens Efficiently, but only Objectively and Finally, (...), as being Loved.
Which Conceit of his, Proclus upon Plato's Timaeus, perstringeth after this
manner, (...)^ P. 167.
Some of the ancients converting the World, to Mind (or Intellect) and making
it move, only by Love of that first Desirable; acknowledged nothing at all to
descend down from Mind (or God) upon the World; but equalized the same with
other Amiable things, amongst Sensibles, that have nothing Generative in their
Nature. Where Proclus seems to suppose Aristotle to have attributed to God, no
Efficiency at all upon the World; the Contrary whereunto, shall be evidently
proved afterward. In the mean time it is certain, that Aristotle, besides his
Immovable Mover of the Heavens, which moves only Finally, or as Being Loved,
must needs suppose another Immediate Mover of them, or Efficient Cause of that
Motion; which could be nothing but A Soul, that enamoured with this Supreme
Mind, did as it were in Imitation of it, continually Turn round the Heavens.
Which seems to be nothing but Plato's Doctrine disguised; that Philosopher
affirming likewise, the Circular Motions of the Heavens, caused Efficiently, by
a Soul of the World in his Timaeus to be, (...), a Motion that is most
agreeable to that of Mind or Wisdom: And again in his Laws, (...), that which
of all Corporeal Motions only resembles the Circuit of Intellect. Which
Platonic Conceit found entertainment with Boethius, who writing of the Soul of
the World, De C^nsol. L. 3. Met. 9.
represents it thus, Quae cum Secta Duos motum glomeravit in Orbs,
In semet reditura meat, Mentemque Profundam
Circuit, and simili convertit Imagine Coelum.
Wherefore as well according to Plato's Hypothesis as Aristotle's, it may be
affirmed of the Supreme Deity, in the same Boethius his Language, that, --
Stabilisque manens dat cuncta Moveri, Being it self Immovable, it causes all
other things to Move. The Immediate Efficient Cause of which Motion also, no
less according to Aristotle than Plato, seems to have been a Mundane Soul;
however Aristotle thought not so fit to make this Soul, a Principle; in all
Probability, because he was not so well assured, of the Incorporiety of Souls,
as of Minds or Intellects.

Nevertheless this is not the only thing, which Aristotle imputed to his First
and Highest Immovable Principle, or the Supreme Deity, its turning Round of the
Primum Mobile, and that no otherwise than as being Loved, or as the Final Cause
thereof, as Proclus supposed; but he as well as Anaxagoras, asserted it to be
also, Met. L. 14, c. 7. P.
(...), The Cause of Well and Fit, or (...), that without which, there could be
no such thing as Well; that is, no no Order, Aptitude, Proportion and Harmony
in the Universe. He declaring excellently, that (...), Unless there were
something else in the world besides Sensibles, there could be neither Beginning
nor Order in it, but one thing would be the Principle of another infinitely, or
without end: and again in another place already cited, (...), It is not at all
likely, that either Fire or Earth or any such Body, should be the Cause of that
Well and Fit that is in the World; nor can so Noble an Effect as this, be
reasonably imputed to Chance or Fortune. Wherefore himself agreeably with
Anaxagoras concludes, that it is (...) or Mind, which is properly (...), The
Cause of Well and Right, and accordingly does he frequently call the Supreme
Deity by that Name. He affirming likewise that the Order, Pulchritude and
Harmony of the whole World, depends upon that One Highest and Supreme Being
in it, after the same manner as the Order of an Army depends upon the General
or Emperor; who is not for the Order, but the Order for him. Which Highest
Being of the Universe, is therefore called by him also, conformably to Plato
(...), The Separate Good of the World, in way of distinction from that
Intrinsic or Inherent Good of it, which is the Order and Harmony it self:
(...)^ Met. l. 14. cap. 10.
It is to be considered also, What is the Good, and Best of the Universe;
Whether its own Order only? or Something Separate and existing by it self? Or
rather Both of them together? As the Good of an Army, consists both in its
Order, and likewise in its General or Emperor, but principally in this Latter;
because the Emperor is not for the Order of the Army, but the Order of the Army
is for him; for all things are coordered together with God, and respectively to
him. Wherefore since Aristotle's Supreme Deity, by what name soever called,
whether Mind or Good, is the proper Efficient Cause of all that Well and Fit,
that is in the Universe, of all the Order, Pulchritude and Harmony thereof; it
must needs be granted, that besides its being the Final Cause of Motion, or its
Turning round the Heavens by being Loved, it was also the Efficient Cause of
the Whole Frame of Nature and System of the World. And thus does he plainly
declare his Sense, where he applauds Anaxagoras for maintaining, Met. L. 1. c.
3.
(...), M^t. L. 14. c. 7.
that Mind is the Cause not only of all Order, but also of the whole World: and
when himself positively affirms, (...), that from such a Principle as this
depends the Heaven, and Nature. Where by Heaven is meant the whole World, and
by Nature, that Artificial Nature of his before insisted on, which does nothing
in vain, but always acts for Ends Regularly, De Part. An. L. 1.
and is the Instrument of the Divine Mind. He also somewhere affirms, that if
the Heavens or World were Generated, that is, Made in Time, so as to have had a
Beginning, then it was certainly Made, not by Chance and Fortune, but by such
an Artificial Nature, as is the Instrument of a Perfect Mind. And in his
Physics, where he contends for the Worlds Ante-Eternity, Lib. 2. c. 6.
he concludes nevertheless, (...), That Mind together with Nature must of
necessity be the Cause of this Whole Universe. For though the World were never
so much Coeternal with Mind; yet was it in order of Nature after it and Juniour
to it as the Effect thereof, Ar. de An. L. 1. c. 7.
himself thus generously resolving, (...), that though some, (that is, the
Atheists) affirm the Elements to have been the First Beings; yet it was the
most reasonable thing of all to conclude, that Mind was the Oldest of All
things, and Seniour to the World and Elements; and that according to Nature, it
had a Princely and Sovereign Dominion over all. Wherefore we think it now
sufficiently evident; that Aristotle's Supreme Deity, does not only move the
Heavens as being Loved, or is the Final Cause of Motion, but also was the
Efficient Cause, of this Whole Mundane System, framed according to the Best
Wisdom, and after the Best manner Possible.

For perhaps it may not be amiss here to observe, That God was not called Mind,
by Aristotle and those other ancient Philosophers, according to that Vulgar
Sense of many in these days of ours; as if he were indeed an Understanding or
Perceptive Being, and that perfectly Omniscient, but yet nevertheless such, as
acted all things Arbitrarilily, being not determined by any Rule or Nature of
Goodness, but only by his own Fortuitous Will.. For according to those ancient
Philosophers, that which acts without respect to Good, would not so much be
accounted Men's as Dementiae, Mind, as Madness or Folly; and to impute the Frame
of Nature or System of the World, together with the Government of the same, to
such a Principle as this, would have been judged by them all one, as to impute
them to Chance or Fortune. But Aristotle and those other Philosophers, who
called the Supreme God, (...) or Mind, understood thereby, that which of all
things in the whole world, is most opposite to Chance, Fortune, and Temerity;
that which is regulated by the (...), The Well and Fit of every thing, if it be
not rather the very Rule, Measure and Essence of Fitness it self; that which
acts all for Ends and Good, and does every thing after the Best manner, in
order to the Whole. Thus Socrates in that place before cited out of Plato's
Phaedo interprets the Meaning of that Opinion, That Mind made the World, and
was the Cause of all things: (...)^ That therefore every thing might be
concluded to have been disposed of after the Best Manner possible. And
accordingly Theophrastus, Aristotle's Scholar and Successor, describes God
after this manner, (...), That First and Divinest Being of all, which wills
all the Best things. Whether of these Two Hypotheses concerning God, One of the
ancient Pagan Philosophers, that God is as essentially Goodness as Wisdom, or
as Plotinus after Plato calls him Decency and Fitness it self; the Other of
some late Professors of Christianity, that he is nothing but Arbitrary Will,
Omnipotent and Omniscient, I say whether of these Two is more agreeable to
Piety and True Christianity, we shall leave it to be considered:

Lastly, it is not without Probability, that Aristotle did, besides the Frame
of Nature, and Fabric of the World, impute even the very Substance of Things
themselves also, to the Divine Efficiency (nor indeed can there well be any
doubt of any thing save only the Matter;) partly from his affirming God to be a
Cause and Principle to all things; Met. L. 1. c. 3.
and partly from his Commending this Doctrine of Anaxagoras, (...), That Mind
was together with Well and Fit, the Cause and Principle of Things themselves.
However that Aristotle's Inferior Gods at least, and therefore his
Intelligences of the Lesser Spheres, which were Incorporeal Substances, were
all of them Produced or Created by One Supreme, may be further confirmed from
this Definition of his in his Rhetoric, L. 2. c. 23.
(...), The Divinity is nothing but either God or the Work of God. Where (...)
is unquestionably used in way of Eminency, for the Supreme Deity, as in those
other places of Aristotle's before cited, Mag. Mor. L. 2 c. 15.
to which sundry more might be added, as, (...), God possesses all Good
things, and is Self-sufficient; and again where he speaks of things that are
more than praiseworthy, (...), Eth. Nic. L. 1. c. 12.
such are God and Good, for to these are all other things referred. But here
Aristotle affirming, that there is nothing Divine, but either God himself, or
the Work and Effect of God, plainly implies, that there was no Multitude of
Self-existent Deities, and that those Intelligences of the Lesser Stars or
Spheres, however Eternal, were themselves also Produced or Caused by One
Supreme Deity.

Met. L. 6. c. 1.
Furthermore Aristotle declares, that this Speculation concerning the Deity,
does constitute a Particular Science by it self, distinct from those other
Speculative Sciences of Physiology, and the Pure Mathematics, so that there
are in all, Three Speculative Sciences, distinguished by their several Objects,
Physiology, the Pure Mathematics, and Theology or Metaphysics: The Former of
these, that is, Physiology, being conversant, (...), about Things both
Inseparable from Matter, and Movable; the Second ( viz. Geometry or the Pure
Mathematics) (...), About things Immovable indeed, but not really separable
from Matter, so as to exist alone by themselves; but the Third and Last, (...),
Concerning things both Immovable and Separable from Matter, that is, Inorporeal
Substances Immovable: This Philosopher there adding, (...)^ That if there were
no other Substance besides these Natural things, which are Material and
Movable; then would Physiology be the First Science; but if there be any
Immovable Substance, the Philosophy thereof must needs in order of Nature be
before the other. Lastly he concludes, that as the Speculative Sciences in
General, are more Noble and Excellent than the other, so is Theology or
Metaphysics the most Honorable of all the Speculatives. Now the chief Points
of the Aristotelick Theology, or Metaphysical Doctrine concerning God, seem to
be these Four following. First, That though all things be not Ingenit or
Unmade, according to that in his Book against Xenophanes, (...); There is no
necessity that all things should be Unmade, for what hinders but that some
things may be Generated from other things? Yet there must needs be something
Eternal and Unmade; Met. L. 14. c. 6.
as likewise Incorruptible, because (...)^ If all Substances were Corruptible,
then All might come to nothing. Which Eternal, Unmade (or Self-existent) and
Incorruptible Substance, according to Aristotle is not Senseless Matter, but a
Perfect Mind. Secondly, that God is also an Incorporeal Substance, (...), Met.
L. 14 c 7
Separate from Sensibles, and not only so, but according to Aristotle's
Judgment likewise, (...), and (...), and (...), Indivisible, and Devoid of
Parts, and Magnitude. Nor can it be denied, but that besides Aristotle, the
Generality of those other Ancients who asserted Incorporeal Substance, did
suppose it likewise to be Vnextended, they dividing Substances (as we learn
from Philo) into (...), Distant and Indistant, or Extended and Vnextended
Substances. Which Doctrine whether True or no, is not here to be discussed.
Thirdly, (...), Met. L. 14. c. 7, etc. 9.
That in God Intellect is really the same thing with the Intelligibles. Because
the Divine Mind being (at least in order of Nature) Seniour to All things, and
Architectonical of the World, could not look abroad for its Objects, or find
them any where without it self, and therefore must needs contain them all
within it self. Whch Determination of Aristotle's, is no less agreeable to
Theism, than to Platonism; whereas on the contrary, the Atheists, who assert
Mind and Understanding as such, to be in order of Nature Juniour to Matter and
the World, do therefore agreeably to their own Hypothesis, suppose all
Intellection to be by way of Passion from Corporeal things without, and no Mind
or Intellect, to contain its Intelligibles, or Immediate Objects within it
self. Lastly, That God being an Immovable Substance, his (...) is (...), Met.
Lib. 14. c. 6.
His Essence and Act or Operation the same, (...), There must therefore needs
be some such Principle as this, whose Essence is Act or Energy. From which
Theorem, Aristotle indeed endeavors to establish the Eternity of the World,
that it was not made (...), from Night, and a Confused Chaos of things, and
from Nothing; that is, from an Antecedent Nonexistence, brought forth into
being; Because God who is an Immovable Nature, and whose Essence is Act or
Energy, cannot be supposed to have rested or Slept from Eternity, doing nothing
at all, and then after Infinite Ages, to have begun to move the Matter, or make
the World. Which Argumentation of Aristotle's, perhaps would not be
Inconsiderable, were the World, Motion, and Time, capable of Existing from
Eternity, or without Beginning. Of which more elsewhere. However, from hence it
is undeniably evident, that Aristotle, though asserting the Worlds Eternity,
nevertheless derived the same from God, because he would prove this Eternity of
the World, from the Essential Energy and Immutability of the Deity.

We shall now conclude all concerning Aristotle, with this short Summary, which
himself gives us of his own Creed and Religion, agreeably to the Tradition of
his Pagans Ancestors; Met. L. 1^. c. 8.
(...)^ It has been delivered down to us from very ancient Times, that the
Stars are Gods also; besides that Supreme Deity which contains the Whole
Nature. But all the other things, were Fabulously added hereunto; for the
better Persuasion of the Multitude, and for Vtility of Humane Life and
Political Ends, to keep men in Obedience to Civil Laws. As for example, that
these Gods are of Humane Form, or like to other Animals; with such other things
as are consequent hereupon. In which words of Aristotle, these Three Things may
be taken notice of. First, That this was the General Persuasion of the
Civilized Pagans from all known Antiquity downwards, that there is One (...),
which comprehends the whole Nature. Where (...) is by Aristotle plainly taken
for the Supreme Deity. And his own sense concerning this Particular, is
elsewhere thus declared after the same manner, In Polit*
where he speaks of Order Harmony and Proportion, (...), This is the Work of
the Divine Power, which also contein^ this Universe. Which Divinity Containing
and Comp^ehending the Whole Nature and Universe, must needs be a Single and
Solitary Being; according to that Expression of Horace before cited, Nec viget
quicquam Simile aut Secundum, That which has nothing Like it, nor Second to
it. The next thing is, That according to the Pagan Tradition, besides this
Universal Numen, there were certain other Particular and Infeferiour Deities
also, that is, Understanding Beings Superior to Men; namely the Animated Stars
or Spheres, according to the Vulgar Apprehension, though Aristotle's Philosophy
would interpret this chiefly of their Immovable Minds or Intelligences. Lastly,
that all the rest of the Pagan Religion and Theology, those Two Things only
excepted, were Fabulous and Fictitious, invented for the better Persuasion of
the Vulgar to Piety, and the conserving of them in Obedience to Civil Laws;
amongst which this may be reckoned for one, that those Gods are all like Men or
other Animals; and therefore to be worshipped in Images and Statues of those
several Forms; with all that other Fabulous Farrago which depends hereupon.
Which being separated from the rest, the (...), or ancient Tradition of their
Pagan Progenitors, would remain comprised within those Two Particulars above
mentioned, namely, that there is One Supreme Deity that Conteins the whole
Universe, and that besides it, the Animated Stars or their Minds, are certain
Inferior Gods also.

To Aristole may be here subjoyned Speusippus and Xenocrates his Equals and
Corrivals, they being Plato's Successors; together with Theophrastus his own
Scholar and Successor. Concerning the former of which it is recorded in Cicero,
De N.D. L. 1.
that agreeably with Plato, he asserted Vim quandam, qua omnia regantur, eamque
Animalem, One Animal and Intellectual Force by which all things are governed;
by reason whereof, Velleius the Epicurean complains of him, as thereby
endeavoring, Evellere ex animis cognitionem Deorum, To pluck out of the minds
of men the Notion of Gods, as indeed both he and Plato did destroy those
Epicurean Gods, which were all supposed to be Independent and to have no Sway
or Influence at all upon the Government of the World; whereas neither of them
denied a Plurality of Subordinate and Dependent Deities, Generated or Created
by One Supreme, and by him Employed as his Ministers in the Economy of the
Universe: For had they done any such thing as this, they would certainly have
been then condemned for Atheists. And Xenocrates his Theology, Ecl. Phys. L. 1.
c. 3.
is thus represented in Stobaeus, (...) (...), etc. That both a Monad and Dyad,
were Gods, the one Masculine, having the order of a Father, which he calls
Zen and Mind, and which is also to him the First God; the other Feminine, as it
were the Mother of the Gods, which is to him, the Soul of the Universe; besides
which he acknowledges the Heaven to be Divine, that is, Animated with a
Particular Soul of its own, and the Fiery Stars, to be Celestial Gods, as he
asserted also certain Sublunary Gods, viz. the Invisible Demons. Where instead
of the Platonic Trinity, Xenocrates seems to have acknowledged only a Duality
of Divine Hypostases; the First called a Monad and Mind, the Second a Dyad and
Soul of the Universe. And lastly, we have this Testimony of Theophrastus,
besides others, cited out of his Metaphysics, (...), There is one Divine
Principle of all things, by or from which all things subsist and remain.

XXV. The Stoics and their chief Doctors, Zeno, Cleanthes and Chrysippus, were
no better Naturalists and Metaphysicians, than Heraclitus, in whose footsteps
they trod: they in like manner admitting no other Substance besides Body,
according to the true and proper Notion thereof, as that which is, not only
(...), Distant and Extended, but also (...), Resisting and Impenetrable. So
that according to these Stoics, the Souls not only of other Animals, but of
Men also, were properly Corporeal, that is, Substances Impenetrably Extended;
and which differed from that other part of theirs, commonly called their Body,
no otherwise, than that they were, (...), a more Thin and Subtle Body, and
(...), a Hot and Fiery Spirit: it being supposed by these Philosophers, that
Cogitation, Reason and Understanding, are lodged only in the Fiery Matter of
the Universe. And though the Generality of these Stoics, acknowledged Humane
Souls, to have a certain Permanency after Death, and some of them till the next
Conflagration (unless perhaps they should be crushed and broken all to pieces,
in their Passage out of the Body, by the downfall of some Tower, Steeple, or
the like, upon them) yet did they all conclude against their Immortality, there
being nothing at all Immortal with them (as shall be afterward declared) save
only Jupiter, or the One Supreme Deity. And as for the Punishment of Wicked
Souls after death, though some of them seem to have utterly exploded the same,
as a mere Figment of Poets, (insomuch that Epictetus himself denies, there was
any Acheron, Cocytus or Phlegethon) yet others granted, that as the better
Souls after Death, did mount up to the Stars, their First Original, so the
Wicked wandered up and down here, in certain Dark and Miry Subterraneous Places,
till at length they were quite extinct. Nevertheless, they seem to have been
all of this Persuasion, that the Frightning of men with punishments after
Death, was no Proper nor Accommodate means to promote Virtue, because that
ought to be pursued after for its own sake, or the Good of Honesty, as Vice to
be avoided, for that Evil of Turpitude which is in it, and not for any other
External Evil consequent thereupon. Wherefore Chrysippus reprehended Plato for
subjoyning to his Republic such affrightful Stories of Punishments after
death, Plut St^^^. Rep. p. ^^^^.
(...) (...)^ Chrysippus affirms, that Plato (in the Person of Cephalus) does
not rightly deterr men from Injustice, by the Fear of Divine Punishments and
Vengeance after Death; since this opinion (of Torments after death) is liable
to much Exception, and the contrary is not without Probabilities; so that it
seems to be but like to Women's frighting of Children from doing unhappy tricks,
with those Bugbears of Accho and Alphito. But how fondly these Stoics, doted
upon that Hypothesis, That all was Body, may appear from hence, that they
maintained even Accidents and Qualities themselves to be Bodies; for Voice and
Sound, Night and Day, Evening and Morning, Summer and Winter; nay, Calends and
Nones, Months and Years, were Bodies with them. And not only so, but also the
Qualities of the Mind it self, as Virtue and Vice, together with the Motions
and Affections of it, as Anger and Envy, Grief and Joy; according to that
passage in Seneca, Corporis Bona sunt Corpora, Corpora ergo sunt and quae
animi, nam and hic Corpus est; The Goods of a Body are Bodies, now the Mind is
a Body, and therefore the Goods of the Mind are Bodies too. And with as good
Logic as this did they further infer, that all the Actions, Passions, and
Qualities of the Mind, were not only Bodies but also Animals likewise. Animam
constat Animal esse, cum ipsa efficiat, ut simus Animalia; Virtus autem nihil
aliud est quam Animus taliter se habens, ergo Animal est; It is manifest, that
the Soul is an Animal, because it is that by which we are made Animals; now
Virtue and Vice are nothing else but the Soul so and so affected or modified,
and therefore these are Animals too. Thus we see what fine Conclusions, these
Doters upon Body (though accounted great Masters of Logic) made; and how they
were befooled in their Ratiocinations and Philosophy.

Nevertheless though these Stoics were such Sottish Corporealists, yet were
they not for all that Atheists: they resolving that Mind or Understanding,
though always lodged in Corporeal Substance, yet was not first of all begotten
out of Senseless Matter, so or so Modified; but was an Eternal Unmade thing, and
the Maker of the whole Mundane System. And therefore as to that Controversy so
much agitated amongst the Ancients, Whether the World were made by Chance, or
by the Necessity of Material Motions, or by Mind, Reason and Understanding;
they avowedly maintained that it was neither by Chance nor by Material
Necessity, but Divina Mente, by a Divine and Eternal Mind every way perfect.
From which One Eternal Mind, they also affirmed Humane Souls to have been
derived, and not from Senseless Matter; Prudentiam and Mentem a Diis ad Homines
pervenisse, that Mind and Wisdom descended down to Men from the Deity. And
that, Ratio nihil aliud est, quam in Corpus humanum Pars Divini Spiritus mersa;
Reason is nothing else but Part of the Divine Spirit merg'd into a Humane Body;
so that these Humane Souls were to them, no other than (...), certain Parts of
God, or Decerptions and Avulsions from him. Neither were the Reasons by which
these Stoics would prove, the World to have had a Divine Original, at all
Contemptible, or much inferior to those which have been used in these Latter
days; they being such as these: First, That it is no more likely, this Orderly
System of the World, should have been made by Chance, than that Ennius his
Annals, or Homer's Iliads might have resulted from the Fortuitous Projection or
Tumbling out of so many Forms of Letters, confounded all together. There being
as much continued and coherent Sense and as many several Combinations, in this
Real Poem of the World, as there is in any Fantastic Poem made by men. And
since we see no Houses or Cities, no Books or Libraries any where made by the
fortuitous Motions of Matter, it is a madness to think that this Admirable
Compages of the whole World should first have resulted from thence. Again,
There could not possibly be such an Agreeing and Conspiring Cognation of
things, and such a Universal Harmony throughout the whole World, as now there
is, nisi ea Vno Divino and Continuato Spiritu continerentur, were they not all
contained by One and the same Divine Spirit: Which is the most obvious
Argument, for the Unity or Onelyness of the Deity. They reasoned also from the
Scale of Nature, or the Gradual Perfection of things in the Universe, one above
another; That therefore there must be something Absolutely Perfect, and that
either the World it self, or something presiding over it, was a Principio
Sapiens, Wise from the Beginning, or rather without Beginning and from
Eternity. For as in the Growth of Plants and Animals, Naturae suo quodam
Itinere ad Vltimum pervenit, Nature by a Continual Progress and Journeying
forwards, arrives at length to the greatest Perfection, which those things are
respectively capable of: And as those Arts of Picture and Architecture, aim at
Perfection; ita in omni Natura necesse est Absolvi aliquid and Perfici, so in
the Nature of the whole Universe, there must needs be something Absolutely
Perfect, reached unto. Necesse est praestantem aliquam esse Naturam qua nihil
est Melius; Since there is such a Gradual Ascent and Scale of Perfections in
Nature one above another, there must needs be some most Excellent and Perfect
Being, than which nothing can be Better, at the Top of all, as the Head
thereof. Moreover they disputed Socratically after this manner, Vnde arripuit
Homo Vitam, Mentem and Rationem? Whence did man snatch Life, Reason, or
Understanding? Or from what was it Kindled in him? For is it not plain, that we
derive the Moisture and Fluidity of our Bodies, from the Water that is in the
Universe, their Consistency and Solidity from the Earth, their Heat and
Activity from the Fire, and their Spirituosity from the Air; Illud autem quod
vincit haec omnia, Rationem, Mentem and Consilium, etc. Vbi invenimus? unde
sustulimus? An caetera Mundus habebit omnia? Hoc unum quod plurimi est non
habebit? But that which far transcendeth all these things, our Reason, Mind and
Understanding, where did we find it? or from whence did we derive it? Has the
Universe all those other things of ours in it, and in a far greater proportion?
and has it nothing at all of that which is the most excellent thing in us?
Nihil quod Animi, quodque Rationis est expers, id generare ex se potest
Animantes, compotesque Rationis, Mundus autem generat Animantes compotes
Rationis: Nothing that is devoid of Mind and Reason can Generate things Animant
and Rational, but the World Generateth such, and therefore it self (or that
which conteins it and presides over it) must needs be Animant, and Rational or
Intellectual. Which Argumentation is further set home by such Similitudes as
these; Si ex Oliva modulate canentes Tibiae nascerentur, non dubitares quin
esset in Oliva Tibicinis quaedam Scientia. Quid si Platani Fidiculas ferrent
numerose sonantes, idem scilicet censeres in Platanis inesse Musicam. Cur
igitur Mundus non Animans Sapiensque judicetur, cum ex se procreet Animantes
atque Sapientes? If from the Olive Tree should be produced Pipes sounding
Harmoniously, or from the Plain-Tree Fiddles, playing of their own accord
Musically, it would not at all be doubted, but that there was, some Musical
either Skill or Nature, in those Trees themselves; Why therefore should not the
World be concluded, to be both Animant and Wise (or to have something in it
which is so) since it produces such Beings from it self? And though perhaps
some may think that of Cotta's here, to have been a smart and witty Repartie,
Quaerit Socrates unde Animam arripuerimus, si nulla fuerit in mundo? Et ego
quaero unde Orationem? unde Numeros? unde Cantus? nisi vero loqui Solemn cum
Luna putemus, cum propius accesserit: aut ad harmoniam canere Mundum ut
Pythagoras existimat. Socrates demands, whence we snatched Soul, Life, and
Reason, if there were none in the world? and I demand (says he) whence did we
snatch Speech, Music, and Numbers? Unless perhaps you will suppose the Sun to
confabulate with the Moon, when he approaches near her in the Syzygiae; or the
World to sound Harmonically as Pythagoras conceited. Yet this how smart soever
it may seem, was really but an Empty Flash of Academick Wit, without any
Solidity at all in it, as shall be manifested afterward. Lastly the Stoics
endeavored to prove the Existence of a God after this manner, Vt nulla pars
Corporis nostri est quae non sit minor quam Nosmetipsi sumus, sic Mundum
Vniversum pluris esse necesse est quam Partem aliquam Vniversi; As there is no
Part of our Body which is not Inferior in perfection to Our selves, so must
the Whole Universe needs be supposed, to be Better and more Perfect than any of
the Parts thereof. Wherefore since it is Better to be endued with Life and
Understanding, than to be devoid thereof, and these are Pure Perfections; they
being in some measure in the Parts, must needs be much more in the Whole.
Nullius sensu carentis Pars, potest esse Sentiens, No Part of that which is
utterly dead and stupid, can have Life and Understanding in it. And it is a
Madness for any man to suppose, Nihil in omni Mundo Melius esse quam se, that
there is nothing in the whole World Better than himself, or than Mankind; which
is but a Part thereof. Now Cotta here again exercises his jeering Academick Wit
after the same manner as before; Hoc si placet, jam efficies, ut Mundus optime
Librum legere videatur, etc. Isto modo etiam Disertus, Mathematicus, Musicus,
omni denique doctrina refertus, postremo Philosophus erit Mundus. By this same
Argument you might as well prove, That the World is also Book-learned, an
Orator, a Mathematician, a Musician, and last of all a Philosopher. But neither
this Objection of his nor that Former, have any Firmitude at all in them:
Because though an Effect cannot be Better or more Perfect than its Cause, nor a
Part than the Whole; and therefore whatsoever there is of Pure Perfection in
any Effect, it must needs be more in the Cause; yet as to those things there
mentioned by Cotta (which have all a plain Mixture of Imperfection in them) as
they could not therefore Formally exist in that which is Absolutely Perfect, so
is it sufficient, that they are all Eminently and Vertuaelly contained therein.

By such Argumentations as these (besides that taken from the Topic of
Prescience and Divination) did the ancient Stoics endeavor to Demonstrate the
Existence of a God, or a Universal Numen, the Maker and Governor of the whole
World; and that such a one, as was not a mere Plastic or Methodical and
Senseless, but a Conscious and Perfectly Intellectual Nature. So that the World
to them, was neither a mere Heap and Congeries of Dead and Stupid Matter,
fortuitously compacted together; nor yet a Huge Plant or Vegetable, that is,
endued with a Spermatick Principle only; but an Animal informed and enlivened
by an Intellectual Soul. And though, being Corporealists, they sometimes
called, the Whole World it self or Mundane Animal, God; and sometimes the Fiery
Principle in it, as Intellectual, and the Hegemonick of the Mundane Soul; Yet
was the God of the Stoics properly, not the very Matter it self, but that
Great Soul, Mind and Understanding, or in Seneca's Language, that Ratio
Incorporalis, that Rules the Matter of the whole World. Which Stoical God was
also called, as well (...), Good as Mind; as that which is a Most Moral,
Benign, and Benificent Being; according to that excellent Cleanthean
Description of him, in Clemens Alexandrinus. (...),
(...),
(...), etc.
But this Maker and Governor of the Whole World was most commonly named by the
Stoics Zeus and Zen, or Jupiter; some of them concluding that therefore there
was but one Zeus or Independent Deity, because the Whole World was but One
Animal, governed by One Soul; and others of them endeavoring on the contrary
to prove the Unity and Singularity of the World, from the Oneliness of this
Zeus or the Supreme Deity, supposed and taken for granted, and because there is
but One Fate and Providence. Which Latter Consequence, Plutarch would by no
means allow of, D. Des. Or. p. 425.
he writing thus concerning it, where he pleads for a Plurality of Worlds,
(...), etc. Neither is it at all considerable, what the Stoics here object
against a Plurality of Worlds, they demanding how there could be but One Fate,
and One Providence, and One Jove ( or Independent Deity) were there many
Worlds? For what Necessity is there, that there must be more Zen's or Joves
than One, if there were More Worlds? and why might not that One and the same
God of this Universe called by us, the Lord and Father of all, be the First
Prince, and Highest Governor in all those Worlds? Or what hinders but that a
Multitude of Worlds, might be all Subject to the Fate and Providence of one
Jupiter or Supreme God, himself inspecting and ordering them every one; and
imparting Principles and Spermatick Reasons to them, according to which all
things in them might be Governed and Disposed. For can many distinct Persons in
an Army or Chorus, be reduced into One Body or Polity? and could not Ten, or
Fifty, or a Hundred Worlds in the Universe; be all Governed by One Reason, and
be ordered together in Reference to One Principle? In which Place these Two
things are plainly contained; First, that the Stoics unquestionably asserted,
One Supreme Deity, or Universal Monarch over the whole World; and Secondly,
that Plutarch was so far from giving any entertainment to the Contrary Opinion;
that he concluded, though there were Ten, or Fifty, or a Hundred worlds, yet
they were all Subject to One Supreme, Solitary, and Independent Deity.

But however though these Stoics thus unquestionably asserted One Sole
Independent and Universal Numen, the Monarch over the whole World: yet did they
notwithstanding, together with the other Pagans, acknowledge a Plurality of
Gods: they concluding, (...), That all things were full of Gods and Demons. And
so far were they from falling short of the other Pagans, as to this Polytheism
or Multiplicity of Gods, that they seem rather to have surpassed and
outstripped them therein. Plutarch making mention of their (...), their So
great Multitude of Gods; and affirming them, (...), to have filled the whole
Heaven, Earth, Air, and Sea with Gods. Nevertheless they plainly declare, that
all this their Multiplicity of Gods ( One only excepted) was Generated or
Created in time by that One, called Zeus or Jupiter, who was not only the
Spermatick Reason, but also the Soul and Mind of the whole Universe; and who
from Himself produced the World and those Gods, out of Nonexistence into
Being. And not only so, but that also in the Successive Conflagrations, they
are all again Resolved and Swallowed up into that One. P. 420.
Thus Plutarch in his Defect of Oracles, writing of the Mortality of Demons,
(...)^ We know the Stoics to maintain this Opinion, not only concerning
Demons, but also the Gods themselves, that they are Mortal. For though they own
such a Multitude of Gods, yet do they acknowledge only one of them Eternal and
Incorruptible; affirming concerning all the rest, that as they were made in
time, so they shall be again Corrupted and Destroyed. Plutarch himself, there
defends the Mortality of Demons, but this only as to their Corporeal Part,
that they die to their present Bodies, and transmigrate into others, their
Souls in the mean time remaining Immortal and Incorruptible; but the Stoics
maintained the same as well concerning Gods as Demons; and that in such a
manner, as that their very Souls, Lives and Personalities, should be utterly
extinguished and Destroyed. To the same purpose Plutarch again writes, P. 1075.
in his Book of Common Notions against the Stoics, (...)^ Chrysippus and
Cleanthes, having filled the whole Heaven, Earth, Air and Sea with Gods, leave
not One of these their so Many Gods Incorruptible nor Eternal, save Jupiter
only, into whom they consume all the rest; thereby making him to be a Helluo
and Devourer of Gods; which is as bad, as if they should affirm him to be
Corruptible, it arguing as much Imperfection for one to be Nourished and
Preserved by the Consumption of other things into him, as for himself to die.
Now this is not only gathered by way of Consequence, from the other Principles
of the Stoics, but it is a thing which they expressly assert, and with a loud
voice proclaim, in all their writings concerning the Gods, Providence, Fate and
Nature; that all the Gods were Generated (or Made in time) and that they shall
be all destroyed by Fire; they supposing them to be Meliable, as if they were
Waxen or Leaden things. This indeed is Essential to the Stoical Doctrine, and
from their Principles Inseparable and Unavoidable; forasmuch as they held all
to be Body, and that in the Successive Conflagrations, all Corporeal Systems
and Compages shall be dissolved by Fire; so that no other Deity, can then
possibly remain safe and Untouched, save Jupiter alone, the Fiery Principle of
the Universe, Animated or Intellectual. Here therefore there is a considerable
Difference to be observed, betwixt these Stoics and the other Pagan Theists;
that whereas the others for the most part acknowledged their Gods to have been
made in Time, by One Supreme Universal Numen, but yet nevertheless to be
Immortal and to continue to Eternity; The Stoical Pagans maintained, that all
their other Gods, save Jupiter alone, were not only (...) but also (...), such
as should be as well Corrupted, as they were Generated, and this so also, as
that their very Personalities should be utterly abolished and annihilated: all
the Stoical Gods in the Conflagration being as it were Melted and Confounded
into One.

Wherefore during the Intervals of the Successive Conflagrations, the Stoics
all agreed, that there is no more than One God (Zeus or Jupiter) left alone
(there being then indeed nothing else besides himself) who afterward produces
the whole Mundane System, together with All the Gods out of himself again.
Chrysippus in Plutarch affirms, (...), P. 1077.
That as Jupiter and the World may be resembled to a Man, so may Providence be
to the Soul; When therefore there shall be a Conflagration, Jupiter of all the
Gods, being alone Incorruptible and then remaining, will retire and withdraw
himself into Providence; and so both together remain in that same Ethereal
Substance. Where notwithstanding Jupiter and Providence are really but One and
the same thing. Ep. 6.
And Seneca writes thus concerning the Life of a Wise man in Solitude, Qualis
futura est Vita Sapientis, si sine amicis relinquatur, in custodiam conjectus,
aut in desertum littus ejectus? Qualis est Jovis, cum Resoluto mundo, and DIIS
IN VNVM CONFVSIS, paulisper cessante Natura, acquiescit sibi, Cogitationibus
suis traditus; If you ask what would be the Life of a Wise man either in a
Prison, or Desert? I answer, the same with that of Jupiter, when the World
being resolved, and the GODS all CONFOVNDED into ONE, and the Course of Nature
ceasing, he rests in himself, conversing with his own Cogitations. Arrianus
his Epictetus likewise, speaking of the same thing, Ironically introduces
Jupiter, bemoaning himself in the Conflagration, as now left quite alone, after
this manner, Arr. L. 3 c. 13.
(...)^ Alas, I am now left all alone I have neither Juno, nor Minerva, nor
Apollo with me; neither Brother nor Son, nor Nephew nor Kinsman (neither God
nor Goddess) to keep me company. He adding also according to the sense of the
Stoics, that in all these successive Conflagrations, (...), Jupiter being left
alone, converseth only with himself, and rests in himself, considering his
own Government, and being entertained with thoughts becoming himself. And thus
have we made it unquestionably evident, that the Stoics acknowledged, only One
Independent and Self-existent Deity, One Universal Numen, which was not only
the Creator of all the other Gods, but also in certain Alternate Vicissitudes
of time, the Decreator of them; he then swallowing them up, and devouring them
all into himself, as he had before produced them together with the World, out
of himself.

It is granted, that these Stoics as well as the other Pagans, did Religiously
Worship More Gods than One, that is, More Understanding B^ings Superior to
Men. For it was Epictetus his own Exhortation, (...), Pray to the Gods. And the
same Philosopher thus describes the Disposition of a Person Rightly Affected,
(...), I would willingly know what is my Duty, First to the Gods, and then to
my Parents, and other Relations. And they are M. Antoninus his Precepts, (...),
Revere the Gods, and (...), In every thing implore the Aid and Assistance of
the Gods. And accordingly in that Close of his First Book, himself does
thankfully ascribe many Particular Benefits to The Gods in common; (...), etc.
I owe to the Gods, that I had good Progenitors and Parents, etc. Where amongst
the rest, he reckons up this for One, That he never was any great Proficient,
either in Poetry or Rhetoric; because these would probably (had he succeeded
in his Pursuit of them) have hindered him from the attainment of far better
things: and after all his Enumeration, he concludes thus, (...), For all these
things need the Assistance of the Gods and Fortune, viz. because they are not
in our own power.

Neither can it be denied, but that they did often derogate from the Honor of
the Supreme God, by attributing such things to the Gods in common, (as the
Donors of them) which plainly belong to the Supreme God only. L. 3. c. 24.
As when Epictetus makes Reason in Men to be a gift of the Gods, (...); Is
Reason therefore given us by the Gods, merely to make us Miserable and Unhappy?
And when he again imputes Virtue to them; Have thou overcome thy Lust, thine
Intemperance, thine Anger? (...), L. 4. c. 3.
how much greater Cause then have thou of offering Sacrifice, than if thou
had got a Consulship or Praetorship? for those things come only from thy
Self, and from the Gods. Though the Reason of these Speeches of theirs seems to
have been no other, than this, because they took it for granted, that those
Understanding Beings Superior to men, called by them Gods, were all of them
the Instruments and Ministers of the Supreme God in the Government of the
World; and had therefore some kind of Stroke or Influence more or less, upon
all the Concernments of Mankind. Whence it came to pass also, that they often
used those Words God and Gods promiscuously and Indifferently. As one and the
same Celebrated Speech of Socrates, is sometimes expressed Singularly, (...),
If God will have it so, let it be so, (Arr. Epict. L. 1. c 29. and L. 4. c. 4.)
and sometimes again Plurally, (...), If the Gods will have it so.

Wherefore notwithstanding the Many Gods of those Stoics, they worshipped for
all that One Supreme, that is, One Universal Numen, that conteins and
comprehends the whole World. Who was variously described by them, sometimes as
the Nature and Reason of the whole World; (...), Anton. L. 9.
The Nature of the whole, the Oldest of all the Gods; and (...), Ant. l. 7. ss.
18
That Nature which governs all things; (...), Ant. L. 6. ss. ^.
that Reason which governs the Substance of all; Ant. l. 5. ss. 24
(...), that Reason which passes through the Substance of the Universe, and
through all Eternity, Anton. L. 9.
orders and dispenses all according to appointed Periods. Sometimes is he
called (...), the Cause of all things, Ant l. 7. ss. 47.
sometimes (...), the Hegemonick and Ruling Principle of the whole World, and
(...), the Prince of the World. Again, (...), The Governor of the Whole, as in
this of Epictetus, (...), L. 1. c. 12.
A Good man submits his Mind to the Governor of the whole Universe; as good
Citizens do theirs to the Law of the City. Also (...), The Orderer of all, in
this other Religious Passage of the same Philosophers, (...), ^p. p. 119. Cant.
To be Instructed is to Will things to be as they are Made: and how are they
made? As that Great Disposer of all has appointed. Again the Supreme God is
sometimes called by them, (...), That Intellectual Principle which conteins the
whole, as in this Instruction of M. Antoninus, L. 8. ss. 45.
(...), That as our Bodies breath the common Air, so should our Souls suck and
draw in Vital Breath, from that Great Mind that comprehends the Universe,
becoming as it were One Spirit with the same. Anton. p. 125.
He is also called by them (...), The Mind and Understanding of the whole
World, (...), One Intellectual Fountain of all things; Ant. p. 257.
and lastly, to name no more, (...), Anton. L. 7. ss 7.
One God through all, one substance, and one Law. Which Supreme God was
commonly called also by the Stoics, together with the Generality of the other
Pagans, (...), or God, Emphatically and in way of Eminency, as in this of
Epictetus, (...); Will nothing but what God Wills, and then who can be able
to hinder thee? And again, L. 2. c. 18.
(...), Affect to seem fair to God, desire to be Pure with thy Pure self, and
with God. Also where he speaks of the Regular Course of things in Nature,
(...)^ That it proceeds orderly, every thing as it were obeying the Command
of God; when he bids the Plants to blossom they blossom; and when to bring
forth fruit, they bring forth fruit. To which Innumerable other Instances might
be added. And Zeus or Jupiter was the Proper Name of this Supreme God amongst
the Stoics also; whence the Government of the Whole World is called by them
(...), Epict. p. 251.
the Government or Economy of Jupiter. Lastly, this Supreme God, is sometimes
distinguished by them, from the other Gods, expressly and by name, L. 4. c. 12.
as in this of Epictetus, (...), I have, whom I ought to be subject to, whom to
obey, God and those who are next after him, that is, the Supreme and Inferior
Gods. So likewise where he exhorts not to desire things out of our own power,
(...), L. 2. c. 17.
Let jupiter alone with these things, and the other Gods, deliver them up to be
ordered and governed by them. And so again, where he personates one that places
his happiness in those things without him, (...), I then shall sit lamenting,
and speaking evil of every one, even Jupiter himself and the other Gods.

And it must in reason be supposed, that this Jupiter or Universal Numen of the
World, was honored by these Stoics far above all their other Particular Gods;
he being acknowledged by them to have been the Maker or Creator of them as well
as the whole World; and the only Eternal and Immortal God: all those other
Gods, as has been already declared, being as well Corruptible, Mortal, and
Annihilable; as they were Generated or Created. For though Cicero's Lucilius
Balbus, De N. D. l. 2. p. 225. Lamb.
where he pretends to represent the Doctrine of the Stoics, attribute the Very
First Original of the World to a Plurality of Gods, in these words, Dico igitur
Providentia Deorum, Mundum and omnes Mundi parts, and initio constitutas esse,
and omni tempore administrari, yet unquestionably Cicero forgot himself herein,
and rather spoke the Language of some other Pagans, who together with the
Generation of the World, held indeed a Plurality of Eternal (though not
Independent) Deites, than of the Stoics; who asserted One only Eternal God,
and supposed in the Reiterated Conflagrations, all the Gods to be Melted and
Confounded into One, so that Jupiter being then left alone, must needs make up
the World again, as also all those other Gods, out of himself. And thus does
Zeno in Laertius describe the Cosmopoeia, (...), That God at First, being alone
by himself, converted the Fiery Substance of the World by degrees into Water,
that is, into a Crasser Chaos; out of which Water, himself afterward as the
Spermatick Reason of the World, formed the Elements and whole Mundane System.
And Cicero himself elsewhere, in his De Legibus, attributes the first Original
of Mankind cautiously, not to the Gods in Common, but to the Supreme God only,
Hoc Animal Providum, etc. quem vocamus Hominem, praeclara quadam condition
Generatum esse, a SVMMO DEO: and this, rather according to the Sense of the
Stoics than of the Platonists, whose Inferior Generated Gods also (being
first made) were supposed to have had a stroke in the Fabrefaction of Mankind,
and other Animals. Thus Epictetus plainly ascribes, the making of the whole
World to God, or the One Supreme Deity, where he mentions the Galileans, that
is, the Christians, their Contempt of Death, though imputing it only to Custom
in them, and not to right Knowledge, (as M. Antoninus likewise ascribes the
same to (...), L. 11. ss. 3.
mere Obstinacy of Mind) (...)^ L. 4. c. 7.
Can some be so affected out of Madness, and the Galileans out of Custom? and
can none attain thereunto by Reason and true Knowledge, namely because God made
all things in the World, and the whole World it self Perfect and Vnhinderable;
but the parts thereof, for the use of the Whole, so that the Parts ought
therefore to yield and give place to the whole. Thus does he again elsewhere
demand, (...); etc. Who made the Sun? Who the Fruits of the Earth? Who the
Seasons of the Year? Who the agreeable Fitness of things? Wherefore thou having
received all from another, even thy very self, do thou murmur and complain
against the Donor of them, if he take away any one thing from thee? Did he not
bring thee into the World? show thee the Light? bestow Sense and Reason upon
the? Now the Sun was the chief of the Inferior Stoical Gods, and therefore he
being made by another, all the Rest of their Gods must needs be so too. And
thus is it plainly expressed in this following Citation, L 1. c. 3.
(...)^ If any one could be thoroughly sensible of this that we are all made by
God, and that as Principal Parts of the World. and that God is the Father both
of Men and Gods, he would never think meanly of himself, knowing that he is the
Son of Jupiter also. Where (...) is plainly put for the Supreme God, and (...)
for the Inferior Gods only. Again he thus attributes the Making of Man and
Government of the whole World to God or Jupiter only. (...) (...), L. 3. c. 24.
etc. (...)^ God made all men to this End, that they might be happy, and as
became him who had a Fatherly care of us, he placed our Good and Evil in those
things which are in our own power. And (...), L. 3. c. 24.
Things would not be well governed, if Jupiter took no care of his own
Citizens, that they also might be happy like himself.

And that these Stoics did indeed Religiously Worship and Honor, the Supreme
God above all their other Gods, may appear from sundry Instances. As first,
from their acknowledging him to be the Sovereign Legislator, and professing
Subjection and Obedience to his Laws, accounting this to be their Greatest
Liberty. Thus Epictetus, L. 4. c. 7.
(...)^ No man has power over me, I am made free by God (by becoming his
Subject) I know his Commandments, and no man can bring me under bondage to
himself. And again, L 3. c. 5.
(...); etc. These things, would I be found employing my self about, that I may
be able to say to God; Have I transgressed any of thy Commandments? have I used
my Faculties and Anticipations (or Common Notions) otherwise than thou
requiredst?

Again from their acknowledging Him to be the Supreme Governor of the whole
World, and the Orderer of all things in it by his Fate and Providence, and
their professing to submit their Wills to his Will in every thing; Epictetus
somewhere thus bespeaks the Supreme God, (...)^ Did I ever complain of thy
Government? I was sick when thou would have me to be, and so are others, but
I was so willingly. I was poor also at thy appointment, but Rejoicing; I never
bore any Magistracy or had any Dignity, because thou would not have me, and I
never desired it. Did thou ever see me the more Dejected or Melancholy for
this? Have I appeared before thee at any time with a Discontented Countenance?
Was I not always prepared and ready for whatsoever thou requiredst? Will thou
now have me to depart out of this Festival Solemnity? I am ready to go; and I
render thee all thanks, for that thou have honored me so far, as to let me
keep the Feast with thee, and behold thy works, and observe thy Economy of the
world. Let Death seize upon me no otherwise employed, than thus thinking and
writing of such things. He likewise exhorts others after this manner, L 2 c. 16.
(...), (...)^ Dare to lift up thine eyes to God and say, Use me hereafter to
whatsoever thou please. I agree and am of the same mind with thee,
indifferent to all things. I refuse nothing that shall seem good to thee. Lead
me whither thou please. Let me act what part thou will, either of a Public
or Private person, of a Rich man or a Beggar. I will apologize for thee as to
all these things before men. And I will also show the Nature of every one of
them.

The same is likewise manifest from their Pretensions to look to God, and
referr all to him; expecting aid and assistance from him, and placing their
Confidence in him. Thus also Epictetus, L. 2. c. 19.
(...)^ My design is this, to render you free and undisturbed, always looking
at God, as well in every small, as greater Matter. Again the same Stoic
concludes, L. 2. c. 16.
(...), etc. (...)^ A man will never be able otherwise to expel Grief, Fear,
Desire, Envy, etc. than by looking to God alone, and being devoted to him, and
the observance of his Commandments. And he affirms of Hercules, that this
great piece of Piety was so long since observed by him, (...)^ L. 3. c. 24.
that as he called Jupiter, or the Supreme God, his Father, so did he
whatsoever he did, looking at him. Thus M. Antoninus speaks of a Double
Relation that we all have; One (...), L. 8. ss. 23.
to those that live with us, and another (...), to that Divine Cause, from
which all things happen to all. As likewise he affirms (...), L. 3. ss. 11*
That no Humane thing is well done without a Reference to God. And he
excellently exhorts men, (...). L. 6. ss. 5.
To be delighted and satisfied with this one thing; in doing one action after
another, tending to a Common Good, or the good of Humane Society; together with
the Remembrance of God. L. 6. ss. 8.
Lastly he declares his own Confidence in the Supreme Deity in these words,
(...), I trust and rely upon the Governor of the whole World.

This may be concluded also from their Thanking the One Supreme God for all, as
the Author of all good, and delightfully Celebrating his Praises. Epictetus
declares it to be the Duty of a Good man, (...), To thank God for all things.
L. 4. c. 7.
And elsewhere he speaks thus, (...). L. 1. c. 16.
etc. (...); etc. (...). Had we understanding, what should we do else, but both
publicly and privately praise God, bless him, and return thanks to him? Ought
not they who dig, plow, and eat, continually sing such a Hymn to God as this;
Great is that God, who gave us these Organs to cultivate the earth withal;
Great is that God who gave us hands, etc. who enabled us to grow undiscernibly,
to breath in our sleep. But the Greatest and Divinest Hymn of all is this, to
praise God for the Faculty of Understanding all these things. What then if for
the most part men be blinded, ought there not to be some One, who should
perform this office, and sing a Hymn to God for all? If I were a Nightingale I
would perform the office of a Nightingale, or a Swan, that of a Swan; but now
being a Reasonable Creature, I ought to celebrate and sing aloud the praises of
God, that is, of the Supreme Deity.

Lastly the same is evident; from their Invoking the Supreme God as such,
addressing their Devotions to him alone without the Conjunction of any other
Gods; L. 2. c. 18.
and particularly imploring his Assistance against the Assaults of Temptations,
called by them Phancies. To this purpose is that of Epictetus, (...)^ This is a
great Conflict or Contention, a Divine Enterprise, it is for Liberty and for a
Kingdom. Now remember the Supreme God; call upon him as thy Helper and
Assistant, as the Mariners do upon Castor and Pollux in a Tempest. He commends
also this Form of Devotional Address, or Divine Ejaculation, which was part of
Cleanthes his Litany, to be used frequently upon occasion, (...)^ Lead me, O
Jupiter, and Thou Fate, whithersoever I am by you destined: and I will readily
and cheerfully follow; who though I were never so reluctant yet must needs
follow. Where Jupiter and Fate are really but one and the same Supreme Deity,
under two several Names. And therefore the Sense of this Devotional
Ejaculation, was no less truly and faithfully, Ep. 106.
than Elegantly thus rendered by Seneca; Duc me Parens, Celsique Dominator Poli,
Quocunque placuit, nulla parendi est mora,
Assum impiger; fac nolle, comitabor Gemens,
Malusque patiar, quod pati licuit bono.
But because many are so extremely unwilling to believe, that the Pagans ever
made any Religious Address to the Supreme God as such; we shall here set down
an Excellent and Devout Hymn of the same Cleanthes to him: the rather because
it has been but little taken notice of. And the more to gratify the Reader,
we shall subjoyn an Elegant Translation thereof into Latin Verse; which he must
owe to the Muse of my Learned Friend Dr. Duport.

Steph. Po^s. Phi^^s p. 49.
(...),
(...),
(...)^
(...)
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...)^
(...),
(...)
(...)^
(...)^
(...),
(...),
(...).
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...);
(...),
(...)^
(...)^
(...)
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...)
(...)^
(...),
(...)
(...),
(...).
Magne Pater Divum, cui Nomina Multa, sed Vna
Omnipotens semper Virtus, Tu Jupiter Author
Naturae, certa qui singula lege gubernas!
Rex salve. Te nempe licet Mortalibus aegris
Cunctis compellare; omnes tua namque propago
Nos sumus, aeternae quasi Imago vocis and Echo
Tantum, quotquot humi spirantes repimus; Ergo
Te cantabo, tuum and robur sine fine celebrans.
Quippe tuo hic totus, terram qui circuit, orbis
Paret (quoquo agis) imperio, ac obtemperat ultro
Invictis Telum manibus tibi tale ministrum,
Anceps, ignitum, haud moriturum denique fulmen.
Ictu etenim illius tota and natura tremiscit;
Illo and Communem Rationem dirigis, and quae
Mundi agitat Molem, magno se corpore miscens:
Tantus Tu rerum Dominus, Rectorque Supremus.
Nec sine Te factum in terris, Deus, aut opus ullum,
Aethere nec dio fit, nec per caerula ponti,
Errore acta suo, nisi quae gen impia patrat.
Confusa in sese, Tu dirigis ordine certo;
Auspice Te ingratis and inest sua gratia rebus;
Foelice harmonia, Tu scilicet, omnia in Vnum
Sic Bona mixta Malis compingis, ut una resurgat
Cunctorum Ratio communis and usque perennans:
Quam refugit, spernitque hominum men's laeva malorum.
Heu Miseri! bona qui quaerunt sibi semper and optant,
Divinam tamen hanc Communem and denique Legem,
Nec spectare oculis, nec fando attendere curant:
Cui si parerent poterant traducere vitam
Cum ratione and mente bonam: nunc sponte feruntur
In mala praecipites, trahit and sua quemque voluptas.
Hunc agit ambitio, laudisque immensa cupido,
Illum and avarities, and amor vesanus habendi,
Blanda libido alium, Venerisque licentia dulcis:
Sic alio tendunt alii in diversa ruentes.
At Tu, Jupiter alme, tonans in nubibus atris,
Da sapere, and mentem miseris mortalibus aufer
Insanam, hanc Tu pelle Pater; da apprendere posse
Consilium, fretus quo Tu omnia rite gubernas:
Nos ut honorati pariter, tibi demus honorem,
Perpetuis tua facta hymnis praeclara canentes,
Vt fas est homini; nec enim mortalibus ullum,
Nec Superis, majus poterit contingere donum,
Quam canere aeterno Communem carmine Legem.
XXVI. It would be endless now to cite all the Testimonies of other
Philosophers and Pagan Writers of Latter times, concerning One Supreme and
Universal Numen. Wherefore we shall content our selves only to instance in some
of the most remarkable, beginning with M. Tull. Cicero. Whom though some would
suspect to have been a Sceptick as to Theism, because in his De Natura Deorum,
he brings in Cotta the Academick, as well opposing Q. Lucil. Balbus the Stoic,
as C. Velleius the Epicurean; yet from sundry other places of his writings, it
sufficiently appears, that he was a Dogmatick and Hearty Theist, as for
example, this in his second Book De Divin. Esse Praestantem aliquam,
Aeternamque naturam, and eam suspiciendam admirandamque hominum generi,
Pulchritudo Mundi, ordoque rerum Coelestium cogit confiteri; That there is some
Most Excellent and Eternal Nature, which is to be admired and honored by
mankind, the Pulchritude of the World, and the order of the Heavenly Bodies
compel us to confess. And this in his Oration De Haruspicum responsis; Quis
est tam vecors, qui cum suspexerit in Coelum, Deos esse non sentiat, and ea
quae tanta Mente fiunt, ut vix quisquam Art ulla, Ordinem rerum ac
Vicissitudinem persequi posset, casu fieri putet? Who is so mad or stupid, as
when he looks up to Heaven, is not presently convinced that there are Gods? or
can persuade himself, that those things which are made with so much Mind and
Wisdom, as that no humane skill is able to reach and comprehend the artifice
and contrivance of them, did all happen by chance? To which purpose more places
will be afterward cited. However in his Philosophic Writings, it is certain
that he affected to follow the way of the New Academy, set on foot by
Carneades, that is, to write Sceptically, partly upon Prudential accounts, and
partly for other Reasons intimated by himself in these words, (...)
Qui requirunt quid quaque de re ipsi sentiamus, curiosius id faciunt quam
necesse est. Non enim tam Authoritatis in disputando quam Rationis momenta
quaerenda sunt. Quinetiam obest plerumque iis qui discere volunt, A^ctoritas
eorum qui se docere profitentur. Desinunt enim suum judicium adhihere, idqu^
habent ratum, quod ab eo quem probant, judicatum vident: They who would needs
know, what we our selves think concerning every thing, are more curious than
they ought, because Philosophy is not so much a matter of Authority as of
Reason; and the Authority of those who profess to teach, is oftentimes an
hindrance to the Learners they negl^^^ing by that means to use their own
Judgment, securely taking that for granted, which is judged by another whom
they value. Nevertheless Cicero in the Close of this discourse De Natura Deorum
(as St. Austin also observes) plainly declares himself to be more propense and
inclinable to the Doctrine of Balbus than either that of Velleius or Cotta,
that is, though he did not assent to the St^ical Doctrine or Theology in every
Point (himself being rather a Platonist than a Stoic) yet he did much prefer
it before not only the Epicureism of Velleius, but also the Skepticism of
Cotta. Wherefore Augustinus Steuchus and other Learned men, quarrel with sundry
passages of Cicero's upon another account, not as Atheistical, but as seeming
to favor a Multitude of Independent Gods; he sometimes attributing not only
the Government of the World, and the making of Mankind, but also he first
Constitution and Fabric of the whole World, to Gods Plurally. As when he
writes thus, Vt perpetuus Mundi esset ornatus, magna adhibita cura est a
Providentia Deorum; For the perpetual adorning of the World, great care has
been taken, by the Providence of the Gods: And A Diis Immortalibus Hominibus
provisum esse, etc. That the Immortal Gods have provided for the Convenience of
Mankind, appears from the very Fabric and Figure of them: ^^ N. D. 2^5.
And that place before cited, Dico igitur Providentia Deorum, Mundum and omnes
Mundi parts initio constitutas esse, I say that the World and all its parts
were at first constituted by the Providence of the Gods. And Lastly, where he
states the Controversy of that Book De N. D. thus; P. 1^5. Lamb.
Vtrum Dii nihil agant, nihil moliantur? An contra ab His, and a Principio
Omnia facta, and constituta sint, and ad insinitum tempus regantur atque
m^veantur? Whether the Gods do nothing at all, but are void of care and
trouble? or whether all things were at first Made and Constituted, and ever
since are Moved and Governed by them? Notwithstanding which it is Evident that
this Learned Orator and Philosopher, plainly acknowledged the Mon^rchy of the
Whole, or One Supreme and Universal Numen over all. And that first from his so
often using the word God in the Singular, Emphatically and by way of Eminency;
as Ipsi Deo nihil minus gratum, 2 L^g p. 335.
qua^ non omnibus patere ad se Placandum and Colendum viam; Nothing can be less
grateful to God himself, than that there should not be a liberty open to all
(by reason of the Costliness of Sacrifices) to wor^^ pan^l appease him; And
Nisi juvante Deo, D. N. D. L. 2
tales non fuerunt Curious, Fabricius, etc. Curious and Fabricius had never been
such menas they were, had it not been for the Divine assistance. Again, pro S.
Ros.
Commoda quibus utimur, Lucemque qua fruimur, Spiritumque quem ducimus, a Deo
nobis dari atque impertiri videmus, We must needs acknowledge that the benefits
of this life, the light which we enjoy, and the spirit which we breath, are
imparted to us from God. And to mention no more, in his Version of Plato's
Timaeus, Deos alios in Terra, alios in Luna, alios in reliquas mundi parts
spargens Deus quasi serebat, God distributing Gods to all the parts of the
World, did as it were sow some Gods in the Earth, some in the Moon, etc.
Moreover by his making such descriptions of God as plainly imply his Oneness
and Singularity, P. 556. Lamb.
as in his Orat. pro Milone, Est, est profecto Illa Vis; neque in his
Corporibus atque in hac Imbecillitate nostra, inest quiddam quod vigeat and
sentiat, and non inest in hoc tanto Naturae tamque praeclaro motu. Nisi forte
idcirco esse non putant, quia non apparet nec cernitur: proinde quasi nostram
ipsam mentem qua sapimus, qu a providemus, qua haec ipsa agimus and dicimus,
videre, aut plane qualis and ubi sit, sentire possumus: There is, there is
certainly, such a divine Force in the world; neither is it reasonable to think,
that in these gross and frail Bodies of ours, there should be something which
has Life, Sense and Understanding, and yet no such thing in the whole
Universe; unless men will therefore conclude, that there is none, because they
see it not; as if we could see our own mind (whereby we order and dispose all
things and whereby we reason and speak thus) and perceive what kind of thing it
is and where it is lodged. Where, as there is a strong asseveration of the
Existence of a God, so is his Singularity plainly implied, in that he supposes
him to be One Mind or Soul acting and governing the whole World, as our Mind
does our Body. L. 1. p. 126.
Again in his Tusculan Questions, Nec vero Deus ipse alio modo intelligi
potest, nisi Men's Soluta quaedam, and Libera, segregata ab omni Concretione
mortali, omnia sentiens and movens; Neither can God himself be understood by us
otherwise, than as a certain Loose and Free Mind, segregated from all mortal
Concretion, which both perceives and moves all things. Tusc. Q L. 1. p. 126.
So again in the same Book, Haec igitur and alia innumerabilia cum cernimus,
possumusne dubitare, quin his praesit aliquis vel Effector, si haec nata sunt
ut Platoni videtur; vel si semper fuerint ut Aristoteli placet, Moderator tanti
operis and muneris? When we behold these and other wonderful works of Nature,
can we at all doubt, but that there presideth over them, either One Maker of
all, if they had a beginning as Plato conceives; or else if they always were
as Aristotle supposes, P. 343.
One Moderator and Governor? And in the Third De Legibus, Sine Imperio nec
Domus ulla, nec Civitas, nec Gens, nec Hominum universum Genus stare, nec rerum
Natura omnis, nec ipse Mundus potest. Nam and hic Deo paret, and huic obediunt
Maria Terraeque, and hominum vita jussis supremae legis obtemperat: Without
Government, neither any House, nor City, nor Nation, nor Mankind in general,
nor the whole Nature of things, nor the World it self could subsist. For This
also obeys God, and the Seas and Earth are subject to him, and the Life of
man is disposed of, by the Commands of the Supreme Law. Tusc. Q. L 1.
Elsewhere he speaks of Dominans ille nobis Deus, qui nos vetat hinc injussu
suo demigrare, That God who rules over all Mankind and forbids them to depart
hence without his lieve. De. Div.
Of Deus, cujus numini parent omnia, That God, whose Divine Power all things
obey. We read also in Cicero, of Summus or Supremus Deus, the Supreme God, to
whom the First making of Man is properly imputed by him; of Summi Rectoris and
Domini Numen, The Divine Power of the Supreme Lord and Governor; of Deus
praepotens, Somn. Scip. De Leg. De Div.
and Rerum omnium praepotens Jupiter, The most Powerful God, and Jupiter who
has power over all things; of Princeps ille Deus, qui omnem hunc mundum regit,
S^mn. Scip.
sicut Animus humanus id corpus cui praepositus est, That Chief or Principal
God, who governs the whole world in the same manner as a Humane Soul governs
that Body which it is set over. Wherefore as for those Passages before
objected, where the Government of the World, as to the concernments of Mankind
at least, is ascribed by Cicero to Gods Plurally, this was done by him and
other Pagans, upon no other account but only this, because the Supreme God was
not supposed by them to do all things himself immediately in the Government of
the World, but to assign certain Provinces to other Inferior Gods, as
Ministers under him, which therefore sharing in the Economy of the World, were
looked upon as Co-governours thereof with him. Thus when Balbus in Cicero to
excuse some seeming defects of Providence, in the Prosperities of wicked and
the Adversities of good men, pretended, Non animadvertere omnia Deos, ne Reges
quidem, That the Gods did not attend to all things, as neither do Kings, De N.
D. L. 3.
Cotta amongst other things replied thus; Fac Divinam Mentem esse distentam,
Coelum versantem, terram tuentem, maria moderantem, cur tam multos Deos nihil
agere and cessare patitur? Cur non rebus humanis aliquos otiosos Deos
praefecit, qui a te Balbe Innumerabilis explicati sunt? Should it be granted,
that the Divine Mind (or Supreme Deity) were distracted with turning round the
Heavens, observing the Earth, and Governing the Seas, yet why does he let so
many other Gods to do nothing at all? Or why does he not appoint some of those
Idle Gods over Humane affairs, which according to Balbus and the Stoics are
innumerable? Again when the Immortal Gods are said by Cicero to have Provided
for the convenience of Mankind in their First Constitution, this doubtless is
to be understood according to the Platonic Hypothesis, that the Gods and
Demons being first made, by the Supreme God, were set a work and employed by
him afterward in the making of man and other mortal Animals. And lastly, as to
that which has the greatest difficulty of all in it, when the whole World is
said by Cicero to have been made by the Providence of the Gods, this must needs
be understood also of those Eternal Gods of Plato's, according to whose
Likeness or Image the World and Man are said to have been made, that is, of the
Trinity of Divine Hypostases, called by Amelius, Plato's Three Minds and Three
Kings, and by others of the Platonists, the First and Second and Third God, and
the (...), and (...), etc. The First and Second Cause, etc. And it may be here
observed, what we learn from S. Cyril, that some Pagans endeavored to justify
this Language and Doctrine of theirs, even from the Mosaic Writings
themselves, Contra Ju. L. 1.
(...), they suspecting, that the God of the Universe being about to make man,
did there bespeak the other Gods, ((...) (...), which were Secondary and
Inferior to him) after this manner, Let Us make man according to Our own Image
and likeness. Which S. Cyril and other Christian Writers understand of the
Trinity. Now those Eternal Gods of Plato, according to whose Image, the World
and Man is said by him to have been made, and which (though one of them were
properly called the Demiurgus) yet had all an Influence and Causality upon the
making of it, were (as has been already observed) not so many Independent and
Self-originated Deities, but all derived from One First Principle. And
therefore Cicero following Plato in this, is not to be suspected upon that
account, to have been an Asserter of Many Independent Gods, or Partial Creators
of the World; especially since in so many other places of his Writings, he
plainly owns a Divine Monarchy.

We pass from M. Tullius Cicero, to M. Terentius Varro his Equal, a man famous
for Polymathy or Multifarious Knowledge, and reputed unquestionably (though not
the most Eloquent, yet) the most Learned of all the Romans, at least as to
Antiquity. He wrote One and Forty Books concerning the Antiquities of Humane
and Divine things; wherein he transcended the Roman Pontifices themselves, and
discovered their Ignorance as to many points of their Religion. In which Books
he distinguished Three Kinds of Theology, the First Mythical or Fabulous, the
Second Physical or Natural, and the Last Civil or Popular: The First being most
accomodate to the Theater or Stage; the Second to the World or the Wiser men in
it; the Third to Cities or the Generality of the Civilized Vulgar. Which was
agreeable also to the Doctrine of Scaevola that Learned Pontifex, concerning
Three Sorts of Gods, Aug. de. Civ. D. L. 6. c. 5.
Poetical, Philosophical and Political. As for the Mythical and Poetical
Theology it was censured after this manner by Varro, In eo sunt multa contra
Dignitatem and Naturam immortalium ficta. In hoc enim est ut Deus alius ex
capite, alius ex femore sit, alius ex guttis sanguinis natus. In hoc ut Dii
furati sint, ut adulteraverint, ut servierint homini. Denique in hoc omnia Diis
attribuuntur, quae non modo in hominem, sed etiam in contemptissimum hominem
cadere possunt: That, according to the Literal Sense, it contained many things
contrary to the Dignity and Nature of Immortal Beings. The Genealogy of one God
being derived from the Head, of another from the Thigh, of another from drops
of Blood: Some being represented as Thieves, others as Adulterers, etc. and all
things attributed to the Gods therein that are not only incident to men, but
even to the most contemptible and flagitious of them. And as for the Second,
the Natural Theology which is the True, this Varro conceived to be above the
capacity of Vulgar Citizens, and that therefore it was expedient, there should
be another Theology calculated, more accommodate for them, and of a middle kind
betwixt the Natural and the Fabulous, which is that which is called Civil. Aug.
Civ. D. L. 4. c. 31.
For he affirmed, Multa esse vera quae vulgo scire non sit utile, and quaedam
quae tametsi falsa sint, aliter existimare populum expediat; that there were
many things true in Religion, which it was not convenient for the Vulgar to
know; and again some things which though false, yet it was expedient they
should be believed by them. As Scaevola the Roman Pontifex in like manner,
would not have the Vulgar to know, that the True God had neither Sex, nor Age,
nor Bodily Members. Expedire igitur existimat (says St. Austin of him) falli
in Religione Civitates, quod dicere etiam in Libris Rerum Divinarum, Civ. D. L.
^. c. 27.
ipse Varro non dubitat, Scaevola therefore judges it expedient that Cities
should be deceived in their Religion; which also Varro himself doubts not to
affirm in his Books of Divine Things. Wherefore this Varro though disapproving
the Fabulous Theology, yet out of a pious design as he conceived, did he
endeavor to assert as much as he could, the Civil Theology, then received
amongst the Romans, and to vindicate the same from Contempt: yet nevertheless
so, as that, Civ. D. L. ^ c. 31.
Si eam Civitatem novam constitueret, ex Naturae potius Formula, Deos and
Deorum nomina se fuisse dedica^urum, non dubitet confiteri; If he were to
constitute a New Rome himself, he doubts not to confess, but that he would
dedicate Gods and the Names of Gods after another manner, more agreeably to the
Form of Nature or Natural Theology. Now what Varro's own sense was concerning
God, he freely declared in those Books of Divine Things; namely, That he was
the Great Soul and Mind of the whole World: Thus St. Austin, Civ. D. L. 4. c. ^
Hi soli Varroni videntur animadvertisse quid esset Deus, qui crediderunt cum
esse Animam, Motu ac Ratione mundum gubernantem: These alone seem to Varro to
have understood what God is, who believed him to be a Soul, governing the whole
World by Motion and Reason. So that Varro plainly asserted One Supreme and
Universal Numen, he erring only in this (as St. Austin conceives) that he
called him A Soul, and not the Creator of Soul, or a Pure and Abstract Mind.
But as Varro acknowledged One Universal Numen, the Whole Animated World, or
rather the Soul thereof, which also he affirmed to be called by several Names,
as in the Earth Tellus, in the Sea Neptune, and the like; so did he also admit
(together with the rest of the Pagans) other Particular Gods, which were to him
nothing but Parts of the World Animated with Souls Superior to men; A summo
Circuitu coeli, usque ad Circulum Lunae, Civ. D. L. 7 c. 6
aethereas Animas esse Astra ac Stellas, eosque coelestes Deos, non modo
intelligi esse sed etiam videri: Inter Lunae vero gyrum and nimborum Caeumina
Aereas esse Animas, sed eas animo non oculis videri; and vocari Heroas and
Lares and Genios: That from the highest Circuit of the heavens to the Sphere of
the Moon, there are Ethereal Souls or Animals, the Stars, which are not only
understood but also seen to be Celestial Gods: And between the Sphere of the
Moon and the Middle Region of the Air, there are Aereal Souls or Animals, which
though not seen by our Eyes, yet are discovered by our Mind and called Heroes,
Lares, and Genii. So that according to Varro the only True Natural Gods, were
as himself also determined, Anima Mundi, ac Parts ejus, First the great Soul
and Mind of the whole world which comprehends all; and secondly the Parts of
the World Animated superior to men. Which Gods also he affirmed to be
worshipped Castius more purely, and chastely without Images, as they were by the
first Romans for one hundred and seventy years: he concluding, De Civ. D. L. 4.
c. 31.
qui primi simulachra Deorum populi posuerunt, eos civitatibus suis and metum
dempsisse and errorem addidisse: prudenter existimans (says St. Austin) Deos
facile posse in Simulachrorum stoliditate contemni: That those Nations who
first set up Images of the Gods, did both take away Fear from their Cities and
add Error to them: he wisely Judging, that the Foppery of Images, would easily
render their Gods contemptible.

L. Annaeus Seneca the Philosopher, was contemporary with our Savior Christ
and his Apostles, who, though frequently acknowledging a Plurality of Gods, did
nevertheless plainly assert One Supreme, he not only speaking of him
Singularly, and by way of Eminency, but also plainly describing him as such; as
when he calls him, Formatorem Vniversi; Not. Q. L. 2. c. 45.
Rectorem and Arbitrum and Custodem Mundi; Ex quo suspensa sunt omnia; Animum
ac Spiritum Vniversi; Mundani hujus operis Dominum and Artificem; Cui nomen
omne convenit; Ex quo nata sunt omnia; Cujus Spiritu vivimus; Totum suis
partibus inditum, and se sustinentem sua vi; Cujus Consilio huic mundo
providetur, ut inconcussus eat, and actus suos explicet; Cujus Decreto omnia
fiunt; Divinum Spiritum per omnia maxima and minima aequali intention
diffusum; P. 442. Lips.
Deum potentem omnium; Deum illum maximum potentissimumque, qui ipse vehit
omnia; Qui ubique and omnibus praesto est; Coeli and Deorum omnium Deum, a quo
ista Numina quae singula adoramus and colimus, suspensa sunt; and the like: The
Framer and Former of the Universe; the Governor, Disposer and keeper thereof;
Him upon whom all things depend; The Mind and Spirit of the World; The
Artificer and Lord of this whole Mundane Fabric; To whom every name belongs;
From whom all things spring; By whose Spirit we live; Who is in all his parts
and susteineth himself by his own force; By whose Counsel the World is provided
for, and carried on in its Course constantly and uninterruptedly; By whose
Decree all things are done; The Divine Spirit that is diffused through all
things both great and small with equal intention; The God whose power extends
to all things; The Greatest and most Powerful God who does himself support and
uphold all things; Who is present every where to all things; The God of Heaven
and of all the Gods, upon whom are suspended all those other Divine Powers,
which we singly worship and adore. Moreover we may here observe from St.
Austin, Civ. D. L 6. c. 10.
that this Seneca in a Book of his, against Superstitions (that is now lost)
did not only Highly extol the Natural Theology, but also plainly censure and
condemn the Civil Theology then received amongst the Romans, and that with more
Freedom and Vehemence, than Varro had done the Fabulous or Theatrical and
Poetical Theology. Concerning a great part whereof he pronounced, that a wise
man would observe such things, tanquam Legibus jussa, non tanquam Diis grata,
only as commanded by the Laws (he therein exercising Civil Obedience) but not
at all, as Grateful to the Gods.

M. Fabius Quintilianus, though no admirer of Seneca, yet fully agreed with him
in the same Natural Theology, and sets down this, as the generally received
Notion or Definition of God, Deum esse Spiritum omnibus partibus immistum, L.
7.6.3.
That God is a Spirit mingled with and diffused through all the part^ of the
World; he from thence inferring Epicurus to be an Atheist, notwithstanding that
he verbally asserted Gods, because he denied a God according to this Generally
received Notion, he bestowing upon his Gods a circumscribed humane form, and
placing them between the Worlds. And the Junior Pliny though he were a
Persecutor of the Christians, he concluding, ^ p. 97.
qualecunque esset quod faterentur, pervicaciam certe and inflexibilem
obstinationem debere puniri, that whatsoever their Religion were, yet
notwithstanding their Stubbornness and Inflexible Obstinacy ought to be
punished, and who compelled many of them to worship the Images of the Emperor,
and to sacrifice and pray to the Statues of the Pagan Gods, and lastly to
blaspheme Christ; yet himself plainly acknowledged also One Supreme Universal
Numen, as may sufficiently appear from his Panegyric Oration to Trajan, where
he is called Deus ille, qui manifestus ac praesens Coelum ac Sydera insidet;
that God who is present with, and inhabits the whole Heaven and Stars And Mundi
Parens, and Parens Hominum Decru^^que.
; himself making a Solemn Prayer and Supplication to him, both in the beginning
and close thereof, and sometimes speaking of him therein Singularly and in way
of Eminency; as in these words, Occultat utrorumque Semina Deus, and plerumque
Bonorum Malorumque Causae, sub diversa specie latent: God hides the Seeds of
good and evil, so that the causes of each often appear disguised to men. L.
Apuleius also, whose pretended Miracles the Pagans endeavored to confirm their
Religion by, as well as they did by those of Apollonius, does in sundry places
of his writings, plainly assert One Supreme and Universal Numen, we shall only
here set down one, Cum Summus Deorum, De Philos. p. 278. ^ol^.
cuncta haec non solum cogitationum ratione consideret; sed Prima, Media, and
Vltima obeat; compertaque intimae Providentiae ordinationis universitate and
Constantia regat; Since the Highest of the Gods, does not only consider all
these things in his mind and Cogitation, but also pass through and comprehend
within himself the Beginning Middle and End of all things, and constantly
Govern all by his occult Providence. Lastly Symmachus, who was a zealous
Stickler for the Restitution of Paganism, declared the Pagans to worship One
and the same God with the Christians, but in several ways, he conceiving, that
there was no necessity God should be worshipped by all after the same manner.
Aequum est, quicquid omnes colunt, VNVM putari: P. 306.
Eadem spectamus Astra; Commune Coelum est; Idem nos Mundus involvit: Quid
interest, qua quisque prudentia Verum requirat? Vno Itinere non potest
perveniri ad tam grande Secretum: We ought in reason to think, that it is One
and the same Thing, which all men worship: As we all behold the same Stars,
have the same Common Heaven, and are involved within the same World. Why may
not men pursue One and the same thing in different ways? One Path is not enough
to lead men to so Grand a Secret. The Sense whereof is thus elegantly expressed
by Prudentius. Vno omnes sub sole siti, vegetamur eodem P. 285.

Aere, Communis cunctis viventibus Aura.
Sed quid sit qualisque Deus, diversa secuti
Quaerimus; atque Viis long distantibus Unum
Imus ad Occultum; suus est mos cuique genti,
Per quod iter properans, eat ad tam Grande Profundum.
And again afterward, P. 308.
Secretum sed grande nequit Rationis opertae
Quaeri aliter, quam si sparsis via multiplicetur
Tramitibus, and centenos terat orbita calls,
Quaesitura Deum variata indage latentem.
And the beginning of Prudentius his Confutation is this, Long aliud verum
est. Nam multa ambago viarum
Anfractus dubios habet, and perplexius errat.
Sola errore caret simplex via, nescia flecti
In diverticulum, biviis nec pluribus anceps, etc.


We shall now instance also in some of the Latter Greek Writers. Though the
Author of the Book De Mundo, were not Aristotle, yet that he was a Pagan,
plainly appears from some passages thereof, as where he approves of Sacrificing
to the Gods, and of Worshipping Heroes and Dead men; as also because Apuleius
would not otherwise have translated so much of that book, and incorporated it
into his De Mundo. He therefore does not only commend this of Heraclitus,
(...), That there is one Harmonious System made out of all things, and that All
things are derived from One; But does himself also write excellently,
concerning the Supreme God, whom he calls (...), C. 6.
the Cause which Contains all things, and (...), The Best and Most excellent
part of the World; he beginning after this manner; (...), It is an ancient
Opinion or Tradition, that has been conveyed down to all men from their
Progenitors, that all things are from God, and consist by him; and that no
Nature is sufficient to preserve it self, if left alone, and devoid of the
Divine assistance and influence. Where we may observe, that the Apuleian Latin
Version, altering the sense, renders the words thus, Vetus opinio est, atque in
cogitationes omnium hominum penitus incidit, Deum esse: Originis non habere
auctorem: Deumque esse salutem and perseverantiam Earum, quas essecerit, rerum:
So that whereas, in the Original Greek, This is said to be the general Opinion
of all mankind, That all things are from God and subsist by him, and that
nothing at all can conserve it self in being without him, Apuleius correcting
the words, makes the general sense of mankind to run no higher than this; That
there is a God; who has no author of his original; and who is the safety and
preservation of all those things that were made by himself. From whence it may
be probably concluded, that Apuleius, who is said to have been of Plutarch's
Progeny, was infected also with those Paradoxical Opinions of Plutarch's, and
consequently did suppose, All things not to have been made by God, nor to have
depended on him (as the Writer De Mundo affirms) but that there was something
besides God, as namely the Matter and an Evil Principle, U^created and
Self-existent. Afterward the same Writer De Mundo, elegantly illustrates by
Similitudes, how God by One Simple Motion and Energy of his own, without any
labor or toil, does produce and govern all the Variety of Motions in the
Universe; and how he does (...) (...), contein the Harmony and Safety of the
Whole. And lastly he concludes, (...), That what a Pilot is to a ship, a
Charioteer to a Chariot, the Coryphaeus to a Quire, Law to a City, and a
General to an Army; the same is God to the World. There being only this
difference, that whereas the Government of some of them is toilsom and
sollicitous, the Divine Government and Steerage of the World, is most easy and
facil: for as this Writer adds, God being himself Immovable, Moves all things;
in the same manner as Law, in it self Immovable, by Moving the minds of the
Citizens, orders and disposes all things.

Plutarchus Chaeronensis (as has been already declared) was Unluckily engaged
in Two False Opinions, The First of Matters being Ingenit or Uncreated, upon
this Pretense, Because Nothing could be made out of Nothing; the Second of a
Positive Substantial Evil Principle, or an Irrational Soul and Demon
Self-existent, upon this Ground because (...)^ There is no greater Absurdity
imaginable, than that Evil should proceed from the Providence of God, as a Bad
Epigramm from the will of the Poet. In which respect he was before called by us
a Ditheist. Plutarch was also a Worshipper of the Many Pagan Gods, himself
being a Priest of the Pythian Apollo. Notwithstanding which, he unquestionably
asserted One Sole Principle of All Good, the Cause of all things, ( Evil and
Matter only excepted) the Framer of the Whole World, and Maker of all the Gods
in it; who is therefore often called by him, God, in way of Eminency, as when
he affirms (...) that God does always act the Geometrician, that is, do all
things in Measure and Proportion; and again (...), That all things are made by
God according to Harmony; and that (...), God is called a Harmonist and
Musician: And he has these Epithets given him, (...), The Great God, and
(...), The Highest or Uppermost God, and (...), The First God, and (...), The
Unmade Self-existent God; all the other Pagan Gods, according to him, having
been made in Time, together with the World. He is likewise styled by Plutarch,
(...), The Sea of Pulchritude: and his Standing and Permanent Duration, without
any Flux of Time, is excellently descibed by the same Writer, in his Book
concerning the Delphick Inscription. Lastly Plutarch affirms, that men
generally pray to this Supreme God, for whatsoever is not in their own power,
(...).

Dio Chrysostomus, a Sophist, Plutarch's Equal, though an acknowledger of Many
Gods, yet nevertheless asserteth, (...), P. 199.
that the whole World is under a Kingly Power or Monarchy, he calling the
Supreme God, sometime, P. 210.
(...), the common King of Gods and Men, their Governor, and Father, (...),
the God that rules over all, (...), The First and Greatest God, P. 203.
(...) (...), etc. The chief President over all things, who orders and guides
the whole Heaven and World, P. 446.
as a wise Pilot does a Ship, (...), the Ruler of the whole Heaven, and Lord of
the Whole Essence; and the like. And he affirming that there is a Natural
Prolepsis in the Minds of men concerning him, (...)^ P. 201.
Concerning the nature of the Gods in general, but especially of that Supreme
Ruler over all; there is an opinion in all humane kind, as well Barbarians as
Greeks; that is naturally implanted in them as rational Beings, and not derived
from any mortal Teacher. The meaning whereof is this, that men are naturally
possessed with a Persuasion, that there is One God, the Supreme Governor of
the whole World, and that there are also below him, but above men, Many other
Intellectual Beings, which these Pagans called Gods.

That Galen was no Atheist, and what his Religion was; may plainly appear from
this one passage out of his third Book De Vsu Partium, P. 402.
to omit many others, (...)^ Should I any longer insist upon such Brutish
Persons as those, the wise and sober might justly condemn me, as defiling this
Holy Oration, which I compose as a True Hymn to the praise of him that made us;
I conceiving true Piety and Religion toward God to consist in this, not that I
should sacrifice many Hecatombs, or burn much Incense to him, but that I should
my self first acknowledge, and then declare to others, how great his Wisdom is,
how great his Power, and how great his Goodness. For that he would adorn the
whole world after this manner, envying to nothing that good which it was
capable of, I conclude to be a demonstration of most absolute Goodness, and
thus let him be praised by us as Good. And that he was able to find out, how
all things might be adorned after the best manner, is a Sign of the Greatest
Wisdom in him. And Lastly to be able to effect and bring to pass all those
things which he had thus decreed, argues an insuperable Power.

Maximus Tyrius in the close of his first Dissertation, gives us this short
Representation of his own Theology, (...) (...)^ I will now more plainly
declare my sense by this similitude. Imagine in your mind, a great and powerful
Kingdom or Principality, in which all the rest freely and with one consent
conspire to direct their actions, agreeably to the will and command of one
Supreme King, the Oldest and the best. And then suppose the bounds and limits
of this Empire, not to be the River Halys, nor the Hellespont, nor the Meotian
Lake, nor the Shores of the Ocean; but Heaven above, and the Earth beneath.
Here then let that great King sit Immovable, prescribing Laws to all his
subjects, in which consists their safety and security: the Consorts of his
Empire, being many both Visible and Invisible Gods; some of which that are
nearest to him and immediately attending on him, are in the highest Royal
dignity, feasting as it were at the same table with him: others again are their
Ministers and Attendants; and a Third Sort, inferior to them both. And thus
you see, how the order and chain of this government descends down by steps and
degrees, from the Supreme God to the Earth and Men. In which Resemblance, we
have a plain acknowledgment of One Supreme God, the Monarch of the whole World,
and Three subordinate ranks of Inferior Gods, as his Ministers, in the
Government of the World; whom that Writer there also calls, (...), Gods the
Sons and Friends of God.

Aristides the famous Adrianean Sophist and Orator, in his first Oration or
Hymn vowed to Jupiter, after he had escaped a great tempest, is so full to the
purpose, that nothing can be more; he after his Proeme beginning thus, (...),
etc. Jupiter made all things, and all things whatsoever exist are the works of
Jupiter, Rivers, and Earth and Sea and Heaven, and what are between these, and
Gods and Men and all Animals, whatsoever is perceivable either by sense or by
the mind. But Jupiter first of all made himself; How God was said to be
Self-made: See p. 405 and 406.
for he was not Educated in the flowery and odoriferous Caves of Crete, neither
was Saturn ever about to devour him, nor instead of him did he swallow down a
stone. For Jupiter was never in danger, nor will he be ever in danger of any
thing. Neither is there any thing older than Jupiter, no more than there are
sons older than their parents, or works than their Opificers. But he is the
First and the Oldest, and the Prince of all things, he being made from himself;
nor can it be declared when he was made, for he was from the beginning, and
ever will be, his own Father, and greater than to have been begotten from
another. As he produced Minerva from his brain and needed no wedlock in order
thereunto, so before this did he produce himself from himself, needing not the
help of any other thing for his being. But on the contrary, all things began to
be from him, and no man can tell the time; since there was not then any time
when there was nothing else besides, and no work can be older than the maker of
it. Thus was Jupiter the beginning of all things and all things were from
Jupiter, who is better than Time, which had its beginning together with the
World. And again, (...), etc. (...), etc. (...), etc. All the several kinds of
Gods, are but a Defluxion and Derivation from Jupiter, and according to Homer
's Chain all things are connected with him and depend upon him. He amongst the
first produced Love and Necessity, Two the most powerful Holders of things
together, that they might make all things firmly to cohere. He made Gods to be
the Curators of men, and he made men to be the Worshippers and Servers of those
Gods. All things are every where full of Jupiter, and the Benefits of all the
other Gods, are his work, and to be attributed to him, they being done in
compliance with that order which he had prescribed them.

It is certain that all the Latter Philosophers after Christianity, whether
Platonists or Peripateticks, though for the most part they asserted the
Eternity of the World, yet Universally agreed in the acknowledgment of One
Supreme Deity, the Cause of the whole World, and of all the other Gods. And as
Numenius, Plotinus, Amelius, Porphyrius, Proclus, Damascius and others, held
also a Trinity of Divine Hypostases, so had some of those Philosophers
excellent Speculations concerning the Deity, En. 2. L. 9. c. 9.
as particularly Plotinus; who notwithstanding that he derived Matter and All
things, from One Divine Principle, yet was a Contender for Many Gods. Thus in
his Book inscribed, against the Gnostics: (...), (...)^ Every man ought to
endeavor with all his might, to become as Good as may be, but yet not to think
himself to be the only thing that is good, but that there are also other Good
men in the World, and Good Demons, but much more Gods: who though inhabiting
this inferior world, yet look up to that Superior; and most of all, the
Prince of this Universe, that most Happy Soul. From whence he ought to ascend
yet higher, and to praise those Intelligible Gods, but above all that great
King and Monarch; declaring his Greatness and Majesty by the Multitude of Gods
which are under him. For this is not the part of them who know the power of
God, to contract all into one, but to show forth all that Divinity which
himself has displayed, who remaining One makes Many depending on him; which
are by him and from him. For this whole World is by him, and looks up
perpetually to him, as also does every one of the Gods in it. And Themistius
the Peripatetick, (who was so far from being a Christian, that as Petavius
probably conjectures, he perstringes our Savior Christ under the Name of
Empedocles, for making himself a God) does not only affirm, that one and the
same Supreme God, was worshipped by Pagans, and the Christians, and all
Nations, though in different manners; but also, that God was delighted with
this Variety of Religions: Orat. 12.
(...)^ The Author and Prince of the Universe, seems to be delighted with this
Variety of Worship; He would have the Syrians worship him One way, the Greeks
another, and the Egyptians another; neither do the Syrians (or Christians)
themselves all agree, they being subdivided into many Sects.

We shall conclude therefore with this full Testimony of St. Cyril, P. 23.
in his First Book against Julian, (...)^ It is manifest to all, that amongst
those who Philosophize in the Greek way, it is Universally acknowledged, that
there is One God, the Maker of the Universe, and who is by Nature above all
things; but that there have been made by him, and produced into generation,
certain other Gods (as they call them) both Intelligible and Sensible.

XXVII. Neither was this the Opinion of Philosophers and Learned Men only,
amongst the Pagans, but even of the Vulgar also. Not that we pretend, to give
an account of all the most sottish Vulgar amongst them, who as they little
considered their Religion, so probably did they not understand that Mystery of
the Pagan Theology (hereafter to be declared) that Many of their Gods, were
nothing but several Names and Notions of one Supreme Deity, according to its
various Manifestations and Effects: but because, as we conceive this Tradition
of One Supreme God, did run current amongst the Generality of the Greek and
Latin Pagans at least, whether Learned or Unlearned. For we cannot make a
better judgment concerning the Vulgar and Generality of the ancient Pagans,
than from the Poets and Mythologists, who were the chief Instructers of them.
Thus Aristotle in his Politics, writing of Music, L. 8. c. 5.
judges of men's Opinions concerning the Gods, from the Poets, (...)^ We may
learn what opinion men have concerning the Gods, from hence, because the Poets
never bring in Jupiter, Singing or Playing upon an Instrument. Now we have
already proved from sundry Testimonies of the Poets, that (however they were
Depravers of the Pagan Religion, yet) they kept up this Tradition of one
Supreme Deity, one King and Father of Gods: To which Testimonies many more
might have been added, as of Seneca the Tragedian, Statius, Lucan, Silius
Italicus, Persius, and Martial, but that we then declined them to avoid
tediousness. Wherefore we shall here content our selves only to set down this
Affirmation of Dio Chrysostomus, Orat. 36. p. 447
concerning the Theology of the Poets, (...)^ All the Poets call the First and
Greatest God, the Father, universally, of all the Rational Kind; as also the
King thereof. Agreeably with which of the Poets, do men erect Altars to Jupiter
King, and stick not to call him Father in their Devotions.

Moreover Aristotle himself has recorded this in his Politics, (...), That
all men affirmed the Gods to be under a Kingly power, or that there is one
Supreme King and Monarch over the Gods. And Maximus Tyrius declares, that as
well the Unlearned as the Learned, throughout the whole Pagan world,
universally agreed in this, that there was one Supreme God, the Father of all
the others Gods: Diss. 1. p. 4, 5.
(...)^ If there were a meeting called of all these several Trades and
Professions, a Painter, a Statuary, a Poet, and a Philosopher, and all of them
were required to declare their sense concerning God, do you think that the
Painter would say one thing, the Statuary another, the Poet another, and the
Philosopher another? No nor the Scythian neither, nor the Greek, nor the
Hyperborean. In other things, we find men speaking very discordantly to one
another, all men as it were differing from all. The same thing is not Good to
all nor Evil, Honest nor Dishonest. For Law and Justice it self, are different
every where, and not only one Nation does not agree with another therein, but
also not one City with another City, nor one House with another House, nor one
man with another man, nor lastly any one man with himself. Nevertheless, in
this so great war, contention, and discord, you may find every where throughout
the whole world, One agreeing Law and Opinion, That THERE IS ONE GOD THE KING
AND FATHER OF ALL, and Many Gods, the Sons of God, Coreigners together with
God. These things both the Greek and the Barbarian alike affirm, both the
Inhabitants of the Continent and of the Seacoast, both the Wise and the
Unwise. Nothing can be more full than this Testimony of Maximus Tyrius, that
the Generality of the Pagan world, as well Vulgar and Illiterate, as Wise and
Learned, did agree in this, that there was One Supreme God, the Creator and
Governor of all. And to the same purpose was that other Testimony before cited
out of Dio Chrysostomus, (...), Orat. 12. p. 201.
etc. That concerning the nature of the Gods in General, but especially
concerning that Prince of all things, there was One agreeing Persuasion in the
minds of all Mankind, as well Barbarians as Greeks. Where Dio plainly intimates
also, that there was a more universal consent of Nations, in the belief of One
God, than of Many Gods.

It has been already observed, that the several Pagan Nations, had vulgarly
their peculiar Proper Names for the One Supreme God. For as the Greeks called
him Zeus or Zen, the Latins Jupiter or Jovis, so did the Egyptians, Africans
and Arabians, Hammon. Which Hammon therefore was called by the Greeks the Zeus
of the Africans, and by the Latins their Jupiter. Whence is that in Cicero's De
Natura Deorum, Jovis Capitolini Nobis alia species, alia Afris Ammonis Jovis,
the form of the Capitoline Jupiter with us Romans, is different from that, of
Jupiter Ammon with the Africans. The Name of the Scythian Jupiter also, as
Herodotus tells us, was Pappaeus or Father. The Persians likewise had their
(...), as Xenophon styles him, their Country- Zeus or Jupiter (namely Mithras
or Oromasdes) who in the same Xenophon, is distinguished from the Sun, and
called in Cyrus his Proclamation in the Scripture, The Lord God of Heaven, who
had given him all the Kingdoms of the Earth. Thus the Babylonian Bell is
declared by Berosus (a Priest of his) to have been that God, who was the Maker
of Heaven and Earth. And Learned men conceive, that Baal (which is the same
with Bell, and signifies Lord) was first amongst the Phenicians also a Name for
the Supreme God, the Creator of Heaven and Earth, sometimes called Beel samen,
The Lord of Heaven. As likewise that Molech which signifies King, was amongst
the Ammonites, the King of their Gods; and that Marnas (the chief God of the
Gazites, who were Philistines) and signifies the Lord of men, was that from
whence the Cretians derived their Jupiter, called the Father of Gods and Men.

Origin indeed contended, that it was not lawful for Christians, to call the
Supreme God by any of those Pagan Names, and probably for these Reasons,
because those names were then frequently bestowed upon Idols; and because they
were contaminated and desiled by Absurd and Impure Fables. Nevertheless that
learned Father does acknowledge the Pagans really to have meant (...), The God
over all, by those several Names. Which yet Lactantius Firmianus would by no
means allow of as to the Roman Jupiter, worshipped in the Capitol, he
endeavoring to confute it after this manner; Vana est Persuasio eorum qui
nomen Jovis Summo Deo tribuunt. L. 1. c. 11.
Solent enim quidam errores suos hac excusatione defendere; qui convicti de Vno
Deo, cum id negare non possunt, ipsum colere affirmant, verum hoc sibi placere
ut Jupiter nominetur, quo quid absurdius? Jupiter enim sine Contubernio
Conjugis Filiaeque, coli non solet. Vnde quid sit apparet, nec fas est id nomen
eo transferri, ubi nec Minerva est ulla nec Juno: It is a vain persuasion of
those, who would give the name of Jupiter to the Supreme God. For some are wont
thus to excuse their errors, when they have been convinced of one God, so as
that they could not contradict it, by saying that themselves worshipped Him, he
being called by them Jupiter: Than which, what can be more absurd? since
Jupiter is not worshipped without the Partnership of his Wife and Daughter.
From whence it plainly appears what this Jupiter is, and that the name ought
not to be transferred thither, where there is neither any Minerva nor Juno. The
ground of which argumentation of Lactantius was this, because the great
Capitoline Temple of Jupiter, had three Sacella or lesser Chapels in it, all
contained under one roof, Jupiter's in the middle, Minerva's on the right hand,
and Juno's on the left; according to that of the Poet. Trina in Tarpeio fulgent
consortia Templo. Which Juno, according to the Poetic Theology, is said to be
the Wife of Jupiter, and Minerva his Daughter, begotten not upon Juno but from
his own Brain. Where it is plain that there is a certain mixture of the
Mythical or Poetical Theology, together with the Natural, as almost evey where
else there was, to make up that Civil Theology of the Pagans. But here
(according to the more Recondit and Arcane Doctrine of the Pagans) these three
Capitoline Gods, Jupiter, Minerva, and Juno, as well as some others, may be
understood, to have been nothing else but Several Names and Notions, of One
Supreme Deity, according to its several Attributes and Manifestations, Jupiter
signifying the Divine Power and Sovereignty, as it were seated and enthroned in
the Heavens; Minerva the Divine Wisdom and Understanding; and Juno the same
Deity acting in these Lower parts of the world. Unless we would rather with
Macrobius, Physiologize them all Three, and make Minerva to be the Higher
Heaven, Jupiter the Middle Either, and Juno the Lower Air and Earth, all
Animated; that is, One God, as acting differently in these Three Regions of the
world. Which yet seems not so congruous, because it would place Minerva above
Jupiter.

Nevertheless it may justly be suspected, as G. I. Vossius has already
observed, that there was yet some higher and more sacred Mystery, in this
Capitoline Trinity, aimed at; namely, a Trinity of Divine Hypostases. For these
three Roman or Capitoline Gods, were said to have been First brought into Italy
out of Phrygia by the Trojans, but before that into Phrygia by Dardanus, out of
the Samothracian Island; and that within eight hundred years after the Noachian
Flood, if we may believe Eusebius. And as these were called by the Latins, Dii
Penates, which Macrobius thus interprets, Dii Per quos Penitus ^p^ramus, per
quos habemus Corpus, per quos rationem animi possidemus, that is, The Gods by
whom we live, and move, and have our being; but Varro in Arnobius, Dii qui sunt
Intrinsecus, atque in Intimis Penetralibus Coeli, the Gods, who are in the most
Inward Recesses of Heaven; so were they called by the Samothracians (...) or
Cabiri, that is, as Varro rightly interprets the word, (...), or Divi Potes,
The Powerful and Mighty Gods. Which Cabiri being plainly the Hebrew (...),
gives just occasion to suspect, that this Ancient Tradition of Three Divine
Hypostases (unquestionably entertained by Orpheus, Pythagoras and Plato amongst
the Greeks, and probably by the Egyptians and Persians) sprung originally from
the Hebrews. The First of these Divine Hypostases, called Jove, being the
Fountain of the Godhead; and the Second of them called by the Latins Minerva,
(which, as Varro interprets it, was that wherein Ideae and Exempla rerum, the
Ideas and first Exemplars or Patterns of things were contained) fitly
expressing the Divine Logos; and the Third Juno, called Amor ac Delicium Jovis,
De Theol. G^r. L. 8. c. 12.
well enough answering (as Vossius thinks) to the Divine Spirit.

But Lactantius has yet another objection against the Roman Jupiter's being
the Supreme God, Quid? quod hujus nominis proprietas, P. 63.
non Divinam vim sed Humanam exprimit? Jovem enim Junonem que a Juvando esse
dictos Cicero interpretatur. Et Jupiter quasi Juvans Pater dicitur. Quod nomen
in Deum minime convenit, quia Juvare hominis est, etc. Nemo sic Deum precatur,
ut se Adjuvet, sed ut Servet, etc. Ergo non Imperitus modo, sed etiam Impius
est, qui nomine Jovis Virtutem Summae Potestatis imminuit. What if we add that
the propriety of this word Jupiter, does not express a Divine, but only a
Humane force? Cicero deriving both Jove and Juno alike a Juvando, that is, from
Helping; For Juvans Pater or a Helping Father, is not a Good Description of
God; forasmuch as it properly belongs to men to Help. Neither does any one
pray to God, to Help him only, but to Save him. Nor is a Father, said to help
his Son, whom he was the Begetter of, etc. Wherefore he is not only Unskillful
but Impious also, who by the Name of Jove or Jupiter, diminishes the power of
the Supreme God. But as this of Lactantius seems otherwise weak enough; so is
the Foundation of it absolutely ruinous, the true Etymon of Jupiter (though
Cicero knew not so much) being without peradventure, not Juvans Pater, but
Jovis Pater, Jove the Father of Gods and Men; which Jovis is the very Hebrew
Tetragrammaton (however these Romans came by it) only altered by a Latin
Termination. Wherefore as there could be no impiety at all in calling the
Supreme God Jove or Jovis, it being that very name which God himself chose to
be called by: so neither is their any reason why the Latins should not as well
mean the Supreme God thereby, as the Greeks did unquestionably by Zeus, which
will be proved afterward from irrefragable Authority.

Especially if we consider, that the Roman Vulgar, commonly bestowed these Two
Epithets upon that Capitoline Jupiter (that is, not the senseless Statue, but
that God who was there worshipped in a Material Statue) of Optimus and Maximus,
the Best and the Greatest, they thereby signifying him to be a Being Infinitely
Good and Powerful. Thus Cicero in his De Not. Deorum, Jupiter a Poetis dicitur
Divum atque Hominum Pater, a majoribus autem nostris Optimus Maximus. That same
Jupiter who is by the Poets styled, The Father of Gods and Men, is by our
ancestors called, The Best The Greatest. And in his Orat. pro S. Roscio,
Jupiter Optimus Maximus, cujus nutu and arbitrio, Coelum, Terra, Mariaque
reguntur, Jupiter the Best the Greatest, by whose beck and command, the Heaven,
the Earth and the Seas are governed. As also the Junior Pliny, in his
Panegyric Oration, Parens Hominum Deorumque, Optimi prius, deinde Maximi
nomine colitur, The Father of Men and Gods, is worshipped under the Name, first
of the Best, and then of the Greatest. Moreover Servius Honoratus informs us,
that the Pontifices in their public Sacrifices, were wont to address
themselves to Jupiter in this Form of words, Omnipotens Jupiter, seu quo alio
nomine appellari volueris, Omnipotent Jupiter, or by what other name soever
thou please to be called. From whence it is plain, that the Romans under the
name of Jupiter worshipped the Omnipotent God. And according to Seneca the
ancient Hetrurians, who are by him distinguished from Philosophers, as a kind
of Illiterate Superstitious persons (in these words, Not Q. L. 2. c. 41.
Haec adhuc Etruscis and Philosophis communia sunt, in illo dissentiunt) had
this very same Notion answering to the word Jupiter, namely, of the Supreme
Monarch of the Universe. For First he sets down their Tradition concerning
Thunderbolts in this manner, Fulmina dicunt a Jove mitti, and tres illi
manubias dant. Prima (ut aiunt) monet and placata est, and ipsius consilio
Jovis mittitur. Secundam quidem mittit Jupiter, sed ex Consilii sententia;
Duodecim enim Deos advocat, etc. Tertiam idem Jupiter mittit. sed adhibitis in
Consilium Diis quos Superiores and Involutos vocant, quae vastat, etc. The
Hetrurians say, that the Thunderbolts are sent from Jupiter, and that there
are three kinds of them; the First Gentle and Monitory and sent by Jupiter
alone; the Second sent by Jupiter, but not without the counsel and consent of
the Twelve Gods, which Thunderbolt does some good, but not without Harm also;
the Third sent by Jupiter likewise, but not before he has called a Council of
all the Superior Gods: and this utterly wastes and destroys both private and
public States. And then does he make a Commentary, upon this old Hetrurian
Doctrine, that it was not to be taken literally, but only so as to impress an
awe upon men and to signify that Jupiter himself intended nothing but Good, he
inflicting evil not alone, but in partnership with others, and when the
necessity of the case required. Adding in the last place, Ne hoc quidem
crediderunt (Etrusci) Jovem qualem in Capitolio, and in caeteris aedibus
colimus, mittere manu sua sulmina; sed eundem quem nos, Jovem intelligunt;
custodem rectoremque Vniversi, Animum ac Spiritum, Mundani hujus operis Dominum
and Artificem, cui nomen omne convenit. Neither did these Hetrurians believe,
that such a Jupiter as we worship in the Capitol and in the other Temples, did
sling Thunderbolts with his own hands, but they understood the very same
Jupiter that we now do, the Keeper and Governor of the Universe, the Mind and
Spirit of the whole, the Lord and Artificer of this Mundane Fabric, to whom
every name belongs. And lastly, that the vulgar Romans afterward about the
beginning of Christianity, had the same Notion of Jupiter, as the Supreme God;
evidently appears from what Tertullian has recorded in his Book ad Scapulam,
that when Marcus Aurelius in his German Expedition, by the prayers of the
Christian Soldiers made to God, had obtained refreshing showers from Heaven in
a great drought, Tunc Populus adclamans JOVI DEO DEORVM, QVI SOLVS POTENS EST,
in Jovis nomine Deo nostro testimonium reddidit; That then the people with one
consent crying out thanks be to JUPITER THE GOD OF GODS, WHO ALONE IS POWERFVL,
did thereby in the name of Jove or Jupiter give testimony to our God. Where by
the way we see also, that Tertullian was not so nice as Lactantius, but did
freely acknowledge the Pagans by their Jupiter to have meant the True God.

As nothing is more frequent with Pagan Writers, than to speak of God
Singularly, they signifying thereby the One Supreme Deity, so that the same was
very familiar with the Vulgar Pagans also, in their ordinary discourse and
common speech, has been recorded by diverse of the Fathers. Tertullian in his
Book De Testimonio Animae, and his Apologet. instanceth in several of these
Forms of Speech then vulgarly used by the Pagans, as Deus videt, Deo commendo,
Deus reddet Deus inter nos judicabit, Quod Deus vult, Si Deus voluerit, Quod
Deus dederit, Si Deus dederit, and the like. Thus also Minutius Felix, Cum ad
Coelum manus tendunt, nihil aliud quam Deum Dicunt. Et Magnus est, and Deus
Verus est, etc. vulgi iste Naturalis sermo, an Christiani consitentis oration?
When they stretch out their hands to Heaven, they mention only God; and these
forms of speech, He is Great, and God is True. and If God grant (which are the
natural language of the vulgar) are they not a plain confession of
Christianity. And lastly Lactantius, Cum Jurant, and cum Optant, and cum
Gratias agunt, non Deos multos, sed Deum nominant; adeo ipsa veritas, cogente
natura, etiam ab invitis pectoribus erumpit: When they swear, and when they
wish, and when they give thanks, they name not Many Gods but God only; the
Truth, by a secrt force of nature, thus breaking forth from them whether they
will or no. And again, Ad Deum confugiunt, a Deo petitur auxilium, Deus ut
subveniat oratur. Et si quis ad extremam mendicandi necessitatem redactus,
victum precibus exposcit, Deum Solum obtestatur, and per ejus divinum atque
unicum Numen hominum sibi misericordiam quaerit: They fly to God, Aid is
desired of God, they pray that God would help them; and when any one is reduced
to extremest necessity, he begs for Gods sake, and by his Divine power alone
implores the mercy of men. Which same thing is fully confirmed also, by Proclus
upon Plato's Timaeus, where he observes, that the One Supreme God, was more
Universally believed throughout the World in all ages, than the Many Inferior
Gods; (...)^ P. 286.
And perhaps you may affirm, that Souls do sooner lose their knowledge of those
things which are Lower and Nearer to them, but retein a stronger remembrance of
those Higher Principles. Because these do act more vigorously upon them, by
reason of the Transcendency of their Power, and by their Energy seem to be
present with them. And the same thing happens as to to our bodily Sight; for
though there be many things here upon earth which none of us see, yet every one
observes that Highest Sphere, and takes notice of the Fixed stars in it;
because these strongly radiate with their light upon our eyes. In like manner
does the Eye of our Soul, sooner lose the sight and remembrance of the Lower
than of the Higher and Diviner Principles. And thus all Religions and Sects,
acknowledge that One Highest Principle of all, and m^n every where call upon
God for their Helper; but that there are Gods, after and below that Highest
Principle, and that there is a certain providence descending down from these
upon the Universe, all Sects do not believe; the reason whereof is, because The
One or Unity, appears more clearly and plainly to them than The Many or a
Multitude.

Moreover we learn from Arianus his Epictetus, that that very Form of Prayer
which has been now so long in use in the Christian Church, Kyrie Eleeson, Lord
have mercy upon us, was anciently part of the Pagans Litany to the Supreme God,
either amongst the Greeks, or the Latins, L. 2. c. 7.
or Both, (...) (says Epictetus) (...), invoking God we pray to him after this
manner, Lord have mercy upon us. Now this Epictetus lived in the times of
Adrian the Emperor, and that this Passage of his, is to be understood of
Pagans and not of Christians, is undeniably manifest from the context, he there
speaking of those who used Auguria or Divination by Birds. Moreover in the
writings of the Greekish Pagans, the Supreme God is often called (...), or
Lord. For, not to urge that passage of the (...) or Asclepian Dialogue, cited
by Lactantius, where we read of (...), the Lord and Maker of all. Menander in
Just. Martyr, styles the Supreme God, (...), the most Universal Lord of all.
And Osiris in Plutarch is called, (...), the Lord of all things. And this is
also done Absolutely, and without any Adjection, and that not only by the
Seventy, and Christians, but also by Pagan Writers; thus in Plutarch's de Iside
and Osiride, we read of (...) (...), The knowledge of the first Intelligible,
and the Lord, that is, of the Supreme God. And Oromasdes is called (...), The
Lord, in Plutarch's Life of Alexander; as (...) also, (...), by Aristotle, De
An. L. ^. c. 7.
that is the Supreme Ruler over all. Thus likewise Plato in his Sixth Epistle
ad Hermiam, etc. styles his First Divine Hypostasis, or the Absolutely Supreme
Deity, (...), The Father of the Prince and Cause of the World, (that is, of the
Eternal Intellect) The LORD. Again Jamblichus writes thus of the Supreme God,
Vit. Pyth. p. 39.
(...), It is confessed that every Good thing ought to be asked of the Lord,
that is, the Supreme God, which words are afterward repeated in him also. p.
129. but depraved in the printed Copy thus, (...), Lastly, Clemens Alexandrinus
tells us, that the Supreme God was called not by one only name, but by diverse
diversely, namely, (...), Either the One, or the Good, or Mind, or the very Ens,
or the Father, or the Demiurgus, or the Lord. Wherefore we conclude, that this
Kyrie Eleeson, or Domine Miserere, in Arrianus, was a Pagan Litany or
Supplication to the Supreme God. Though from Mauritius the Emperors
Stratagemata it appears that in his time a Kyrie Eleeson was wont to be sung
also by the Christian Armies before Battle. Rigal^. Gloss.


And that the most Sottishly Superstitious and Idolatrous of all the Pagans,
and the Worshippers of never so many Gods amongst them; did notwithstanding
generally acknowledge, One Supreme Deity over them all, One Universal Numen, is
positively affirmed, and fully attested by Aurelius Prudentius, in his
Apotheosis, in these words; Verse. 254.
Ecquis in Idolio recubans inter sacra mill,
Ridiculosque Deos venerans, sale, caespite, thure,
Non putat esse Deum Summum, and super omnia Solum?
Quamvis Saturnis, Junonibus, and Cytheraeis,
Portentisque aliis, sumantes consecret aras;
Attamen in Coelum quoties suspexit, in Vno
Constituit jus omne Deo, cui serviat ingens
Virtutum ratio, Variis instructa Ministris.


We are not ignorant that Plato in his Cratylus, where he undertakes to give
the Etymologies of words, and amongst the rest of the word (...), writes in
this manner, concerning the First and most Ancient Inhabitants of Greece; That
they seemed to him, like as other Barbarians at that time, to have acknowledged
no other Gods, than such as were Visible and Sensible, as the Sun and the Moon,
and the Earth, and the Stars, and the Heaven. Which they perceiving to run
round perpetually, therefore called them (...), from (...), that signifies to
run. But that when afterward, they took notice of other Invisible Gods also,
they bestowed the same name of (...) upon them likewise. Which Passage of
Plato's Eusebius somewhere would make use of, to prove that the Pagans
universally acknowledged no other Gods, but Corporeal and Inanimate; plainly
contrary to that Philosophers meaning, who as he no where affirms, that any
Nation ever was so barbarous, as to worship Senseless and Inanimate Bodies, as
such, for Gods, but the contrary; so does he there distinguish, from those
First Inhabitants of Greece and other Barbarians, the afterward Civilized
Greeks, who took notice of Invisible Gods also. However, if this of Plato
should be true, that some of the ancient Pagans, worshipped none but Visible
and Sensible Gods (they taking no notice of any Incorporeal Beings) yet does it
not therefore follow, that those Pagans had no Notion at all amongst them, of
One Supreme and Universal Numen. The contrary thereunto being manifest, that
some of those Corporealists looked upon the whole Heaven and Either Animated, as
the Highest God, according to that of Euripides cited by Cicero, De N. D. p.
223.
Vides Sublime fusum, immoderatum aethera,
Qui tenero terram circumvectu amplectitur,
Hunc Summum habeto Divum, hunc perhibeto Jovem.
As also that others of them conceived that Subtle Fiery Substance, which
permeates and pervades the whole World, (supposed to be Intellectual) to be the
Supreme Diety which governs all; this Opinion having been entertained by
Philosophers also, as namely the Heracliticks and Stoics. And lastly, since
Macrobius in the Person of Vettius Praetextatus, refers so many of the Pagan
Gods, to the Sun, this renders it not improbable, but that some of these Pagans
might adore the Animated Sun, as the Sovereign Numen, and thus perhaps invoke
him in that Form of Prayer there mentioned (...), O Omnipotent Sun, the Mind
and Spirit of the whole World, etc. And even Cleanthes himself, that Learned
Stoic, and Devout Religionist, is suspected by some to have been of this
Persuasion.

Nevertheless we think it opportune here to observe, that it was not Macrobius
his Design in those his Saturnalia, to defend this, either as his own opinion,
or as the opinion of the Generality of Pagans, That the Animated Sun, was
Absolutely The Highest Deity; (as some have conceived) nor yet to reduce that
Multiplicity of Pagan Gods, by this device of his, into a seeming Monarchy and
nearer compliance with Christianity; he there plainly confining his Discourse,
to the Dii duntaxat qui sub Coelo sunt, that is, the Lower sort of Mundane
Gods, and undertaking to show, not that all of these neither, but only that
many of them, were reducible to the Sun, as Polyonymous, and called by several
Names, according to his Several Virtues and Effects. For, what Macrobius his
own opinion was, concerning the Supreme Deity, appears plainly from his other
Writings, particularly this Passage of his Commentary upon Scipio's Dream,
where the Highest Sphere and Starry Heaven was called Summus Deus, the Supreme
God; L. 1. c. 17.
Quod hunc Extimum Globum, Summum Deum vocavit, non ita accipiendum est, ut
iste Prima Causa, and Deus ille Omnipotentissimus existimetur; cum Globus ipse,
quod Coelum est, Animae sit Fabrica, Anima ex Mente processerit, Men's ex Deo,
qui vere Summus est, procreata sit. Sed Summum quidem dixit ad Caeterorum
Ordinem qui subjecti sunt: Deum vero quod non modo Immortale Animal ac Divinum
sit, plenum inclytae ex illa purissima Mente rationis, sed quod and virtutes
omnes, quae illam Primae Omnipotentiam Summitatis sequantur, aut ipse faciat,
aut contineat; Ipsum denique Jovem veteres vocaverunt, and apud Theologos
Jupiter est mundi Anima: That the Outmost Sphere is here called The Supreme
God, is not so to be understood, as if this were thought to be The First Cause,
and The Most Omnipotent God of all. For this Starry Sphere being but a part of
the Heaven, was made or produced by Soul. Which Soul also proceeded from a
Perfect Mind or Intellect; and again Mind was begotten from that God, who is
Truly Supreme. But the Highest Sphere is here called the Supreme God, only in
respect to those Lesser Spheres or Gods, that are contained under it; and it is
styled a God, because it is not only an Immortal and Divine Animal, full of
Reason derived from that Purest Mind, but also because it makes or contains
within it self, all those Virtues which follow that Omnipotence of the First
Summity. Lastly, this was called by the ancients Jupiter, and Jupiter to
Theologers is the Soul of the World. Wherefore though Macrobius, as generally
the other Pagans, did undoubtedly worship the Sun as a Great God, and probably
would not stick to call him Jupiter nor (...) neither (in a certain sense)
Omnipotent or the Governor of all, nor perhaps Deum Summum, as well as the
Starry Heaven was so styled in Scipio's Dream, he being the Chief Moderator in
this Lower World; yet nevertheless it is plain that he was far from thinking
the Sun to be Primam Causam, or Omnipotentissimum Deum; The First Cause, or the
most Omnipotent God of all. He acknowledging above the Sun and Heaven, First,
an Eternal Psyche, which was the Maker or Creator of them both; and then above
this Psyche, a Perfect Mind or Intellect, and Lastly above that Mind a God who
was Vere Summus, Truly and Properly Supreme, The First Cause, and the Most
Omnipotent of all Gods. Wherein Macrobius plainly Platonized, asserting a
Trinity of Archical or Divine Hypostases. Somn. Scip. L. 1. c. 14
Which same Doctrine is elsewhere also further declared by him after this
manner; Deus qui Prima Causa est and vocatur, Vnus omnium, quaeque sunt quaeque
videntur esse, Principium and Origo est. Hic superabundanti Majestatis
faecunditate de se Mentem creavit. Haec Men's quae (...) vocatur, qua Patrem
inspicit, plenam similitudinem servat auctoris,, Animam vero de se creat
posteriora respiciens. Rursus Anima partem quam intuetur induitur, ac paulatim
regrediente respectu in fabricam corporum, in corporea ipsa degenerat: God who
is and is called, the First Cause, is alone the Fountain and Original of all
things that are or seem to be; He by his superabundant Fecundity, produced from
himself Mind, which Mind, as it looks upward toward its Father, bears the
perfect resemblance of its Author, but as it looked downward, produced Soul.
And this Soul again as to its superior part resembles that Mind from whence it
was begotten; but working downwards, produced the Corporeal Fabric, and acts
upon Body. Besides which the same Macrobius tells us, that Summi and Principis
omnium Dei, nullum Simulachrum finxit Antiquitas, quia supra Animam and Naturam
est, quo nihil fas est de fabulis pervenire; de Diis autem caeteris, and de
Anima, non frusta se ad fabulosa convertunt: The Pagan Antiquity made no Image
at all of the Highest God, or Prince of all things, because he is above Soul
and Nature, where it is not lawful for any Fabulosity to be intromitted. But as
to the other Gods, the Soul of the World, and those below it, they thought it
not inconvenient here, to make use of Images, and Fiction or Fabulosity. From
all which it plainly appears, that neither Macrobius himself, nor the
Generality of the ancient Pagans according to his apprehension did look upon
the Animated Sun, as the Absolutely Supreme and Highest Being.

And perhaps it may not be amiss to suggest here, what has been already
observed; that the Persians themselves also, who of all Pagan Nations, have
been most charged with this, the Worshipping of the Sun as the Supreme Deity,
under the name of Mithras, did notwithstanding if we may believe Eubulus (who
wrote the History of Mithras at large) acknowledge another Invisible Deity
Superior to it, (and which was the Maker thereof and of the whole World) as
the True and Proper Mithras. Which opinion, is also plainly confirmed, L. 1 N.
131.
not only by Herodotus, distinguishing their Jupiter from the Sun, but also by
Xenophon in sundry places, as particularly where he speaks of Cyrus his being
admonished in a Dream of his aproaching death, and thereupon addressing his
Devotion by Sacrifices and Prayers; first to the (...), the Persian Jupiter,
and then to the Sun, and the other Gods. Cyri Inst. L. 8. p. 184.
(...), etc. He sacrificed to their Country (or the Persian) Jupiter, and to
the Sun, and to the other Gods, upon the Tops of the Mountains, as the custom
of the Persians is; praying after this manner; Thou our Country Jupiter (that
is, thou Mithras or Oromasdes) and thou Sun, and all ye other Gods; accept, I
pray you, these my Eucharistick Sacrifices, etc. And we find also the like
Prayer used by Darius in Plutarch (...), De Fort. Alex. L. 2
Thou our Country Jupiter, or Supreme God of the Persians. Moreover Herodotus
and Curtius record, that in the Persian Pomp and Procession, there was wont to
be drawn a Chariot sacred to Jupiter, distinct from that of the Sun. But Cyrus
his Proclamation in the Book of Esdras, puts all out of doubt; since That
Lord God of Heaven, who is there said, to have given Cyrus all the Kin^doms of
the Earth, and commanded him to build Him a House at Jerusalem, cannot be
understood of the Sun.

The Ethiopians in Strabo's time, may well be looked upon as Barbarians, and
yet did they not only acknowledge One Supreme Deity, but also such as was
distinct from the world, and therefore Invisible, he writing thus concerning
them, (...)^ L. 17. p. 822.
They believe, that there is One Immortal God, and this the Cause of all
things; and another Mortal one, anonymous; but for the most part they account
their Benefactors and Kings, Gods also. And though Caesar affirm of the ancient
Germans, Deorum numero eo^ solos ducunt, quos cernunt, and quorum opibus aperte
juvantur, Sol^m, and Vulcanum, and Lunam, yet is he contradicted by Tacitus,
who coming after him had better information; and others have recorded, See
Sc^ed. de Dii^ Cerm.
that they acknowledged One Supreme God, under the name of Thau first, and then
of Thautes, and Theutates. Lastly, the Generality of the Pagans at this very
day, as the Indians, Chinese, Siamenses and Guineans; the Inhabitants of Peru,
Mexico, Virginia, and New England, (some of which are sufficiently Barbarous)
acknowledge One Supreme or Greatest God; they having their several Proper Names
for him, as Parmiscer, Fetisso, Wiracocha, Pachacamac, Vitziliputzti, etc.
though worshipping withal, other Gods and Idols. And we shall conclude this
with the Testimony of Josephus Acosta: De P^oc. In^. Sal. L. 5.47^.
Hoc commune apud omnes pene Barbaros est, ut Deum quidem Omnium rerum Supremum
and sum Bonum, fateantur; Spirituum vero quorundam perversorum non obscura
opinio sit, qui a nostris Barbaris Zupay vocari solent. Igitur and quis ille
Summus, idemque Sempiternus rerum omnium Opifex, quem illi ignorantes colunt,
per omnia doceri debent, mox quantum ab illo illiusque fidelibus Ministris
Angelis, absint gens pessima Cacodaemonum. This is common almost to all the
Barbarians, to confess one Supreme God over all, who is perfectly Good; as also
they have a Persuasion amongst them of certain Evil Spirits, which are called
by our Barbarians Zupay. Wherefore they ought to be first well instructed, what
that Supreme and Eternal Maker of all things is, whom they ignorantly worship;
and then how great a difference there is, betwixt those wicked Demons, and his
faithful Ministers, the Angels.

XXVIII. It has been already declared, that according to Themistius and
Symmachus, two zealous Pagans, One and the same Supreme God, was worshipped in
all the several Pagan Religions throughout the world, though after different
manners. Which Diversity of Religions, as in their opinion, it was no way
inconvenient in it self, so neither was it Ungrateful nor Unacceptable to
Almighty God, it being more for his Honor, State and Grandeur, to be
worshipped with this Variety, than after one only Manner. Now that this was
also the opinion of other ancienter Pagans before them, may appear from this
remarkable Testimony of Plutarch's in his Book De Iside, where defending the
Egyptian Worship (which was indeed the main design of that whole Book;) but
withal declaring, that no Inanimate thing ought to be looked upon or worshipped
as a God, he writes thus: P. 377.
(...)^ No Inanimate thing ought to be esteemed for a God, but they who bestow
these things upon us, and afford us a continual supply thereof for our use,
have been therefore accounted by us Gods. Which Gods are not different to
different Nations; as if the Barbarians and the Greeks, the Southern and the
Northern Inhabitants of the Globe, had not any the same, but all other
different Gods. But as the Sun and the Moon, and the Heaven and the Earth, and
the Sea, are common to all, though called by several names in several
Countries, so ONE REASON ordering these things and ONE PROVIDENCE dispensing
all, and the Inferior subservient Ministers thereof, having had several Names
and Honors bestowed upon them by the Laws of several Countries, have been
every where worshipped throughout the whole world. And there have been also
different Symbols consecrated to them, the better to conduct and lead on men's
unde^st^ndings to Divine things; though this has not been without some hazard
or danger of casting men upon one or other of these Two Inconveniences, either
Superstition or Atheism. Where Plutarch plainly affirms, that the Several
Religions of the Pagan Nations, whether Greeks or Barbarians, and among these
the Egyptians also, as well as others, consisted in nothing else, but the
worshipping of One and the Same Supreme Mind, Reason and Providence, that
orders all things in the world, and of its (...), its Subservient Powers or
Ministers, appointed by it over all the several parts of the World; though
under different Names, Rites and Ceremonies, and with different Symbols.

Moreover that Titus Livius was of the very same opinion, that the Pagan Gods
of several Countries, though called by several Names, and worshipped with so
great Diversity of Rites and Ceremonies, yet were not for all that, Different,
but the same common to all, may be concluded from this passage of his, where he
writes of Hannibal: L. 28. C 12.
Nescio an Mirabilior fuerit in adversis, quam secundis rebus. Quippe qui
mistos ex colluvione omnium gentium, quibus alius Ritus, alia sacra, alii PROPE
Dii essent, ita uno vinculo copulaverit, ut nulla seditio extiterit. I know not
whether Hannibal were more admirable in his adversity or Prosperity; who having
a mixed colluvies of all Nations under him, which had different Rites, different
Ceremonies, and Almost different Gods, from one another, did notwithstanding so
unite them all together in one common bond, that there happened no sedition at
all amongst them. Where Livy plainly intimates, that though there was as great
diversity of Religious Rites and Ceremonies among the Pagans, as if they had
worshipped several Gods, yet the God^ of them all, were really the same,
Namely, One Supreme God, and his Ministers under him. And the same Livy
elsewhere declares, this to have been the General opinion of the Romans and
Italians likewise at that time; where he tells us how they quarreled with Q.
Fulvius Flaccus, for that when being Censor, and building a new Temple in
Spain, he uncovered another Temple dedicated to Juno Lacinia amongst the
Brutii, and taking off the Marble-Tyles thereof, sent them into Spain to adorn
his new erected Temple withal; and how they accused him thereupon publicly in
the Senate House in this manner, Dec. 5.
Quod ruinis Templorum Templa aedificaret, tanquam non Iidem ubique Dii
immortales essent, sed spoliis aliorum alii colendi exornandique; That with the
ruins of Temples he built up Temples; as if there were not every where the
Same Immortal Gods; but that some of them might be worshipped and adorned with
the spoils of others.

The Egyptians were doubtless the most singular of all the Pagans, and the most
odly discrepant from the rest in their manner of worship, yet nevertheless,
that these also agreed with the rest in those Fundamentals, of worshipping one
Supreme and Universal Numen, together with his Inferior Ministers, as Plutarch
sets himself industriously to maintain it, in that forementioned Book De Iside,
so was it further cleared and made out (as Damascius informs us) by Two Famous
Egyptian Philosophers Asclepiades and Heraiscus in certain writings of theirs,
that have been since lost: (...), Damasc. de Princ. M.S.
etc. (...)^ Though Eudemus has given us no certain account of the Egyptians,
yet the Egyptian Philosophers of latter times, have declared the hidden truth
of their Theology, having found in some Egyptian Monuments, that according to
them there is one Principle of all things, celebrated under the name of the
Unknown Darkness, and this thrice repeated, etc. Moreover this is to be
observed concerning these Egyptians, that they are wont to divide and multiply
things that are One and the Same. And accordingly have they divided and
multiplied the First intelligible or the One Supreme Deity, into the Properties
of Many Gods; as any one may find that pleases to consult their writings; I
mean that of Heraiscus, entitled the Universal Doctrine of the Egyptians, and
inscribed to Proclus the Philosopher; and that Symphony or Harmony of the
Egyptians with other Theologers, begun to be written by Asclepiades and left
imperfect. Of which Work of Asclepiades the Egyptian, Suidas also makes
mention, upon the Word Heraiscus; (...)^ But Asclepiades having been more
conversant with ancient Egyptian writings, was more thoroughly instructed, and
exactly skilled in his Country Theology; he having searched into the Principles
thereof, and all the consequences resulting from them; as manifestly appears
from those Hymns which he composed in praise of the Egyptian Gods, and from
that Tractate begun to be written by him (but left unfinished) which
contains, The Symphony of all Theologies. Now we say that Asclepiades his
Symphony of all the Pagan Theologies, and therefore of the Egyptian with the
rest; was their agreement in those Two Fundamentals expressed by Plutarch;
namely the worshipping of One Supreme and Universal Numen, Reason and
Providence, governing all things; and then of his Subservient Ministers (the
Instruments of Providence) appointed by him, over all the parts of the world:
Which being honored under several Names, and with different Rites and
Ceremonies, according to the Laws of the respective Countries caused all that
Diversity of Religions, that was amongst them. Both which Fundamental Points,
of the Pagan Theology, were in like manner acknowledged by Symmachu's, The
First of them being thus expressed, Aequum est quicquid omnes colunt, Vnum
putari, That all Religions agreed in this, the Worshipping of One and the same
Supreme Numen; and the Second thus, Varios Custodes Vrbibus Men's Divina
distribuit, That the Divine Mind appointed diverse Guardian and Tutelar Spirits
under him, unto Cities and Countries. He there adding also, that Suus cuique
Mos est, suum cuique Jus, That every Nation had their peculiar Modes and
Manners in worshipping of these: and that these external differences in
Religion, ought not to be stood upon, but every one to observe the Religion of
his own Country. Or else these Two Fundamental Points of the Pagan Theology,
may be thus expressed, First, that there is One Self-Originated Deity, who was
the (...) or Maker of the whole World, Secondly, That there are besides him,
Other Gods also, to be Religiously worshipped (that is, Intellectual Beings
superior to men) which were notwithstanding all Made or Created by that One;
Ecl. Phys. c. 1.
Stobaeus thus declaring their sense, (...), That the multitude of Gods, is the
work of the Demiurgus, made by him together with the world.

XXIX. And that the Pagan Theologers, did thus generally acknowledge, One
Supreme and Universal Numen, appears plainly from hence, Plut. L. 2. c. 3. Stob
Ecl. Phys. c. 25.
because they supposed the whole World to be an Animal. Thus the Writer de
Placitis Philos. and out of him Stobaeus, (...)^ All others assert the World to
be an Animal, and governed by Providence; only Leucippus, Democritus, and
Epicurus, and those who make Atoms and Vacuum the Principles of all things,
dissenting, who neither acknowledge the World to be Animated, nor yet to be
governed by Providence; but by an Irrational Nature. Where by the way, we may
observe the Fraud and Juggling of Gassendus, who takes occasion from hence
highly to extol and applaud Epicurus, as one who approached nearer to
Christianity than all the other Philosophers, in that he denied the World to be
an Animal; whereas according to the Language and Notions of those times, to
deny the Worlds Animation, and to be an Atheist or to deny a God, was one and
the same thing; because all the Pagans who then asserted Providence, held the
World also to be Animated; neither did Epicurus deny the World's Animation,
upon any other account than this, because he denied Providence. And the Ground
upon which this opinion of the Worlds Animation was built, was such as might be
obvious even to vulgar undererstandings; and it is thus expressed by Plotinus
according to the sense of the Ancients, En. 4. L. 3. c. 7.
(...)^ It is absurd to affirm, that the Heaven or World is Inanimate, or
devoid of Life and Soul, when we our selves who have but a part of the Mundane
Body in us, are endued with Soul. For how could a Part have Life and Soul in
it, the Whole being Dead and inanimate? Now if the whole world be One Animal,
then must it needs be Governed by One Soul, and not by Many. Which One Soul of
the World, and the whole Mundane Animal was by some of the Pagan Theologers (as
namely the Stoics) taken to be the (...), The First and Highest God of all.

Nevertheless others of the Pagan Theologers, though asserting the World's
Animation likewise, yet would by no means allow the Mundane Soul to be the
Supreme Deity; they conceiving the First and Highest God to be an Abstract and
Immovable Mind, and not a Soul. Thus the Panegyrist, (cited also by Gyraldus,
Hist. Deor. p. 12
) invokes the Supreme Deity doubtfully and cautiously, as not knowing well what
to call him, whether Soul or Mind; Te Sum rerum Sator, cujus tot nomina sunt,
quot gentium linguas esse voluisti; quem enim te ipse dici velis, scire non
possumus: sive in te quaedam vis Mensque Divina est, quae toto infusa mundo,
omnibus miscearis elementis, and sine ullo extrinsecus accedente vigoris
impulsu, per te ipse movearis; sive aliqua supra omne Coelum potestas es, quae
hoc opus totum ex altiore Naturae arce despicias: Te inquam oramus, etc. Thou
Supreme Original of all things, who have as many Names as thou have pleased
there should be languages; whether thou be a certain Divine Force and Soul,
that infused into the whole world art mingled with all the Elements, and
without any External impulse moved from thy self; or whether thou be a Power
Elevated above the Heavens, which look down upon the whole work of Nature,
as from a higher Tower; Thee we invoke, etc. And as the Supreme Deity was thus
considered only as a Perfect Mind, Superior to Soul, so was the Mundane Soul
and whole Animated World, called by these Pagans frequently, (...), The Second
God. Thus in the Asclepian Dialogue or Perfect Oration, is the Lord and Maker
of all, said to have made a Second God Visible and Sensible, which is the World.

But for the most part, they who asserted a God, Superior to the Soul of the
World, did maintain a Trinity of Universal Principles, or Divine Hypostases
subordinate, they conceiving, that as there was above the Mundane Soul a
Perfect Mind or Intellect; so that Mind and Intellect as such, was not the
First Principle neither, because there must be (...) in order of nature before
(...), an Intelligible before Intellect. Which First Intelligible, was called
by them, (...) and (...), The One, and The Good, or Unity and Goodness it self
Substantial, the Cause of Mind and All things. Now as the Tagathon or Highest
of these Three Hypostases, was sometimes called by them (...), The First God,
and (...) or Intellect (...), The Second God, so was the Mundane Soul and
Animated world, called (...), The Third God Thus Numenius in Proclus upon
Plato's Timaeus, P. 93.
(...)^ Numenius praising Three Gods, calls the Father the First God, the Maker
the Second, and the Work the Third. For the World according to him, is the
Third God; as he supposes also Two Opificers, the First and the Second God.
Plotinus in like manner speaks of this also, En. 3. L. 5. 6.
as very Familiar language amongst those Pagans, (...), And the World, as is
commonly said, is the Third God.

But neither they, who held the Supreme Deity to be an Immovable Mind or
Intellect, superior to the Mundane Soul (as Aristotle and Xenocrates) did
suppose that Mundane Soul and the whole World, to have depended upon Many such
Immovable Intellects Self-existent, as their First Cause, but only upon One:
nor they, who admitting a Trinity of Divine Hypostases, made the Supreme Deity
properly to be a Monad above Mind or Intellect, did conceive that Intellect to
have depended upon Many such Monads, as First Principles Coordinate, but upon
One only. From whence it plainly appears, that the Pagan Theologers, did always
reduce things under a Monarchy, and acknowledge not Many Independent Deities,
but One Universal Numen (whether called Soul, or Mind, or Monad) as the Head of
all. Though it has been already declared, that those Pagans, who were
Trinitarians, especially the Platonists, do often take those their Three
Hypostases subordinate (a Monad, Mind and Soul) all together, for the (...), or
One Supreme Numen; as supposing an extraordinary kind of Unity, in that Trinity
of Hypostases, and so as it were, a certain Latitude and Gradation, in the
Deity.

Where by the way Two things may be observed, concerning the Pagan Theologers;
First, that according to them generally the whole Corporeal System, was not a
Dead Thing, like a Machin or Automaton Artificially made by men, but that Life
and Soul was mingled with and diffused thorough it All: insomuch that Aristotle
himself, taxes those, who made the World to consist of nothing but Monads or
Atoms altogether Dead and Inanimate, as being therefore a kind of Atheists.
Secondly, That how much soever some of them supposed the Supreme Deity and
First Cause, to be Elevated above the Heaven and Corporeal World, yet did they
not therefore conceive either the World to be quite Cut off from that, or that
from the World, so as to have no commerce with it nor influence upon it; but as
all proceeded from this First Cause, so did they suppose that to be closely and
intimately united with all those Emanations from it self, (though without
Mixture and Confusion) and all to subsist in it, and be pervaded by it. P. 100.
par.
Plutarch in his Platonic Questions, propounds this amongst the rest, (...);
Why Plato called the Highest God, the Father and Maker of All? To which he
answers in the First place thus, (...)^ That perhaps he was called the Father
of all the Generated Gods, and of men, but the Maker of the Irrational and
Inanimate things of the World. But afterward he adds, That this Highest God,
might therefore be styled the Father of the whole Corporeal World also, as well
as the Maker, because it is no Dead and Inanimate thing, but endued with Life;
(...) (...)^ Generation is the making or production of something Animate. And
the work of an Artificer, as an Architect or Statuary, as soon as it is
produced, departs and is removed from the Maker thereof, as having no
Intrinsic dependence upon him; Whereas from him that begets, there is a
Principle and Power infused into that which is begotten, and mingled therewith,
that contains the whole nature thereof, as being a kind of Avulsion from the
Begetter. Wherefore since the World is not like to those works, that are
Artificially made and compacted by men, but has a participation of Life and
Divinity, which God has inserted into it and mingled with it; God is therefore
rightly styled by Plato, not only the Maker, but also the Father of the whole
World, as being an Animal. To the same purpose also Plotinus, (...)^ ^n. 4. L.
3. c. ^*
The World being made as a large and stately Edifice, was neither cut off and
separated from its Maker, nor yet mingled and confounded with him. Forasmuch as
he still remains above Presiding over it: The World being so animated, as
rather to be possessed by Soul, than to possess it, it lying in that great
Psyche which sustaineth it, as a net in the waters, all moistened with Life.
Thus Plotinus supposing the whole Corporeal World to be Animated, affirms it
neither to be cut off from its Maker (by which Maker he here understands the
Mundane Soul) nor yet that Mundane Soul it self, to be Immersed into its Body
the World, after the same manner as our humane Souls are into these Bodies; but
so to preside over it, and act it, as a thing Elevated above it. And though
according to him, that Second Divine Hypostasis of Nous or Intellect, be in
like manner Elevated above this Mundane Soul; and again that First Hypostasis
or Supreme Deity, (called by him Unity and Goodness) above Intellect; yet the
Corporeal World could not be said, to be cut off from these neither; they being
all three ( Monad, Mind, and Soul) closely and intimately united together.

XXX. The Hebrews were the only Nation, who before Christianity for several
ages, professedly opposed the Polytheism and Idolatry of the Pagan World.
Wherefore it may be probably concluded, that they had the right Notion of this
Pagan Polytheism and understood what it consisted in, viz. Whether in
worshipping Many Unmade, Self-originated Deities, as Partial Creators of the
World; or else in worshipping, besides the Supreme God, other Created Beings
Superior to Men? Now Philo plainly understood the Pagan Polytheism after this
latter way; as may appear from this passage of his in his Book concerning the
Confusion of Languages, where speaking of the Supreme God (the Maker and Lord
of the whole World) and of his (...), his Innumerable Assistent Powers, P. 345*
both visible and invisible, he adds, (...)^ Wherefore some men being struck
with admiration of both these Worlds, the Visible and the Invisible, have not
only Deified the whole of them, but also their several Parts, as the Sun, and
the Moon, and the whole Heaven, they not scrupling to call these, Gods. Which
Notion and Language of theirs, Moses respected in those words of his, Thou Lord
the King of Gods; he thereby declaring the transcendency of the Supreme God
above all those his subjects called Gods. To the same purpose Philo writes
also in his Commentary upon the Decalogue, 753.
(...)^ Wherefore removing all such imposture, Let us worship no Beings, that
are by Nature Brothers and Germane to us, though endued with far more pure and
immortal Essences than we are. For all Created things as such, have a kind of
Germane and Brotherly Equality with one another, the maker of all things being
their common Father. But let us deeply infix this first and most holy
commandment in our breasts, to acknowledge and worship One only Highest God.
And again afterward, (...)^ They who worship the Sun, and the Moon, and the
whole Heaven and World, and the Principal parts of them as Gods, err, in that
they worship the Subjects of the Prince; whereas the Prince alone ought to be
worshipped. Thus according to Philo, the Pagan Polytheism consisted, in giving
Religious Worship, besides the Supreme God, to other Created understanding
Beings, and Parts of the World, more pure and immortal than men.

Flavius Josephus in his Judaick Antiquities, extolling Abraham's Wisdom and
Piety, writes thus concerning him, (...), which some would understand in this
manner, that Abraham was the first who publicly declared, that there was one
God the Demiurgus or maker of the whole world; as if all mankind besides at
that time, had supposed, the world to have been made not by One but by Many
Gods. But the true meaning of those words is this, That Abraham was the first,
who in that degenerate age, publicly declared that the Maker of the whole
world, was the One only God, and alone to be Religiously Worshipped:
accordingly as it follows afterward in the same writer, (...), to whom alone
men ought to give honor and thanks. And the reason hereof is there also set
down, (...)^ Because all those other beings, that were then worshipped as Gods,
whatsoever any of them contributed to the happiness of mankind, they did it not
by their own power, but by his appointment and command; he instancing in the
Sun and Moon, and Earth and Sea, which are all made and ordered by a higher
power and providence, by the force whereof they contribute to our utility. As
if he should have said, That no Created Being, ought to be Religiously
worshipped, but the Creator only. And this agrees with what we read in
Scripture concerning Abraham, that he called upon the Name of the Lord, (...),
Gen 21.23.
The God of the whole World; that is, he worshipped no particular Created
Beings, as the other Pagans at that time did, but only that Supreme Universal
Numen, which made and contains the whole World. And thus Maimonides
interprets that place, De Idol. c. 1.. 7.
(...) Abraham began to teach, that none ought to be Religiously Worshipped,
save only the God of the whole World. Moreover the same Josephus afterward in
his Twelfth Book, brings in Aristaeus (who seems to have been a secret
Proselyted Greek) pleading with Ptolemaeus Philadelphus, in behalf of the Jews
and their Liberty, after this manner; (...)^ It would well agree with your
Goodness and Magnanimity, to free the Jews from that miserable Captivity which
they are under: since the same God who governs your Kingdom, gave Laws to
them, as I have by diligent search found out. For both They and we, do alike
worship the God who made all things, we calling him Zene, because he gives life
to all. Wherefore for the honor of that God, whom they worship after a
singular manner, please you to indulge them the liberty of returning to their
native country. Where Aristaeus also according to the sense of Pagans thus
concludes; Know, O King, that I intercede not for these Jews as having any
cognation with them, (...), but all men being the Workmanship of God, and
knowing that he is delighted with beneficence, I therefore thus exhort you.

As for the latter Jewish Writers and Rabbis, it is certain that the
generality of them supposed the Pagans to have acknowledged One Supreme and
Universal Numen, and to have worshipped all their other Gods, only as his
Ministers, or as Mediators between him and them: Maimonides in Halacoth (...)
describes the Rise of the Pagan Polytheism in the days of Enosh, after this
manner: (...) In the days of Enosh, the Sons of men grievously erred, and the
wisemen of that age became brutish (even Enosh himself being in the number of
them) and their error was this, that since God had created the Stars and
Spheres, to govern the world, and placing them on high, had bestowed this
honor upon them, that they should be his Ministers and subservient
Instruments; men ought therefore to praise them, honor them, and worship them:
this being the pleasure of the Blessed God, that men should magnify and honor
those whom himself has magnified and honored, as a King will have his
Ministers to be reverenced, this honor redounding to himself. Again the same
Maimonides in the beginning of the Second Chapter of that Book writes thus;
(...) (...) The Foundation of that Commandment against strange Worship (now
commonly called Idolatry) is this, that no man should worship any of the
Creatures whatsoever, neither Angel, nor Sphere, nor Star, nor any of the four
Elements, nor any thing made out of them. For though he that worships these
things, know that the Lord is God, and Superior to them all, and worships
those Creatures no otherwise, than Enosh and the rest of that age did, yet is
he nevertheless guilty of Strange Worship, or Idolatry. And that, after the
times of Enosh also, in succeeding ages, the Polytheism of the Pagan Nations,
was no other than this, the worshipping (besides One Supreme God) of other
created Beings, as the Ministers of his Providence, and as Middles or Mediators
betwixt Him and Men, is declared likewise by Maimonides (in his More Nevochim)
to have been the Universal Belief of all the Hebrews or Jews; (...) You know
that whosoever commits Idolatry, P 1. c. 36.
he does it not as supposing, that there is no other God besides that which he
worshippeth, for it never came into the minds of any Idolaters, nor never will,
that that Statue which is made by them of metal, or stone, or wood, is that
very God who created Heaven and Earth; but they worship those Statues and
Images only as the representation of something, which is a Mediator between God
and them. Moses Albelda the Author of the Book entitled, (...) Gnolath Tamid,
resolves all the Pagan Polytheism and Idolatry, into these Two Principles, one
of which respected God, and the other men themselves: (...) The Idolaters first
argued thus, Fol. 147.
in respect of God; that since he was of such transcendent perfection above
men, it was no possible for men to be united to or have communion with him,
otherwise than by means of certain Middle Beings or Mediators; as it is the
manner of Earthly Kings, to have petitions conveyed to them by the hands of
Mediators and Intercessors. Secondly they thus argued also in respect of
themselves; That being corporeal so that they could not apprehend God
Abstractly, they must needs have something Sensible, to excite and stir up
their devotion and fix their Imagination upon. Joseph Albo in the Book called
Ikkarim, concludes that Ahab and the other Idolatrous Kings of Israel and Judah
worshipped other Gods upon those two accounts mentioned by Maimonides and no
otherwise, namely that the Supreme God was honored by worshipping of his
Ministers, and that there ought to be certain Middles and Mediators betwixt him
and Men, P. 3. c. 18.
(...) Ahab and other Kings of Israel and Judah, and even Solomon himself,
erred in worshipping the Stars upon those two accounts already mentioned out of
Maimonides, notwithstanding that they believed the Existence of God and his
Unity; they partly conceiving that they should honor God in worshipping of his
Ministers, and partly worshipping them as Mediators betwixt God and themselves.
And the same Writer determines the meaning of that First Commandment (which is
to him the Second) Thou shall have no other Gods before my face, to be this,
(...) Thou shall not set up other Inferior Gods as Mediators betwixt me and
thy self, or worship them so, as thinking to honor me thereby. R. David Kimchi
(upon 2 Kings 17.) writes thus, concerning that Israelitish P^i^st, who by the
King of Assyria's command, was sent to Samariah to teach the new inhabitan^s
thereof to worship the God of that Land (of whom it is afterward said, that
they both feared the Lord and served their Idols;) (...) If he should have
altogether prohibited them their Idolatry, they would not have hearkened to him,
that being a thing which all those Eastern people were educated in from their
very Infancy, insomuch that it was a kind of First Principle to them. Wherefore
he permitted them to worship all their several Gods, as before they had done,
only he required them to direct the intention of their minds to the God of
Israel ( as the Supreme) for those Gods could do them neither Good nor Hurt,
otherwise than according to his Will and pleasure: but they worshipped them to
this purpose, that they might be MEDIATORS betwixt them and the Creator. In
the Book Nitzachon, all the Polytheism and Idolatry of the Pagans, is reduced
to these Three Heads; First (...) When they worshipped the Ministers of God, as
thinking to honor him thereby; and Secondly, (...) When they worshipped them,
as Orators and Intecessors for them with God; and Lastly (...) when they
worshipped Statues of wood and stone, for Memorials of him. And though it be
true that Isaak Abrabanel (upon 2 Kings 17.) does enumerate more Species of
Pagan Idolatry, even to the number of Ten, yet are they all of them but so many
several Modes of Creature-worship; and there is no such thing amongst them to
be found, as the worshipping of many Unmade Independent Deities, as Partial
Creators of the World.

Moreover those Rabbinick Writers commonly interpret certain places of the
Scripture to this sense, That the Pagan Idolaters, did notwithstanding,
acknowledge, One Supreme Deity, as that Jeremy 10.7. Who is there that will not
fe^r thee thou King of Nations? For amongst all their wise men and in all their
Kingdoms, there is none like unto thee; though they are become all together
brutish, and their worshipping of stocks is a doctrine of vanity: For
Maimonides thus glosseth upon those Words, (...) As if he should say, all the
Gentiles know, that thou art the only Supreme God, but their error and folly
consists in this, that they think this vanity of worshipping Inferior Gods,
to be a thing agreeable to thy will. And thus also Kimchi in his Commentaries,
(...) Who will not fear thee? It is fit that even the Nations themselves who
worship Idols, should fear thee, for thou art their King; and indeed amongst
all the wisemen of the Nations and in all their Kingdoms it is generally
acknowledged, that th^re is none like unto thee. Neither do they worship the
Stars otherwise, th^n as Mediators betwixt thee and them. Their wise men know
that a^ Id^l is nothing; and though they worship Stars, yet do they worship
th^^ (...) thy Minist^^s, and that they may be Intercessors for them. Another
place is that, Malachi 1.11. which though we read in the Future Tense, as a
^roph^cy of the Gentiles, yet the Jews understand it of that pre^^nt time, when
those words were written, From the rising of the Sun to the going down thereof
my name is great among the Gentiles; and in every place incense is offered to
my name, and a pure oblation, for my name is great amongst the Gentiles, says
the Lord of Hosts. But you profane it, etc. Upon which words R. Solomon
glosseth thus, (...) The Pagan Polytheists and Idolaters Know, that there is
One God Superior to all those other Gods and Idols worshipped by them; and in
every place are there Free-will-offerings, brought to my name, even amongst the
Gentiles. And Kimchi agrees with him herein, (...) Although the Pagans
worshipped the Host of Heaven, yet do they confess me to be the first Cause,
they worshipping them only as in their opinion certain Mediators betwixt me and
them. Whether either of these two places of Scripture, does sufficiently prove,
what these Jews would have, or no; yet however is it evident from their
interpretations of them, that themselves supposed, the Pagans to have
acknowledged, One Supreme Deity, and that their Other Gods, were all but his
Creatures and Ministers. Nevertheless there is another place of Scripture which
seems to found more to this purpose, and accordingly has been thus interpreted
by Rabbi Solomon and others, Psalm. 65.6. where God is called (...) The
Confidence of all the Ends of the Earth, and of them that are afar off in the
Sea, that is, even of all the Pagan World.

Thus we see plainly, that the Hebrew Doctors and Rabbis, have been generally
of this persuasion, that the Pagan Nations anciently, at least the Intelligent
amongst them, acknowledged One Supreme God of the Whole World; and that all
their Other Gods were but Creatures and Inferior Ministers; which were
worshipped by them upon these Two Accounts, either as thinking, that the Honor
done to them redounded to the Supreme; or else that they might be (...), and
(...), their Mediators, and Intercessors, Orators, and Negotiators with him.
Which Inferior Gods of the Pagans, were supposed by these Hebrews, to be
chiefly of Two Kinds, Angels, and Stars or Spheres. The Latter of which the
Jews as well as Pagans, concluded to be Animated and Intellectual: For thus
Maimonides expressly, J^sude Hatterah c. 3.. 9.
(...) The Stars and Spheres are every one of them Animated, and endued with
Life, Knowledge and Understanding. And they acknowledge him, who commanded and
the World was made, every one of them, according to their degree and excellency
praising and honoring him, as the Angels do. And this they would confirm from
that place of Scripture, Neh. 9.6. Thou, even thou art Lord alone, Thou have
made Heaven, the Heaven of Heavens with all their Host, the Earth with all
things that are therein, the Seas and all that is therein, and Thou preservest
them all; and the Host of Heaven Worshippeth Thee: The Host of Heaven being
commonly put for the Stars.

XXXI. But Lastly, this same thing is plainly confirmed from the Scriptures of
the New Testament also; That the Gentiles and Pagans, however Polytheists and
Idolaters, were not unacquainted with the knowledge of the True God, that is,
of the One only Self-existent and Omnipotent Being, which Comprehends all
things under him: From whence it must needs follow, that their other Many Gods,
were all of them supposed to have been derived from this One, and to be
Dependent on him.

For First, St. Paul in his Epistle to the Romans tells us, that these Gentiles
or Pagans did (...), Hold the Truth in Unrighteousness, or Unjustly Detain and
Imprison the same. Which is chiefly to be understood, of the Truth concerning
God, as appears from that which follows, and therefore implies the Pagans not
to have been unfurnshed of such a knowledge of God, as might and ought to have
kept them from all kinds of Idolatry; however by their Default, it proved
ineffectual to that end, as is afterward declared; (...), V. 28.
They liked not to retain God in the Agnition, or Practical Knowledge of him.
Where there is a distinction to be observed, betwixt (...) and (...), the
Knowledge and the Agnition of God; the former whereof in this Chapter, is
plainly granted to the Pagans, though the Latter be here denied them; because
they lapsed into Polytheism and Idolatry; which is the meaning of these words,
V. 25.
(...), They changed the truth of God into a lie. Again the same Apostle there
affirms, That the (...), That which may be Known of God, was manifest within
them, God himself having showed it unto them. There is something of God
Vnknowable and Incomprehensible by all Mortals, but that of God which is
Knowable, his Eternal Power and Godhead, with the Attributes belonging
thereunto, is made manifest to all mankind from his works. The invisible things
of him, from the Creation of the World, being clearly seen and understood by
the things that are made. Moreover this Apostle expressly declares, the Pagans
to have known God, in that Censure which he gives of them, V. 21.
(...), that when they Knew God they Glorified him not as God; because they
fell into Polytheism and Idolatry. Though the Apostle here instanceth only in
the Latter of those Two, their changing the Glory of the Incorruptible God,
into an Image made like to Corruptible man and to birds and beasts and creeping
things. The reason whereof is, because this Idolatry of the Pagans, properly so
called, that is, their worshipping of stocks and stones, formed into the
likeness of Man or Beast, was generally taken amongst the Jews, for the
grossest of all their Religious Miscarriages. De Decal. p. 753.
Thus Philo plainly declares; (...), etc. Whosoever worship the Sun, and Moon,
and the whole Heaven, and World, and the chief Parts thereof, as Gods, do
unquestionably Err (they honoring the subjects of the Prince) but they are
guilty of less iniquity and injustice, than those who form wood and stone, gold
and silver, and the like matters, into Statues to worship them, etc. of which
assertion he afterward gives this account, (...), because these have cut off
the most excellent Fulcrum of the Soul, the persuasion of the Everliving God,
by means whereof, like unballasted ships, they are tossed up and down
perpetually, nor can be ever able to rest in any safe harbor. And from hence
it came to pass, that the Polytheism of the Pagans, their worshipping of
Inferior Gods (as Stars and Demons) was vulgarly called also by the Jews and
Christians, Idolatry, it being so denominated by them a famosiore specie.
Lastly, the Apostle plainly declares, that the error of the Pagan Superstition
universally consisted (not in worshipping Many Independent Gods and Creators,
but) injoyning Creature-worship, as such, some way or other, with the Worship
of the Creator; V. 25.
(...), which words are either to be thus rendered; They [religiously]
worshipped the Creature Besides the Creator, that Prepositon being often used
in this sense, as for example, in this of Aristotle, where he affirms
concerning Plato, Met L 1. c. 6.
that he did (...), (not make Numbers to be the Things themselves, as the
Pythagoreans had done, but) Unity and Numbers to be Besides the things; or
(...), Numbers to exist by themselves, Besides the Sensibles. He by Numbers
meaning, as Aristotle himself there expounds it, (...), the Ideas contained in
the First Intellect (which was Plato's Second Divine Hypostasis) as also by
(...), that Ipsum Unum, or Unity which gives being to those Ideas, is
understood Plato's First Divine Hypostasis. Or else the Words ought to be
translated thus; And worshipped the Creature Above or More than the Creator,
that Preposition (...), being sometimes used Comparatively, so as to signify
Excess, as for example in Luke 13.2. Think that these Galileans were (...),
Sinners beyond all the Galileans? And ver. 4. Think you, that those eighteen
upon whom the Tower of Siloam fell, were (...) debtors above all the men that
dwelt in Jerusalem. According to either of which interpretations, it is
supposed, that the Pagans did worship the True God, the Creator of the whole
World; though they worshipped the Creature also, Besides him, or (perhaps in
some sense) Above him and More than him also. But as for that other
Interpretation, of (...), which Beza chose rather to follow, that they
worshipped the Creature, the Creator being wholly Passed by, this is no true
Literal Version, but only a Gloss or Commentary upon the words, made according
to a certain preconceived and extravavagant opinion, that the Pagans did not at
all worship the Supreme God or Creator, but universally transfer all their
worship upon the Creature only. But in what sense the Pagans might be said to
worship the Creatures, Above or Beyond or More than the Creator (because it is
not possible that the Creature, as a Creature, should be worshipped with more
Internal and Mental Honor, than the Creator thereof, looked upon as such) we
leave others to enquire. Whether or no, because when Religious Worship, which
properly and only belongs to the Creator, and not at all to the Creature, is
transferred from the Creator upon the Creature, according to a
Scripture-Interpretation and Account, such may be said to worship the Creature
more than the Creator? Or whether because some of these Pagans, might more
frequently address their Devotions to their Inferior Gods (as Stars, Demons
and Hero's) as thinking the Supreme God, either Above their Worship, or
Incomprehensible, or Inaccessible by them? Or lastly, Whether because the Image
and Statue-worshippers among the Pagans (whom the Apostle there principally
regards) did direct all their External Devotion to Sensible Objects, and
Creaturely Forms? However it cannot be thought, that the Apostle here taxes the
Pagans, merely for worshipping Creatures Above the Creator, as if they had not
at all offended, had they worshipped them only in an Equality with him; but
doubtless their sin was, that they gave any Religious Worship at all to the
Creature, though in way of Aggravation of their crime, it be said, that they
also worshipped the Creature more than the Creator, Thus we see plainly, that
the Pagan Superstition and Idolatry (according to the True Scripture notion of
it) consisted not in Worshipping of Many Creators, but in Worshipping the
Creatures together with the Creator.

Besides this we have in the Acts of the Apostles an Oration, which St. Paul
made at Athens in the Areopagitick Court, beginning after this manner; Ye men
of Athens, I perceive that ye are every way more than ordinarily Religious; for
the word (...) seems to be taken there in a good sense, it being not only more
likely that St. Paul would in the beginning of his Oration thus captare
benevolentiam, conciliate their benevolence, with some commendation of them,
but also very unlikely that he would call their worshipping of the True God by
the name of Superstition, for so it follows; For as I passed by and beheld
your sacred things (or monuments) I found an Altar with this Inscription,
(...), TO THE UNKNOWN GOD. It is true that both Philostratus and Pausanias
write, that there were at Athens, (...), Altars of Unknown Gods: but their
meaning in this might well be, not that there were Altars Dedicated to Unknown
Gods Plurally, but that there were several Altars, which had this Singular
Inscription, TO THE UNKNOWN GOD. And that there was at least One such, besides
this Scripture-record, is evident from that Dialogue in Lucian's Works,
entitled Philopatris, where Critias uses this form of Oath, (...), No, by the
Unknown God at Athens: and Triephon in the close of that Dialogue speaks
thus, (...), etc. But we having found out that Unknown God at Athens, and
worshipped him, with hands stretched up to Heaven, will give thanks to him, as
having been thought worthy to be made subject to this power. Which passages, as
they do unquestionably refer to that Athenian Inscription either upon One or
more Altars, so does the latter of them plainly imply, that this Unknown God of
the Athenians, was the Supreme Governor of the World. And so it follows in St.
Paul's Oration, (...), Whom therefore you ignorantly worship (under this name
of the Unknown God) Him declare I unto you, the God that made the World, and
all things in it, the Lord of Heaven and Earth. From which place we may upon
firm Scripture-Authority conclude these Two Things; First, that by the Unknown
God of the Athenians, was meant the Only True God, He who made the World and
all things in it; who in all probability was therefore styled by them, (...),
the Unknown God, because he is not only Invisible but also Incomprehensible by
mortals; of whom Josephus against Appion writes thus, That he is (...),
knowable to us only by the Effects of his Power, but as to his own Essence,
Vnknowable or Incomprehensible. But when in Dion Cassius the God of the Jews is
said to be (...), not only Invisible but also Ineffable, and when he is called
in Lucan Incerius Deus, an Uncertain God, the reason hereof seems to have been,
not only because there was no Image of him, but also because he was not
vulgarly then known by any Proper Name, the Tetragrammaton being religiously
forborne amongst the Jews in common use, that it might not be profaned. And
what some learned men have here mentioned upon this occasion, of the Pagans
sometimes sacrifying (...), to the Proper and Convenient God, without
signifying any name, seems to be nothing to this purpose; that proceeding only
from a Superstitious Fear of these Pagans (supposing several Gods to preside
over several things) lest they should be mistaken, in not applying to the Right
and Proper God, in such certain cases, and so their Devotion prove unsuccessful
and ineffectual. But that this Unknown God is here said to be ignorantly
worshipped by the Athenians, is to be understood chiefly in regard of their
Polytheism and Idolatry. The Second thing that may be concluded from hence is
this, That these Athenian Pagans, did (...), Religiously Worship the True God,
the Lord of Heaven and Earth; and so we have a Scripture-confutation also, of
that opinion, That the Pagans did not at all worship the Supreme God.

Lastly, St. Paul citing this passage out of Aratus a Heathen Poet, concerning
Zeus or Jupiter, (...) -- For we are his Offspring, and interpreting the same
of the True God, in whom we live and move and have our being; we have also here
a plain Scripture-acknowledgment that by the Zeus of the Greekish Pagans, was
sometimes at least meant the True God. And indeed that Aratus his Zeus was
neither a man born in Crete nor in Arcadia, but the Maker and Supreme Governor
of the whole World, is evident both from the antecedent and the subsequent
Verses. For Aratus his Phenomenon begin thus, (...) -- (which in Tully's
Version is Ab Jove Musarum Primordia) and then follows a Description of this
Zeus or Jupiter: -- (...)
(...),
(...),
(...)^
(...)^
To this sense; Him of whom we men are never silent; and of whom all things are
full, he permeating and pervading all and being every where; and whose
beneficence we all constantly make use of and enjoy: For we also are his
Offspring. Where Theon the Scholiast writes thus, (...)^ Aratus being about
to declare the Position of the Stars, does in the first place, very decorously
and becomingly invoke Zeus, the Father and Maker of them. For by Zeus is here
to be understood the Demiurgus of the World, or as he afterward expresses it,
(...), the God who made all things. Notwithstanding which, we must confess,
that this Scholiast there adds, that some of these Passages of the Poet, and
even that cited by the Apostle, (...), may be understood also in another sense,
of the (...), the Physical Jupiter, that is, the Air: but without the least
shadow of Probability, and for no other reason, as we conceive, but only to
show his Philological Skill. However this is set down by him, in the First
place as the genuine and proper sense of those words, (...)^ This agrees with
that Title of Jupiter, when he is called the Father of Gods and men: For if he
made Us, and all these other things for our use, we may well be called His, and
also style him our Father and Maker. And that this was the only Notion, which
the Poet here had of Zeus or Jupiter, appears undeniably also from the
following words, as -- (...)
(...) --
Who as a kind and benign Father, shows lucky Signs to men; which to
understand of the Air were very absurd. And (...),
(...)
(...)^
For he also has fastened the Signs in Heaven, distinguishing Constellations,
and having appointed Stars to rise and set at several times of the year.

And from this, (...), Therefore is He always Propitiated and Placated both
First and Last. Upon which the Scholiast thus, (...)^ This perhaps refers to
the Libations, in that the First of them was for the Heavenly G^ds, the Second
for Heroes, and the Last for Jupiter the Savior. From whence it plainly
appears also, that the Pagans in their Sacrifices (or Religious Rites) did not
forget Jupiter the Savior, that is, the Supr^me God.

Lastly, from his concluding thus; (...)^ Where the Supreme God is saluted, as
the Great Wonder of the World, and Interest of Mankind.

Wherefore it is evident from Aratus his Context, that by his Zeus or Jupiter
was really meant the Supreme God, the Maker of the whole World; which being
plainly confirmed also by St. Paul and the Scripture, ought to be a matter out
of Controversy amongst us. Neither is it reasonable to think that Aratus was
Singular in this, but that he spoke according to the Received Theology of the
Greeks, and that not only amongst Philosophers and Learned Men, but even the
Vulgar also. Nor do we think that that Prayer of the ancient Athenians,
commended by M. Antoninus, for its simplicity, is to be understood otherwise,
L. 5.. 5.
(...), Rain Rain O Good (or Gracious) Jupiter, upon the fields and pastures of
the Athenians: upon which the Emperor thus, (...), We should either not pray at
all (to God) er else thus plainly and freely. And since the Latins had the very
same Notion of Jupiter, that the Greeks had of Zeus, it cannot be denied but
that they commonly by their Jupiter also, undestood the One Supreme God, the
Lord of Heaven and Earth. We know nothing that can be objected against this,
from the Scripture, unless it should be that Passage of St. Paul, In the Wisdom
of God the World by Wisdom knew not God. But the meaning thereof is no other
than this, that the Generality of the World before Christianity, by their
Natural Light, and Contemplation of the works of God, did not attain to such a
Practical Knowledge of God, as might both free them from Idolatry, and
Effectually bring them to a Holy Life.

XXXII. But in order to a fuller explication of this Pagan Theology, and giving
yet a more Satisfactory Account concerning it, P. 314, 315.
there are Three Heads requisite to be insisted on; First, That the Intelligent
Pagans worshipped the One Supreme God under Many Several Names; Secondly, That
besides this One God, they worshipped also Many Gods, that were indeed
Inferior Deities Subordinate to Him; Thirdly, That they worshipped both the
Supreme and Inferior Gods, in Images, Statues and Symbols, sometimes Abusively
called also Gods. We begin with the First, That the Supreme God amongst the
Pagans, was Polyonymous, and worshipped under several Personal Names, according
to several Notions and Considerations of him, from his Several Attributes and
Powers, Manifestations, and Effects in the World.

It has been already observed out of Origin, P. 114, 115.
that not only the Egyptians, but also the Syrians, Persians, Indians,, and
other Barbarian Pagans, had beside their Vulgar Theology, another more Arcane
and Recondit one, amongst their Priests and Learned Men: and that the same was
true concerning the Greeks and Latins also, is unquestionably evident from that
account, that has been given by us of their Philosophic Theology. Where by
the Vulgar Theology of the Pagans, we understand, not only their Mythical or
Fabulous, but also their Political or Civil Theology, Civ. D.L. 4. c. 8.
it being truly affirmed by St. Austin concerning both these, Et Civilis and
Fabulosa, ambae Fabulosae sunt, ambaeque Civiles, That both the Fabulous
Theology of the Pagans was in part their Civil, and their Civil was Fabulous.
And by their more Arcane or Recondit Theology, is doubtless meant, that which
they conceived to be the Natural and True Theology. Which Distinction of the
Natural and True Theology, from the Civil and Political, as it was acknowledged
by all the Ancient Greek Philosophers, but most expressly by Antistines, Plato,
Aristotle and the Stoics; so was it owned and much insisted upon, both by
Scaevola that famous Roman Pontifex, and by Varro that most Learned Antiquary;
they both agreeing, that the Civil Theology then established by the Roman Laws,
was only the Theology of the Vulgar, but not the True; and that there was
another Theology besides it, called by them Natural, which was the Theology of
Wise men and of Truth: nevertheless granting a necessity that in Cities and
Commonwealths, besides this Natural and True Theology (which the generality of
the Vulgar were incapable of) there should be another Civil or Political
Theology, accommodate to their apprehensions; which Civil Theology differed
from the Natural, only by a certain mixture of Fabulosity in it, and was
therefore looked upon by them, as a Middle, betwixt the Natural, and the
Fabulous or Poetical Theology.

Wherefore it was acknowledged, that the Vulgar Theology of the Pagans, that
is, not only their Fabulous, but even their Civil also, was oftentimes very
discrepant from the Natural and True Theology; though the wise men amongst them
in all ages, endeavored as much as they could, to dissemble and disguise this
Difference, and by Allegorizing the Poetic Fables of the Gods, to bring that
Theology, into some seeming conformity with the Natural, and Philosophic; but
what they could not in this way reconcile, was by them excused upon the
necessity of the Vulgar.

The Fabulous Theology both of the Greeks and Romans, did not only Generate all
the other Gods, but even Jupiter himself also, their Supreme Numen, it
assigning him both a Father and a Mother, a Grandfather and a Grandmother. And
though the Romans did not plainly adopt this into their Civil Theology, yet are
they taxed by St. Austin for suffering the Statue of Jupiter's Nurse to be kept
in the Capitol for a Religious Monument. And however this differed nothing at
all from that Atheistick Doctrine of Evemerus, That all the Gods were really no
other than Mortal Men, yet was it tolerated and connived at by the Politicians,
in way of necessary compliance with the Vulgar, it being so extremely difficult
for them to conceive any such Living Being or Animal, as was never Made and
without Beginning. Insomuch that Callimachus, who would by no means admit of
Jupiter's Sepulcher, either in Crete or Arcadia (but looked upon it as a foul
reproach to him) for this reason, (...), Because he was Immortal and could
never die; did notwithstanding himself, attribute a Temporary Generation and
Nativity to him, as Origin and others observe. Nevertheless, the generality of
the more Civilized and Intelligent Pagans, and even of the Poets themselves,
did all this while constantly retain thus much of the Natural and True Theology
amongst them, That Jupiter was the Father both of Gods and Men* that is, the
Maker of the whole World, and consequently himself Without Father, Eternal and
Unmade, according to that Peleadean Oracle before cited out of Pausanias,
(...)^ --

Again the Civil Theology of the Pagans as well as the Poetic, had not only
many Fantastic Gods in it, but also an appearance of a Plurality of
Independent Deities; it making Several Supreme in their several Territories and
Functions; as One to be the Chief Ruler over the Heavens, Another over the Air
and Winds, Another over the Sea, and Another over the Earth and Hell: One to be
the Giver of Corn, Another of Wine; One the God of Learning, Another the God of
Pleasure, and Another the God of War; and so for all other things. But the
Natural Theology of the Pagans (so called) though it did admit a Plurality of
Gods too, in a certain sense, that is, of Inferior Deities Subordinate to One
Supreme, yet did it neither allow of more Independent Deities than One, nor own
any Gods at all but such as were Natural, that is, such as had a Real Existence
in Nature and the World without, and not in men's Opinion Only. And these Varro
concluded, to be no other than First, the Soul of the World, and then the
Animated Parts thereof Superior to men; that is, One Supreme Universal Numen
Unmade, and other Particular Generated Gods, such as Stars, Demons, and Heroes.
Wherefore all the other Gods besides these, are frequently exploded by Pagan
Writers (as Cicero and others) under the Name of Dii Poetici, that is, not
Philosophical, but Poetical Gods, and Dii Commentitii and Fictitii, that is,
not Natural and Real, but Feigned and Fictitious Gods. They in the mean time
giving this Account of them, that they were indeed nothing else, but so Many
Several Names and Notions of One Supreme Numen, according to his Several Powers
and various Manifestations, and Effects in the World; it being thought fit by
the wisdom of the ancient Pagan Theologers, that all those manifold Glories and
Perfections of the Deity, should not be huddled up, and as it were crowded and
crumpled together, in one General Acknowledgment of an Invisible Being the
Maker of the world, but that they should be distinctly and severally displayed,
and each of them adored singly and apart; and this too (for the greater Pomp
and Solemnity) under so many Personal Names. Which perhaps the Unskilful and
sottish Vulgar, might sometimes mistake, not only for so many Real and
Substantial, but also Independent and Self-existent Deities.

We have before proved that one and the same Supreme God, in the Egyptian
Theology, had several Proper and Personal Names given him, according to several
Notions of him, and his several Powers and Effects; Jamblichus himself in that
passage already cited, De Mist. Aeg.
plainly affirming thus much, (...), etc. (...)^ The Demiurgical Mind and
President of Truth, as with wisdom it proceeds to Generation, and brings
forth the hidden Power of the occult Reasons, contained within it self, into
light, is called in the Egyptian Language Ammon; as it Artificially effects all
things with Truth, Phtha; as it is productive of Good things Osiris; besides
which it has also several other Names, according to its other Powers and
Energies: as namely Neith (or according to Proclus his Copy (...), Neithas) the
Tutelar God of the City Sais, from whence probably the Greek (...) was derived,
(the Athenians being said to have been at first, a Colony of these Saites) and
this is The Divine Wisdom diffusing it self thorough all. So likewise Serapis,
which though some would have to be the Sun, is by others plainly described as
an Universal Numen. P. 95.
As Aristides in his Eighth Oration upon this God Serapis; (...)^ They who
inhabit the great City in Egypt, call upon this God Serapis, as their only
Jupiter, he being supposed to be no way defective in Power, but to Pervade all
things, and to Fill the whole Universe. And whereas the Powers and Honors of
the other Gods are divided, and some of them are invoked for one thing, and
some for another; This is looked upon by them as the Coryphaeus of all the
Gods, who contains the beginning and end of all things, and who is able to
supply all wants. Cneph is also described by Eusebius as that Divine Intellect,
which was the Demiurgus of the world and which gives life to all things, as he
is by Plutarch said to be (...) or Unmade, so that this was also another
Egyptian Name of God; as likewise was Emeph and Eicton in Jamblichus; though
these may be severally distinguished into a Trinity of Divine Hypostases.
Lastly, when Isis, which was sometimes called Multimammea, and made all over
full of Breasts, to signify her Feeding all things, thus describes her self in
Apuleius, Summa Numinum, Prima Coelitum, Deorum Dearumque facies Vniformis,
cujus numen Vnicum multiformi specie, ritu va^io, nomine multijugo totus
veneratur Orbis; as she plainly makes her self to be the Supreme Deity, so does
she intimate, that all the Gods and Goddess^s were compendiously contained in
Her Alone, and that she (i.e. the Supreme God) was worshipped under several
personal Names and with different rites, over the whole Pagan World. Moreover
this is particularly noted concerning the Egyptians by Damascius the
Philosopher, that, (...), They multiplied the First Intelligible (or the
Supreme Deity) breaking and dividing the same into the Names and Properties of
Many Gods. Now the Egyptian Theology, was in a manner, the Pattern of all the
rest, but especially of those European Theologies, of the Greeks and Romans.

Who likewise, that they often Made Many Gods of One, is evident from their
bestowing so many Proper and Personal Names, upon each of those Inferior Gods
of theirs, The Sun, and The Moon, and The Earth; The First whereof, Usually
called Apollo, had therefore this Epithet of (...) commonly given to him, the
God with many Names. Which many Proper Names of his, Macrobius insisteth upon
in his Saturnalia, though probably making more of them than indeed they were.
And the Moon was not only so called, but also Diana, and Lucina, and Hecate,
and otherwise, insomuch that this Goddess also, has been styled Polyonymous as
well as her brother the Sun. And Lastly, the Earth besides those Honorary
Titles, of Bona Dea, and Magna Dea, and Matter Deorum, The Good Goddess, and the
Great Goddess, and the Mother of the Gods, was multiplied by them into those
Many Goddesses, of Vesta, and Rhea, and Cybele, and Ceres, and Proserpina, and
Ops, etc. And for this cause was she thus described by Aeschylus, (...)^ Et
Tellus Multorum Nominum Facies Vna. Now if these Inferior Gods of the Pagans,
had each of them so many Personal Names bestowed upon them, much more might the
Supreme God be Polyonymous amongst them; and so indeed he was commonly styled,
as that learned Grammarian Hesychius intimates, upon that word (...), they
called the Monad thus, and it was also the Epithet of Apollo; where by the
Monad according to the Pythagorick Language, is meant the Supreme Deity, which
was thus styled by the Pagans (...), the Being that has many Names. And
accordingly Cleanthes thus begins that forecited Hymn of his to him, (...),
Thou most Glorious of all the Immortal Gods, who art called by Many Names. And
Zeno his Master, in Laertius expressly declares, (...)^ God is called by many
several Names, according to his several Powers and Virtues, whose Instances
shall be afterward taken notice of. Thus also the Writer De Mundo, (...)^ God
though he be but one, is Polyonymous, and variously denominated from his
several attributes, and the effects produced by him. Quaecunque voles (says
Seneca) illi Propria Nomina aptabis, De Ben. L. ^.
vim aliquam Effectumque Coelestium rerum continentia. Tot Appellationes ejus
possunt esse quot Munera: You may give God whatsoever Proper Names you please,
so they signify some force and effect of Heavenly things: He may have as many
Names, as he has Manifestations, Offices and Gifts. Macrobius also, from the
Authority of Virgil, thus determines, Vnius Dei Effectus Varios pro Variis
censendos esse (or as Vossius corrects it, Censeri) Numinibus, That the Various
Effects of One God, were taken for Several Gods; that is, Expressed by Several
Personal Names; as he there affirms, the Diverse Virtues of the Sun, to have
given Names to Diverse Gods; because they gave occasion for the Sun, to be
called by Several Proper and Personal Names. We shall conclude with that of
Maximus Madaurensis, before cited out of St. Austin, Hujus Virtutes per
Mundanum Opus diffusas, Nos multis vocabulis invocamus, quoniam Nomen ejus
Proprium ignoramus. Ita fit ut dum ejus quasi quaedam Membra carptim variis
supplicationibus prosequimur, Totum colere profecto videamur. The Virtues of
this One Supreme God, diffused throughout the whole World, we (Pagans) invoke
under Many Several Names, because we are ignorant what his Proper Name is.
Wherefore we thus worshipping his Several Divided Members, must needs be judged
to worship him Whole, we leaving out nothing of him. With which Latter words
seems to agree, that of the Poet, wherein Jupiter thus bespeaks the other
Gods. Coelicolae, Mea Membra, Dei; quos Nostra Potestas,
Officiis divisa facit.
Where it is plainly intimated, that the Many Pagan Gods were but the Several
Divided Members of the One Supreme Deity, whether, because according to the
Stoical Sense, the Real and Natural Gods, were all but Parts of the Mundane
Soul; or else because all those other Fantastic Gods, were nothing but
Several Personal Names, given to the Several Powers, Virtues, and Offices of
the One Supreme.

Now the Several Names of God, which the Writer De Mundo instanceth in, to
prove him Polyonymous, are First of all such as these; (...) and (...) The
Thunderer and Light^er, (...) The Giver of Rain, (...) The Bestower of Fruits,
(...) The Keeper of Cities, (...) The Mild and Placable, under which Notion
they sacrificed no Animals to him, but only the Fruits of the Earth: together
with many other such Epithets, as (...), etc. and Lastly he is called (...) and
(...), Savior and Assertour. Answerably to which, Jupiter had Many such Names
given him also by the Latins, as ^^ctor, Invictus, Opitulus, Stator; the True
meaning of which last, (according to Seneca) was not that which the Historians
pretend, quod post Votum susceptum, acies Romanorum fugientium stetit, because
once after Vows and Prayers offered to him, the Flying Army of the Romans was
made to stand; Sed quod stant beneficio ejus Omnia, but because all things by
means of him Stand Firm and are Established. For which same reason he was
called also by them (as St. Austin informs us) Centupeda, as it were, standing
Firm upon an Hundred Feet, and Tigillus the Beam, Prop, and Supporter of the
World. He was styled also by the Latins (amongst other Titles) Almus and
Ruminus, i. e. He that Nourishes all things, Ruma Mamma.
as it were, with his Breasts. Again that Writer De Mundo adds another sort
of Names, which God was called by; as (...) Necessity, Acad. Q.L. 1.
because he is an Immovable Essence, though Cicero gives another reason for
that appellation, Interdum Deum Necessitatem appellant, quia nihil aliter esse
possit, atque ab eo constitutum sit; they sometimes call God Necessity, because
nothing can be o^herwise than as it is by Him appointed. Likewise (...),
because all things are by him Connected together, and proceed from him
unhinderably. (...), because all things in the world are determined, and
nothing left Infinite (or Undetermined) (...), because, he makes an apt
Division and Distribution of all things. (...), because his Power is such, as
that none can possibly avoid or escape him. Lastly, that Ingenious Fable, (as
he calls it) of the Three Fatal Sisters, Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropos,
according to him, meant nothing but God neither, (...), All this is nothing
else but God, as the noble and generous Plato also intimates, when he
affirms, God to contain the Beginning, and Middle, and End of all things. And
both Cicero and Seneca tell us, that amongst the Latins God was not only called
Fatum, but also Natura, and Fortuna. Quid aliud est Natura (says Seneca) quam
Deus, and Divina Ratio, toti Mundo and Partibus ejus inserta? What is Nature
else, but God and the Divine Reason, inserted into the Whole World and all its
Several Parts? He adding, that God and Nature, were no more Two Different
Things, than Annaeus and Seneca. And Nonnunquam Deum (says Cicero) Fortunam
appellant, quod efficiat multa improvisa, and nec opinata nobis, propter
obscuritatem ignorationemque Causarum; They sometimes call God also by the name
of Fortune, because he surprizeth us in many Events, and brings to pass
things unexpected to us, by reason of the Obscurity of Causes and our
Ignorance. Seneca thus concludes concerning these, and the like Names of God,
Omnia ejusdem Dei Nomina sunt, vary utentis sua Potestate; These are all Names
of one and the same God, Variously Manifesting his Power.

But concerning most of these forementioned Names of God, and such as are like
to them, it was rightly observed by St. Austin, C.D.L. 7. c. 11.
that they had no such Appearance or show of Many Distinct Gods; Haec omnia
cognomina imposuerunt Vni Deo, propter Causas Potestatesque Diversas, non tamen
propter tot res, etiam tot Deos eum esse coegerunt, etc. Though the Pagans
imposed all these Several Names upon One God, in respect of his Several Powers,
yet did they not therefore, seem to make so many Gods of them: as if Victor
were one God, and Invictus another God, and Centupeda another God, and Tigillus
another, and Ruminus another, etc. Wherrefore there are other Names of God used
amongst the Pagans, which have a greater show and appearance of so many
Distinct Deities, not only because they are Proper Names, but also because each
of them had their peculiar Temples appropriated to them, and their different
Rites of Worship. Now these are of Two sorts; First, such as signify the Deity
according to its Universal, and All-comprehending Nature; and Secondly, such as
denote the same only according to certain Particular Powers, Manifestations,
and Effects of it in the world. Of the First kind there are not a few. For
First of all, PAN, as the the very word plainly implies him to be a Universal
Numen, and as he was supposed to be the Harmostes of the whole World, or to
play upon the World as a Musical Instrument, according to that of Orpheus (or
Onomacritus) (...), So have we before showed, that by him the Arcadians and
Greeks meant, not the Corporeal World Inanimate, nor yet as endued with a
Senseless Nature only, but as proceeding from an Intellectual Principle or
Divine Spirit, which framed it Harmoniously; and as being still kept in tune,
acted and governed by the same. Which therefore is said to be the Universal
Pastor and Shepherd of all Mankind, and of the whole world, according to that
other Orphick passage, (...), Pascens Humanum Genus, ac sine limite Terram. And
this Pan, Socrates in Plato's Phaedrus, plainly invokes as the Supreme Numen.
Pan therefore, is the One only God (for there cannot possibly be more than One
Pan, more than One All or Universe) who contained All within himself, displayed
All from himself, framing the World Harmoniously, and who is in a manner All
Things.

Again JANVS, whom the Romans First invoked in all their Sacrifices and
Prayers, and who was never omitted, whatsoever God they sacrificed unto; was
unquestionably many times taken for a Universal Numen, as in this of Martial,
-- Nitidique Sator pulcherrime mundi. And again in this of Ovid. Fast. 1.
Quicquid ubique vides, Coelum, Mare, Nubila, Terras,
Omnia sunt nostra clausa patentque Manu:
Me penes est Vnum vasti Custodia Mundi.
From which passages it also appears, that Janus was not the mere Senseless and
Inanimate Matter of the World, but a Principle Presiding over it. And without
doubt all the Beginnings of things, were therefore referred to this Janus,
because he was accounted the most Ancient God, and the Beginning of all things.
St. Austin concluding him to be the same with Jupiter, therefore quarrels with
the Pagans (that is, with their Civil Theology) for thus making Two Gods of
One. C.D.L. 7. c. 10
Cum ergo Janus Mundus sit, and Jupiter Mundus sit, Vnusque sit Mundus, quare
Duo Dii sunt Janus and Jupiter? Quare seorsum habent Templa, seorsum Aras,
diversa Sacra, dissimilia Simulachra? Si propterea, quia alia vis est
Primordiorum, alia Causarum, ex illa Jani ex ista Jovis nomen accepit: nunquid
si unus homo in diversis rebus duas habeat potestates, aut duas arts, (quia
singularum diversa Vis est) ideo Duo dicuntur Artifices? etc. Since therefore
Janus is the World, and Jupiter is the World, and there is but one World, how
can Janus and Jupiter be Two Gods? Why have they their Temples apart, their
Altars apart, distinct Sacred things, and Statues of different forms? If
because the force of Beginnings is One, and the force of Causes Another, he is
therefore called Janus from the former, and Jupiter from the latter; I ask
whether or no, if one Man have two Several arts about different things, he
therefore be to be called Two Artificers? Or is there any more reason, why one
and the same God, having Two Powers, one over the Beginnings of things, and
another over the Causes, should therefore be accounted Two Gods? Where when
Jupiter and Janus are both said to be the World, this is to be understood
properly not of the Matter but the Soul or Mind of the World, as St. Austin
himself elsewhere declares, C.D.L. 4. c. 11
Sit Jupiter Corporei hujus Mundi Animus, qui universam istam Molem, ex quatuor
Elementis constructam atque compactam, implet and movet; Let Jupiter be the
Mind of this corporeal World, which both fills and moves that whole bulk,
compounded and made up of the four Elements. Nevertheless as the Soul and Body
both together are called the Man, so was the whole Animated World, by the
Pagans called God. Now the forementioned Argumentation of St. Austin, though it
be good against the Pagans Civil Theology, yet their other Arcane and Natural
Theology was unconcerned in it, that plainly acknowledging all to be but One
God, which for certain Reasons was worshipped under Several Names, and with
Different Rites. Wherefore Janus and Jupiter, being really but Different Names
for One and the same Supreme God, that conjecture of Salmasius seems very
probable, that the Romans derived their Janus from (...), the Aetolian Jupiter.

GENIUS was also another of the Twenty Select Roman Gods and that this was
likewise a Universal Numen, containing the whole Nature of things, appears from
this of Festus, Genium appellabant Deum, qui vim obtineret rerum omnium
genendarum, They called that God, who has the Power of begetting or producing
all things, Genius. C.D.L. 7. c. ^3.
And St. Austin also plainly declares Genius to be the same with Jupiter, that
is, to be but another Name for the One Supreme God. Cum alio loco [Varro]
dicit, Genium esse Vniuscujusque animum rationalem; talem autem Mundi Animum
Deum esse, ad hoc idem utique revocat, ut tanquam Vniversalis Genius, ipse
Mundi Animus esse credatur. Hic est igitur quem appellant Jovem. And
afterward, Restat ut eum Singulariter and Excellenter dicant Deum Genium, quem
dicunt Mundi Animum; ac per hoc Jovem. When Varro elsewhere calls the
Rational Mind of every one, a Genius, and affirms such a Mind of the whole
World, to be God; he plainly implies, that God is the Universal Genius of the
world, and that Genius and Jupiter are the same. And though Genius be sometime
used for the Mind of every man, yet the God Genius, spoken of by way of
Excellency, can be no other than the Mind of the whole world, or Jupiter.

Again that CHRONOS or SATURN was no Particular Deity, but the Universal Numen
of the whole World, is plainly affirmed by Dionysius of Halicarnassus; where
commending the Fertility of Italy, he writes thus, Romans Ant. L. 1. p. 24.
Steph.
(...)^ Wherefore it is no wonder, if the Ancients thought this Country to be
sacred to Saturn, they supposing this God to be the Giver and Perfecter of all
happiness to men; whether we ought to call him Chronos as the Greeks will have
it, or Cronos as the Romans; he being either way such a God, as comprehends the
Whole Nature of the world. But the word Saturn was Hetrurian (which Language
was Originally Oriental) and being derived from (...), signifies Hidden, so
that by Saturn was meant, that Hidden Principle of the Universe which
contains all things, and he was therefore called by the Romans Deus Latius,
The Hidden God; as the wife of Saturn in the Pontifical Books is Latia Saturni,
and the Land it self (which in the Hetrurian Language was Saturnia) is in the
Roman Latium; from whence the Inhabitants were called Latins, which is as much
as to say, the Worshippers of the Hidden God. Moreover that Saturn could not be
inferior to Jupiter, according to the Fabulous Theology, is plain from hence,
because he is therein said to have been his Father. But then the Question will
be, how Saturn and Jupiter could be both of them One and the same Universal
Numen? To which there are several Answers. For first Plato who propounds this
Difficulty in his Craetylus, solves it thus; That by Jupiter here is to be
understood the Soul of the World, which according to his Theology was derived
from a Perfect and Eternal Mind or Intellect (which Chronos is interpreted to
be) as Chronos also depended upon Vranus or Coelus, the Supreme Heavenly God,
or First Original Deity. So that Plato here finds his Trinity of Divine
Hypostases, Archical and Universal, (...), and (...), in Vranus, Chronos, and
Zeus; or Coelus, Saturn and Jupiter. Others conceive, that according to the
plainer and more simple sense of Hesiod's Theogonia, that Jupiter who together
with Neptune and Pluto, is said to have been the Son of Saturn, was not the
Supreme Deity, nor the Soul of the World neither, but only the Ether, as
Neptune was the Sea and Pluto the Earth. All which are said to have been
begotten by Chronos or Saturn the Son of Vranus that is as much as to say, by
the Hidden Virtue of the Supreme Heavenly God. But the Writer De Mundo, though
making Jupiter to be the First and Supreme God, yet (taking Chronos to signify
Immensity of Duration or Eternity) will have Jupiter to be the Son of Chronos
in this sense, because he does (...), continue from one Eternity to another; so
that Chronos and Zeus are to him in a manner one and the same thing. But we are
apt to think that no Ingenuous and learned Pagan, who well understood the
Natural Theology, would deny, but that the best Answer of all to this
difficulty is this, That there is no Coherent Sense, to be made, of all things,
in the Fabulous Theology. St. Austin, from Varro, gives us this account of
Saturn, that it is he who produces from himself continually the Hidden Seeds
and Forms of things, and reduces or receives them again into himself; which
some think to have been the true meaning of that Fable concerning Saturn his
devouring his Male-children; because the Forms of these Corporeal things, are
perpetually destroyed, whilst the Material Parts (signified by the Femals)
still remain. However it is plain, that this was but another Pagan Adumbration
of the Deity, that being also sometimes thus defined by them, C. D. L. 4. c. 12.
as St. Austin likewise enforms us, Sinus quidam Naturae in seipso continens
omnia, A certain Bosom, or Deep Hollow, and Inward Recess of Nature, which
contains within it self all things. And St. Austin himself concludes, that
according to this Varronian Notion of Saturn likewise, the Pagans Jupiter and
Saturn, were really but one and the same Numen, De Civ. D. L. 7. c. 13.
Wherefore we may with good reason affirm, that Saturn was another Name for the
Supreme God amongst the Pagans, it signifying that Secret and Hidden Power,
which comprehends, pervades and supports the whole World; and which produces
the Seeds or Seminal Principles and Forms of all things from it self. As also
Vranus or Coelus, Thus in that old Inscription. OPTIMVS MAXIMUS CAELVS AETERNVS
JVPITER.
was plainly yet another Name for the same Supreme Deity; (or the First Divine
Hypostasis) comprehending the whole.

In the next place, though it be true that Minerva be sometimes taken for a
Particular God, or for God according to a Particular Manifestation of him in
the Ether (as shall be showed afterward) yet was it often taken also, for the
Supreme God according to his most General Notion, or as a Universal Numen
diffusing himself through all things. Thus has it been already proved, that
Neith or Neithas, was the same amongst the Egyptians, that Athena amongst the
Greeks, and Minerva amongst the Latins; which that it was a Universal Numen,
appears from that Egyptian Inscription in the Temple of this God, I am all that
Was, Is, and Shall be. And accordingly Athenagoras tells us, that Athena of the
Greeks was, (...), Wisdom passing and diffusing it self through all things: as
in the Book of Wisdom it is called, (...), the Artifex of all things, and is
said (...), to pass and move through all things. Wherefore this Athena or
Minerva of the Pagans was either the First Supreme Deity a Perfect and Infinite
Mind the Original of all things; or else a Second Divine Hypostasis, the
immediate Offspring and First-begotten of that First Original Diety. Thus
Aristides in his Oration upon Minerva, (...), etc. Wherefore all the most
excellent things are in Minerva, and from her: but to speak briefly of her,
this is the only immediate offspring of the only Maker and King of all things;
For he had none of equal honor with himself, upon whom he should beget her,
and therefore retiring into himself, he begot her and brought her forth from
himself: So that this is the only Genuine Offspring of the First Father of
all. And again, (...)^ Pindar also affirms concerning Minerva, that sitting
at the Right hand of her Father, she there receives commands from him to be
delivered to the Gods. For she is greater than the Angels, and commands them
some one thing and some another, accordingly as she had first received of her
Father: she performing the office of an Interpreter and Introducer to the Gods
when it is needful. Where we may observe by the way, that this word Angel, came
to be in use amongst the Pagans from Jews and Christians, about this very age
that Aristides lived in; after which we meet with it frequently in the writings
of their Philosphers. Lastly Aristides thus concludes his Oration upon
Minerva, (...)^ He that from what we have said will determine, that Minerva is
as it were the Power and Virtue of Jupiter himself will not err. Wherefore (not
to enumerate all the minute things belonging to Minerva) we conclude thus
concerning her, that all the works of Jupiter, are common with Jupiter and
Minerva. Wherefore that conceit which the Learned and Industrious Vossius,
somewhere seems to favor; that the Pagans Universal Numen was no other than a
Senseless Nature, or Spermatick Reason of the whole World, undirected by any
Higher Intellectual Principle, (which is indeed no better than downright
Atheism) is plainly confuted from hence, they making Wisdom and Understanding,
under these Names of Neith, Athena, and Minerva, to be either, the Absolutely
Supreme Deity, or the First-begotten Offspring of it.

To Minerva may be added Apollo, who though often taken for the Sensible Sun
Animated, and so an Inferior Deity, yet was not always understood in this
sense, nor indeed then when he was reckoned amongst the Twelve Consentes,
because the Sun was afterward added to them, in the number of the Eight Select
Gods. And that he was sometimes taken for the Supreme Universal Numen, the
Maker of the Sun and of the whole World, is plainly testified by Plutarch (who
is a competent Witness in this Case, he being a Priest of this Apollo) writing
thus concerning him in his Defect of Oracles, P. 41^.
(...)^ Whether Apollo be the Sun, or whether he be the Lord and Father of the
Sun, placed far above all sensible and Corporeal Nature, it is not likely, that
he should now deny his Oracles to them to whom himself is the cause of
Generation and Nourishment, of Life and understanding.

Moreover Urania Aphrodite, the Heavenly Venus or Love, was a Universal Numen
also, or another name of God, according to his more General Notion, as
Comprehending the whole World, it being the same with that (...), or Love,
which Orpheu^, and others in Aristotle, made to be the First Original of all
things. For it is certain that the Ancients distinguished concerning a double
Venus and Love. P. 108.
Thus Pausanias in Plato's Symposium, (...)^ There are Two Venuses and
therefore two Loves, one the Older and without a Mother, the Daughter of Uranus
or Heaven, which we call the Heavenly Venus; another younger, begotten from
Jupiter and Dione, which we call the Vulgar Venus; and accordingly are there of
necessity two Loves, answering to these two Venuses, the one Vulgar, and the
other Heavenly. The Elder of these two Venuses, is in Plato said to be Seniour
to Japhet and Saturn, and by Orpheus the Oldest of all things, and (...), The
First Begetter of all. Upon which account perhaps, it was called by the
Oriental Nations, Mylitta or Genitrix, as being the Fruitful Mother of all.
This was also the same with Plato's (...), The First Fair; the Cause of all
Pulchritude, Order and Harmony in the World. And Pausanias the Writer tells us,
that there were Temples severally erected to each of these Venusses or Loves,
the Heavenly and the Vulgar, and that Urania or the Heavenly Venus was so
called, (...), because the Love belonging to it, was pure and free from all
corporeal affection; which as it is in men, is but a participation of that
First Urania, or Heavenly Venus and Love, God himself. And thus is Venus
described by Euripides in Stobaeus, as the Supreme Numen. Thus also by
Aechylus, (...), etc. (...), etc. -- (...), Grot. Excerp. p. 45
(...);
(...),
(...)^
(...), etc.
To this sense, Do you not see how great a God this Venus is? but you are never
able to declare her Greatness, nor to measure the Vast extent thereof. For this
is she which nourishes both Thee and Me and all Mortals, and which makes
Heaven and Earth friendly to conspire together, etc. But by Ovid this is more
fully expressed, in his Fastorum, Illa quidem Totum dignissima temperat Orbem,
Lib. 4.

Illa tenet Nullo regna minora Deo:
Juraque dat Coelo, Terrae, Natalibus Vndis;
Perque suos initus continet omne genus.
Illa Deos omnes (longum enumerare) creavit;
Illa Satis Causas Arboribusque dedit.
Where all the Gods are said to have been Created or Made by Venus, that is, by
the One Supreme Deity. But lastly this is best of all performed by Severinus
Boethius, a Christian Philosopher and Poet, De Cons. L. 2. Met. 8.
in this manner; Quod Mundus Stabili fide
Concordes variat vices,
Quod Pugnantia Semina
Foedus perpetuum tenent;
Quos Phoebus roseum diem
Curru provehit aureo; etc.
Hanc rerum seriem ligat,
Terras ac pelagus regens,
Et Coelo imperitans, AMOR. etc.
Hic si sroena remiserit,
Quicquid nunc amat invicem,
Bellum continuo geret.
Hic sancto populos quoque
Junctos foedere continet;
Hic and Conjugii Sacrum
Castis nectit Amoribus, etc.
O felix hominum genus,
Si vestros animos AMOR,
Quo Coelum regitur, regat.
And to this Urania or Heavenly Venus was near of kin also, that Third Venus in
Pausanias called (...), and by the Latins Venus Verticordia, pure and chaste
Love, expulsive of all unclean Lusts, to which the Romans consecrated a Statue,
as Valerius M. tells us ( L. 8. c. 15.) quo facilius Virginum, Mulierumque
mentes a libidine ad pudicitiam converterentur, To this end, that the minds of
the Female Sex might then the better be converted from Lust and Wantonness to
Chastity. We conclude therefore that Urania or the Heavenly Venus, was
sometimes amongst the Pagans a Name for the Supreme Deity, as that which is the
most Amiable Being, and First Pulchritude, the most Benign and Fecund Begetter
of all things, and the constant Harmonizer of the whole World.

Again though Vulcan, according to the most common and Vulgar Notion of him, be
to be reckoned amongst the Particular Gods, yet had he also another more
Universal Consideration. For Zeno in Laertius tells us, that the Supreme God
was called (...) or Vulcan, (...), as his Hegemonick acted in the Artificial
Fire. Now Plutarch and Stobaeus testify that the Stoics did not only call
Nature, but also the Supreme Deity it self, (the Architect of the whole world)
(...), An Artificial Fire, they conceiving him to be Corporeal. And Jamblichus
making Phtha to be the same Supreme God amongst the Egyptians, with Osiris, and
Hammon; or rather more properly, all of them alike the Soul of the World, tells
us that Hephaestus in the Greekish Theology, was the same with the Egyptian
Phtha; (...), Amonst the Greeks Hephaestus ( or Vulcan) answers to the Egyptian
Phtha. Wherefore as the Egyptians by Phtha, so the Greeks by Hephaestus,
sometimes understood no other than the Supreme God or at least the Soul of the
World, as Artificially framing all things.

De Ben L. 4. c. 8.
Furthermore Seneca gives us yet other Names of the Supreme Deity, according to
the Sense of the Stoics, Hunc and Liberum Patrem, and Herculem, ac Mercurium
nostri putant, Liberum Patrem, quia Omnium Parens, etc. Herculem, quod vis ejus
invicta sit; Mercurium, quia Ratio penes illum est, Numerusque, and Ordo, and
Scientia: Furthermore our Philosophers take this Auctor of all things, to be
Liber Pater, Hercules, and Mercury; The First because he is the Parent of all
things, etc. the Second, because his Force and Power is unconquerable, etc. And
the Third, because there is in and from him Reason, Number, Order and
Knowledge. And now we see already, that the Supreme God, was sufficiently
Polyonymous amongst the Pagans; and that all these, Jupiter, Pan, Janus,
Genius, Saturn, Coelus, Minerva, Apollo, Aphrodite Urania, Hephaestus, Liber
Pater, Hercules and Mercury, were not so many Really Distinct and Substantial
Gods. much less Self-existent and Independent Ones; but only several Names, of
that One Supreme Universal and All-comprehending Numen, according to several
Notions and Considerations of him.

But besides these, there were many other Pagan Gods called by Servius, Dii
Speciales, Special or Particular Gods, which cannot be thought neither, to have
been so many Really Distinct and Substantial Beings (that is Natural Gods) much
less Self-existent and Independent, but only so many several Names or Notions
of One and the same Supreme Deity, according to certain Particular Powers and
Manifestations of it. It is true, that some late Christian Writers against the
Polytheism and Idolatry of the Pagans, have charged them with at least a
Trinity of Independent Gods, viz. Jupiter, Neptune and Pluto, as sharing the
Government of the whole world amongst these Three, and consequently
acknowledging no One Universal Numen. Notwithstanding which it is certain, that
according to the more Arcane Doctrine and Cabala of the Pagans, concerning the
Natural True Theology, these Three considered as Distinct and Independent Gods,
were accounted but Dii Poetici and Commentitii, Poetical and Fictitious Gods,
and they were really esteemed no other, than so many Several Names and Notions
of One and the same Supreme Numen, as acting variously in those several parts
of the world, the Heaven, the Sea, the Earth and Hell. For First as to Pluto
and Hades, called also by the Latins Orcus, and Dis, (which latter word seems
to have been a contraction of Dives to answer the Greek Pluto) as Balbus in
Cicero attributes to him, Omnem Vim terrenam, all Terrene Power, so others
commonly assign him the Regimen of Separate Souls after Death. Now it is
certain, that according to this latter Notion, it was by Plato understood no
otherwise than as a Name for that Part of the Divine Providence which exercises
it self upon the Souls of men after Death. This Ficinus observed upon Plato's
Cratylus, Animadverte prae caeteris, Plutonem hic significare praecipue,
Providentiam Divinam ad Separatas Animas pertinentem: You are to take notice,
that by Pluto is here meant, that part of Divine Providence, which belongs to
Separate Souls. For this is that which according to Plato, binds and detains
pure Souls, in that separate state, with the best Vinculum of all, which is not
Necessity, but Love and Desire, they being ravished and charmed as it were with
those pure delights which they there enjoy. And thus is he also to be
understood, in his Book of Laws, Lib. 8.
writing in this manner concerning Pluto, (...)^ Neither ought Military men to
be troubled or offended at this God Pluto, but highly to honor him, as who
always is the most beneficent to mankind. For I affirm with the greatest
seriousness, that the Union of the Soul with this Terrestrial body, is never
better than the Dissolution or Separation of them. Pluto therefore according to
Plato, is nothing else but a Name for that Part of the Divine Providence, that
is exercised upon the Souls of men, in their Separation from these Earthly
Bodies. And upon this account was Pluto styled by Virgil, The Stygian Jupiter.
But by others Pluto together with Ceres, is taken in a larger sense, for the
Manifestation of the Deity in this whole Terrestrial Globe, and thus is the
Writer De Mundo to be understood, when he tells us, that God or Jupiter is
(...)^ both Celestial and Terrestrial, he being denominated from every Nature,
forasmuch as he is the cause of all things. Pluto therefore is (...) or (...),
The Terrestrial (also, as well as the Stygian and Subterranean) Jupiter; and
that other Jupiter which is distinguished both from Pluto and Neptune, is
properly (...), The Heavenly Jupiter, God as manifesting himself in the
Heavens. Hence is it that Zeus and Hades, Jupiter and Pluto, are made to be one
and the same thing, in that Passage which Julian cites as an Oracle of Apollo,
but others impute to Orpheus, (...),

Jupiter and Pluto are one and the same God. As also that Euripides in a place
before produced, is so doubtful whether he should call the Supreme God ((...),
that takes care of all things here below) Zeus or Hades. -- (...)
(...)^
Whether thou had rather, be called Jupiter or Pluto.

Lastly Hermesianax the Colophonian Poet, in those Verses of his (afterward to
be set down) makes Pluto in the first place, (with many other Pagan Gods) to be
really one and the same with Jupiter.

That Neptune was also another Name of the Supreme God, from another Particular
Consideration of him, namely as acting in the Seas; (at least according to the
Arcane and Natural Theology of the Pagans) is plainly declared by diverse of the
Ancients. Xenocrates in Stobaeus, and Zeno in Laertius, affirm, that God as
acting in the water is called Posidone or Neptune. To the same purpose Balbus
in Cicero. De N.D L. 2.
Sed tamen his Fabulis spretis ac repudiatris, Deus Pertinens per Naturam
cujusque rei, per Terras Ceres, per Maria Neptunus, alii per alia, poterunt
intelligi, qui qualesque sint, etc. But these Poetic Fables concerning the
Gods, being despised and rejected; it is easy for us to understand, how God
passing through the Nature of every thing; may be called by several Names, as
through the Earth Ceres (and Pluto) through the Seas Neptune; and through other
parts of the world by other Names: so that all these Titular Gods were but so
many several Denominations of one Supreme Deity. De N.D.L. 3.
And Cotta afterward thus represents the sense of this Theology, Neptunum esse
dicis Animum cum Intelligentia per mare pergentem, idem de Cerere: Your meaning
is, Neptune is a Mind which with understanding passes through the Sea, and the
like of Ceres through the Earth. Lastly, to name no more, Maximus Tyrius
agrees also herewith, Dissert. 30.
(...), etc. (...)^ You are to call Jupiter that Princely Mind, which all
things follow and obey, etc. and Neptune that Spirit, which passing through the
Earth and Sea, causes their State and Harmony.

Lastly, that these Three Jupiter, Neptune and Pluto, were not Three really
Distinct Substantial Beings, but only so many Several Names for One Supreme God
(according to the True and Natural Theology of the Pagans) is thus plainly
declared by Pausanias in his Corinthiacks; he there expounding the meaning of a
certain Statue of Jupiter, with Three Eyes (called the Country- Jupiter of the
Trojans) in this manner: (...), (...). (...)^ Now that this Statue of Jupiter
was made to have Three Eyes, one may guess this to have been the reason:
Because first the common speech of all men makes Jupiter to reign in the
Heaven. Again he that is said to rule under the Earth, is in a certain Verse of
Homer called Zeus or Jupiter too, namely the Infernal or Subterraneous Jupiter
together with Proserpina. And lastly Aeschylus the son of Euphorion, calls that
God who is the King of the Sea also Jupiter. Wherefore this Statuary made
Jupiter with Three Eyes, to signify, that it is One and the same God, which
rules in those Three several Parts of the World, the Heaven, the Sea, and the
Earth. Whether Pausanias were in the right or no, as to his Conjecture
concerning this Three-ey'd Statue of Jupiter, it is evident that himself and
other ancient Pagans acknowledged Jupiter, Neptune and Pluto, to be but Three
several Names and Partial Considerations of one and the same God, who rules
over the Whole World. And since both Proserpina and Ceres were really the same
with Pluto, and Salacia with Neptune: we may well conclude, that all these,
Jupiter, Neptune, Salacia, Pluto, Proserpina and Ceres, though several Poetical
and Political Gods, yet were really taken but for One and the same Natural and
Philosophical God.

Moreover as Neptune was a Name for God, as manifesting himself in the Sea and
ruling over it, so was Juno another Name of God as acting in the Air. This is
expressly affirmed both by Xenocrates in Stobaeus, and Zeno in Laertius. And St.
Austin propounding this Quaere, Why Juno was joined to Jupiter as his wife and
Sister, makes the Pagans answer thus to it, Quia Jovem ( inquiunt) in Aethere
accipimus, in Aere Junonem: because we call God in the Ether Jupiter, in the
Air Juno. But the reason why Juno was Feminine and a Goddess, is thus given by
Cicero, Effaeminarunt autem eum, Junoni que tribuerunt, quod nihil est aere
mollius, they effeminated the Air and attributed it to Juno a Goddess, because
nothing is softer than it. Minerva was also sometimes taken for a Special or
Particular God, and then was it nothing else (as Zeno informs us) but a Name
for the Supreme God as Passing through the (Higher) Ether: C.D.L. 4. c. 10.
Which gave occasion to St. Austin thus to object against the Pagan Theology,
Si aetheris partem Superiorem Minerva tenere dicitur, and hac occasion fingere
Poetas, quod de Jovis Capite nata sit, cur non ergo ipsa potius Deorum Regina
deputatur, quod sit Jove Superior? If Minerva be said, to possess the Highest
part of the Ether, and the Poets therefore to have feigned her to have been
begotten from Jupiter 's head, why is not she rather called the Queen of the
Gods, since she is superior to Jupiter? Furthermore as the Supreme God was
called Neptune in the Sea, and Juno in the Air, so by the same reason may we
conclude, that he was called Vulcan in the Fire. Lastly, as the Sun and Moon,
were themselves sometimes worshipped by the Pagans for Inferior Deities, they
being supposed to be Animated with Particular Souls of their own; so was the
Supreme God also, worshipped in them both (as well as in the other Parts of the
world) and that under those names of Apollo, and Diana. Thus the Pagans
appointing a God to preside over every Part of the world, did thereby but make
the Supreme God Polyonymous, all those Gods of theirs, being indeed nothing but
Several Names of him. Which Theology of the Ancient Pagans, Maximus Tyrius,
treating concerning Homer's Philosophy (after he had mentioned his Tripartite
Empire of the world, shared between Jupiter, Neptune, and Pluto) thus
declares, Dissert. 16. p. 163.
(...), etc. You may find also in Homer, other Principles, and the Originals of
Several names; which the ignorant hear as Fables, but a Philosopher will
understand as Things and Realities. For he assigns a Principle of Virtue and
Wisdom, which he calls Minerva,; another of Love and Desire, which he calls
Venus, another of Artificialness and that is Vulcan, who rules over the Fire.
And Apollo also with him presides over Dancings, the Muses over Songs, Mars
over War, Aeolus over Winds, and Ceres over Fruits. And then does he conclude
thus, (...)^ So that no part neither of Nature, nor of the World, is to Homer
Godless (or void of a God) none destitute of a Ruler, or without a Superior
Government; but all things full of Divine Names, and of Divine Reason, and of
Divine Art. Where his (...), his Divine Names, are nothing but Several Names of
God, as manifesting himself variously in the several Things of Nature, and the
parts of the world, and as presiding over them.

Wherefore besides those Special Gods of the Pagans, already mentioned, that
were appointed to preside over several Parts of the world, there are Others,
which are but several Names of the Supreme God neither, as exercising several
Offices and Functions in the world, and bestowing several Gifts upon mankind:
as when in giving Corn and Fruits he is called Ceres, in bestowing Wine
Bacchus, in men's recovery of their Health, Aesculapius, in presiding over
Traffic and Merchandising, Mercury, in governing Military Affairs, Mars, in
ordering the Winds Aeolus, and the like.

That the more Philosophic Pagans, did thus really interpret the Fables of the
Gods, and make their Many Poetical and Political Gods, to be all of them but
One and the same Supreme Natural God, is evident from the testimonies of
Antisthenes, Plato, Xenocrates, Zeno, Cleanthes, and Chrysippus (who
allegorized all the Fables of the Gods accordingly) and of Scaevola the Roman
Pontifex, of Cicero, Varro, Seneca, and many others. But that even their Poets
also, did sometimes venture to broach this Arcane Theology, is manifest from
those Fragments preserved, of Hermesianax the Colophonian amongst the Greeks,
and of Valerius Soranus amongst the Latins; the former thus enumerating the
chief Pagan Gods, and declaring them to be all but one and the same Numen;
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...)^
Pluto, Persephone, Ceres, and Venus alma and Amores,
Tritones, Nereus, Tethys, Neptunus and ipse,
Mercurius, Juno, Vulcanus, Jupiter, and Pan,
Diana, and Phoebus Jaculator, sunt Deus Unus.
The Latter pronouncing Universally, that Jupiter Omnipotens, is -- Deus Vnus
and Omnes, One God, and All Gods. Whether by his Jupiter he here meant the Soul
of the World only, as Varro would interpret him agreeably to his own
Hypothesis, or whether an Abstract Mind superior to it; but probably he made
this Jupiter to be All Gods, upon these two Accounts; First as he was the
Begetter and Creator of all the other Natural Gods, which were the Pagans
Inferior Deities (as the Stars and Demons) Secondly, as that all the other
Poetical and Political Gods, were Nothing else but Several Names and Notions of
him.

We shall add in the last place, that St. Austin making a more Full and
Particular Enumeration of the Pagan Gods, and mentioning amongst them many
others besides the Select Roman Gods; (which are not now commonly taken notice
of) does pronounce Universally of them all, according to the sense of the more
Intelligent Pagans; That they were but One and the same Jupiter; De Civ. D. L.
4. c. 11.
Ipse in Aethere sit Jupiter, Ipse in Aere Juno, Ipse in Mari Neptunus, in
Inferioribus etiam Maris Ipse Salacia, in Terra Pluto, in Terra Inferiore
Proserpina, in Focis Domesticis Vesta, in Fabrorum furnace Vulcanus, in
Divinantibus Apollo, in Merce Mercurius, in Jano Initiator, in Termino
Terminator, Saturnus in Tempore, Mars and Bellona in Bellis, Liber in Vineis,
Ceres in Frumentis, Diana in Sylvis, Minerva in Ingeniis. Ipse sit postremo
etiam illa Turba quasi Plebeiorum Deorum, Ipse praesit nomine Liberi Virorum
Seminibus, and nomine Liberae Faeminarum. Ipse sit Diespiter, qui Partum
perducat ad Diem: Ipse sit Dea Mena, quam praefecerunt Menstruis Faeminarum,
Ipse Lucina, quae a Parturientibus invocatur, Ipse Opem ferat nascentibus,
excipiens eos sinu Terrae, and vocetur Opis. Ipse in Vagitu os aperiat, and
vocetur, Deus Vagitanus. Ipse levet de Terra, and vocetur Dea Levana. Ipse
Cunas tueatur and vocetur Dea Cunina. Sit Ipse in Deabus illis quae fata
nascentibus canunt, and vocantur Carmentes. Praesit Fortuitis, vocenturque
Fortuna. In Diva Rumina mammam parvulis immulgeat. In Diva Potina Potionem
immisceat. In Diva Educa Escam praebeat. De Pavore infantium Paventia
nuncupetur. De spe quae venit Venilia; de Voluptate Volupia. De Actu Agenoria.
De stimulis quibus ad nimium actum homo impellitur Dea Stimula nominetur.
Strenua Dea sit, strenuum faciendo. Numeria quae numerare doceat; Camaena quae
canere. Ipse sit and Deus Consus praebendo Consilia; and Dea Sentia sententias
inspirando. Ipse Dea Juventas, quae post praetextam excipiat Juvenilis aetatis
Exordia. Ipse sit Fortuna Barbata quae adultos barba induit quos honorare
voluerit. Ipse in Jugatino Deo Conjuges jungat; and cum Virgini uxori zona
solvitur Ipse invocetur and Dea Virginensis invocetur. Ipse sit Mutinus, qui
est apud Graecos Priapus, si non pudet. Haec omnia quae dixi, and quaecunque
non dixi, hi omnes Dii Deaeque sit Unus Jupiter; sive sint ut quidam volunt
omnia ista Parts ejus, sicut eis videtur quibus eum placet esse Mundi Animum;
sive Virtutes ejus, quae sententia velut magnorum multorumque Doctorum est. Let
us grant according to the Pagans, that the Supreme God is in the Ether
Jupiter; in the Air Juno; in the Sea Neptune; in the lower parts of the Sea
Salacia; in the Earth Pluto; in the inferior parts thereof Proserpina; in the
Domestic harths Vesta; in the Smiths Forges Vulcan; in Divination Apollo; in
Traffic and Merchandise Mercury; in the Beginning of things Janus; in the Ends
of them Terminus; in Time Saturn; in Wars Mars and Bellona; in the Vineyards
Liber; in the Cornfieldsd Ceres; in the Woods Diana, and in Wits Minerva. Let
him be also that troop of Plebeian Gods; let him preside over the seeds of men
under the Name of Liber, and of women under the name of Libera; let him be
Diespiter that brings forth the birth to light; let him be the Goddess Mena,
whom they have set over women's monthly courses; let him be Lucina, invoked by
women in childbearing; let him be Opis who aids the new born Infants; let him
be Deus Vagitanus that opens their mouths to cry; let him be the Goddess
Levana, which is said to lift them up from the Earth; and the Goddess Cunina
that defends their Cradles; let him be the Carmentes also who foretell the Fates
of Infants; let him be Fortune as presiding over Fortuitous events; let him be
Diva Rumina which suckles the Infant with the Breasts; Diva Potina which gives
it drink; and Diva Educa which affords it meat; let him be called the Goddess
Paventia, from the Fear of Infants; the Goddess Venilia from Hope; the Goddess
Volupia from Pleasure; the Goddess Agenoria from Acting; the Goddess Stimula
from Provoking; the Goddess Strenua from making Strong and Vigorous; the
Goddess Numeria which teaches to Number; the Goddess Camaena which teaches to
Sing; let him be Deus Consus, as giving Counsel; and Dea Sentia as inspiring
men with Sense; let him be the Goddess Juventas which has the Guardianship of
young men; and Fortuna Barbata which upon some more than others liberally
bestows beards; let him be Deus Jugatinus which joins man and wife together;
and Dea Virginensis, which is then invoked when the Girdle of the Bride is
loosed; Lastly let him be Mutinus also (which is the same with Priapus amongst
the Greeks) if you will not be ashamed to say it. Let all these Gods and
Goddesses, and many more (which I have not mentioned) be One and the same
Jupiter, whether as Parts of him, which is agreeable to their opinion who hold
him to be the Soul of the world; or else as his Virtues only, which is the
sense of many and great Pagan Doctors.

But that the Authority and Reputation of a late Learned and Industrious
Writer, G. I. Vossius may not here stand in our way or be a Prejudice to us, we
think it necessary to take notice of one passage of his, in his Book De
Theologia Gentili, and freely to censure the the same; where treating
concerning that Pagan Goddess Venus, he writes thus; Ex Philosophica de Diis
Doctrina, Venus est vel Luna (ut vidimus) vel Lucifer, sive Hesperus. Sed ex
Poetica ac Civili, supra hos coelos statuuntur Mentes quaedam a Syderibus
diversae: quomodo Jovem, Apollinem Junonem, Venerem, caeterosque Deos
Consentes, considerare jubet Apuleius. Quippe eos, (inquit) Natura Visibus
nostris denegavit: necnon tamen Intellectu eos mirabundi contemplamur, acie
mentis acrius contemplantes. Quid apertius hic quam ab eo, per Deos Consentes
intelligi, non Corpora Coelestia vel Subcoelestia, sed sublimiorem quandam
Naturam, nec nisi animis conspicuam? According to the Philosophic Doctrine
concerning the Gods, Venus is either the Moon, or Lucifer, or Hesperus; but
according to the Poetic and Civil Theology of the Pagans, there were certain
Eternal Minds, placed above the Heavens, distinct from the Stars: accordingly
as Apuleius requires us to consider Jupiter and Apollo, Juno and Venus, and all
those other Gods called Consentes; he affirming of them, that though Nature had
denied them to our sight, yet notwithstanding by the diligent contemplation of
our Minds we apprehend and admire them. Where nothing can be more plain (says
Vossius) than that the Dii consentes, were understood by Apuleius neither to be
Celestial nor Subcelestial Bodies, but a certain higher Nature perceptible only
to our Minds. Upon which words of his, we shall make these following Remarks;
First, that this Learned Writer seems here, as also throughout that whole Book
of his, to mistake the Philosophic Theology, of Scaevola and Varro, and
others, for that which was Physiological only; (which Physiological Theology of
the Pagans, will be afterward declared by us.) For the Philosophic Theology
of the Pagans did not Deifie Natural and Sensible Bodies only, but the
Principal part thereof was the Asserting of One Supreme and Universal Numen,
from whence all their other Gods were derived. Neither was Venus according to
this Philosophic and Arcane Theology, taken only for the Moon, or for Lucifer
or Hesperus, as this Learned Writer concieves, but as we have already proved
for the Supreme Deity also, either according to its Universal Notion, or some
Particular Consideration thereof. Wherefore the Philosophic Theology both of
Scaevola and Varro and others, was called Natural, not as Physiological only,
but (in another sense) as Real and True; it being the Theology neither of
Cities, nor of Stages or Theaters, but of the World, and of the Wise men in it;
Philosophy being that properly which considers the Absolute Truth and Nature of
things. Which Philosophic Theology thereof was opposed, both to the Civil and
Poetical, as consisting in Opinion and Fancy only. Our Second Remark is, That
Vossius does here also seem incongruously, to make both the Civil and Poetical
Theology as such, to Philosophize; whereas the First of these was properly
nothing but the Law of Cities and Commonwealths, together with Vulgar Opinion
and Error; and the Second nothing but Fancy, Fiction and Fabulosity. Poetarum
ista sunt, says Cotta in Cicero; nos autem Philosophi esse volumus, Rerum
authors, non Fabularum. Those things belong to Poets, but we would be
Philosophers, authors of Things (or Realities) and not of Fables. But the main
thing which we take notice of in these words of Vossius is this, that they seem
to imply, the Consentes, and Select, and other Civil and Poetical Gods of the
Pagans, to have been generally accounted, so many Substantial and Eternal
Minds, or Understanding Beings Supercelestial, and Independent; their Jupiter
being put only in an equality, with Apollo, Juno, Venus, and the rest. For
which since Vossius pretends no other manner of Proof, than only from Apuleius
his De Deo Socratis, who was a Platonic Philosopher; we shall here make it
evident, that he was not rightly understood by Vossius neither; which yet ought
not to be thought any Derogation from this Eminent Philologer (whose Polymathy
and Multifarious Learning, is readily acknowledged by us) that he was not so
well versed in all the Niceties and Punctilio's of the Platonic School. For
though Apuleius do in that Book, besides those Visible Gods, the Stars; take
notice of another kind of Invisible ones; such as the Twelve Consentes, and
others, which (he faith) we may animis conjectare, per varias Vtilitates in
vita agenda, animadversas in iis rebus, quibus eorum singuli curant, make a
conjecture of by our minds, from the various Vtilities in humane life,
perceived from those things which each of these care of; yet that he was no
Bigot in this Civil Theology, is manifest from hence, because in that very
place, he declares as well against Superstition, as Irreligious Profaneness.
And his design there was plainly no other, than to reduce the Civil and
Poetical Theologies of the Pagans into some handsome conformity and agreement
with that Philosophical, Natural, and Real Theology of theirs, which derived
all the Gods from One Supreme and Universal Numen: but this he endeavors to
do, in the Platonic way, himself being much addicted to that Philosophy. Hos
Deos in sublimi aetheris vertice locatos, Plato existimat veros, incorporales,
animales, sine ullo neque fine neque exordio, sed prorsus ac retro aeviternos,
corporis contagione sua quidem natura remotos, ingenio ad summam beatitudinem
porrecto, etc. Quorum Parentem, qui omnium rerum Dominator atque Auctor est,
solum ab omnibus nexibus patiendi aliquid gerendive, nulla vice ad alicujus rei
mutua obstrictum, cur ego nunc dicere exordiar? cum Plato coelesti facundia
praeditus, frequentissime praedicet, hunc solum majestatis incredibili quadam
nimietate and ineffabili, non posse penuria sermonis humani, quavis oratione
vel modica comprehendi. All these Gods placed in the ^ighest Ether, Plato
thinks to be true, incorporeal, Animal, without beginning or end, Eternal,
happy in themselves without any external good. The Parent of which Gods, who is
the Lord and Author of all things, and who is alone free from all bonds of
doing and suffering, why should I go about in words to describe him? since
Plato who was endued with most Heavenly eloquence, equal to the Immortal Gods,
does often declare, that this Highest God by reason of his excess of Majesty,
is both ineffable and Incomprehensible. From which words of Apuleius it is
plain, that according to him, the Twelve Consentes, and all the other Invisible
Gods were derived from One Original Deity, as their Parent and Author. But then
if you demand, what Gods of Plato these should be, to which Apuleius would here
accommodate the Civil and Poetic Gods, contained in those Two Verses of
Ennius, Juno, Vesta, Minerva, Ceres, Diana, Venus, Mars.
Mercurius, Jovi', Neptunus, Vulcanus, Apollo.
and the rest of this kind, that is, all their other Gods (properly so called)
Invisible? We reply, that these are no other than Plato's Ideas, or First
Paradigms and Patterns of things, in the Archetypal World, which is the Divine
Intellect (and his Second Hypostasis) derived from his first Original Deity,
and most Simple Monad. For as Plato writes in his Timaeus, (...), this
Sensible World, must n^eds be the Image of another Intelligible one. And again
afterward, (...)^ Plato in Tim. p. 30.
What Animal was the Pattern, according to whose likeness he that made this
great Animal of the World, framed it? certainly we must not think it to be any
Particular Animal, since nothing can be perfect which is made according to an
imperfect copy. Let us therefore conclude it, to be that Animal, which
contains all other animals in it, as its Parts. For that Intelligible World
contains all Intelligible Animals in it, in the same manner as this Sensible
World, does us and other sensible animals. Wherefore Plato himself here and
elsewhere speaking obscurely of this Intelligible World, and the Ideas of it,
no wonder if many of his Pagan followers, have absurdly made so many Distinct
Animals and Gods of them. Amongst whom Apuleius accordingly would refer all the
Civil and Poetic Gods, of the Pagans (I mean their Gods, properly so called,
Invisible) to this Intelligible world of Plato's, S. Cyrill. Cont. Jul. L. 2.
p. 67.
and those several Ideas of it. Neither was Apuleius singular in this, but
others of the Pagan Theologers did the like, as for example Julian in his Book
against the Christians; (...)^ Plato indeed speaks of certain Visible Gods,
the Sun, and the Moon, and the Stars, and the Heaven; but these are all but
Images of other Invisible Gods; that Visible Sun which we see with our eyes, is
but an Image of another Intelligible and Invisible One: so likewise the Visible
Moon, and every one of the Stars, are but the Images and Resemblances of
another Moon, and of other Stars Intelligible. Wherefore Plato acknowledged
also these other Invisible Gods, inexisting and co-existing with the Demiurgus,
from whom they were generated and produced. That Demiurgus in him, thus
bespeaking these Invisible and Intelligible Gods; Ye Gods of Gods, that is, Ye
Invisible Gods, who are the Gods and Causes of the Visible Gods. There is one
common maker therefore of both these kinds of Gods; who first of all made a
Heaven, Earth, Sea, and Stars, in the Intelligible World, as the Archetypes and
Paradigms of these in the Sensible. Where S. Cyril in his Confutation writes
thus, (...)^ This our excellent ^^lian, by his Intelligible and Invisible Gods,
seems here to mean, (...) ideas, which Plato sometimes contends to be
Substances, and to subsist alone by themselves, and sometimes again determines
to be nothing but Notions or Conceptions in the mind of God. But however the
matter be, the skilful in this kind of learning affirm, that these Ideas have
been rejected by Plato 's own Disciples, Aristotle discarding them as Figments,
or at least, such as being mere notions, could have no real causality and
influence upon things. But the meaning of this Pagan Theology, may be more
fully understood from what the same St. Cyril thus further objecteth against
it, (...)^ The sense whereof seems to be this; Julian adds, that the God of
the Universe who made Heaven and Earth, is alike the Demiurgus both of these
Sensible and of the other Intelligible things. If therefore the Ingenit God, be
alike the Creator of both, how can he affirm those things that are Created by
him, to co-exist with, and inexist in him? How can that which is created,
co-exist with the Ingenit God? but much less can it inexist in him. For we
Christians indeed affirm, that the Unmade Word of God, does of necessity
co-exist with, and inexist in the Father, it proceeding from him not by way of
Creation but of Generation. But this defender of Platonic trifles,
acknowledging the Supreme God to be Ingenit, affirms notwithstanding those
things which were Made and Created by him, to inexist in him; thus mingling and
confounding all things. Where notwithstanding, Julian, and the Platonic Pagans
would in all probability reply; that those Ideas of the Intelligible and
Archetypal World (which is the First (...) or Intellect) proceeding from the
Highest Hypostasis, and Original Deity, by way of Necessary and Eternal
Emanation, are no more to be accounted Creatures, than the Christian (...); and
therefore might, with as little absurdity, be said to exist, With and In, the
First Original Deity. But besides, the same Julian elsewhere in that Book of
his, accommodates this Platonic Notion also, to the Pagan Gods in Particular,
in like manner as Apuleius had done before, he writing of Aesculapius, after
this canting way, Cyr. C. Jul. L. 6. p. 200.
(...), etc. Jupiter, amongst the Intelligible things, generated out of himself
Aesculapius, and by the Generative Life of the Sun manifested him here upon
Earth, he coming down from Heaven and appearing in a Humane Form, first about
Epidaurus, and from thence extending his salutary power or virtue, over the
whole Earth. Where Aesculapius is First of all, the Eternal Idea of the
Medicinal Art or Skill, generated by the Supreme God, in the Intelligible
world; which afterward by the Vivifick Influence of the Sun, was Incarnated,
and appeared in a humane form at Epidaurus. This is the Doctrine of that
Julian, who was so great an Opposer of the Incarnation of the Eternal Logos, in
our Savior Jesus Christ. Neither was this Doctrine, of Many Intelligible Gods,
and Powers Eternal, (of which the Archetypal World consists) first invented,
by Platonic Pagans, after the times of Christianity, as some might suspect;
but that there was such a thing extant before amongst them also, may be
concluded from this passage of Philo's, De Consus. L. 345. Par.
(...)^ Though God be but one, yet has he about himself Innumerable
Auxiliatory Powers, all of them salutiferous and procuring the good of that
which is made, etc. Moreover by these Powers and out of them, is the
Incorporeal and Intelligible World compacted, which is the Archetype of this
visible World, that consisting of Invisible Ideas, as this does of visible
Bodies. Wherefore some admiring, with a kind of astonishment, the Nature of
both these worlds, have not only Deified the whole of them, but also the most
excellent parts in them, as the Sun and the Moon and the whole Heaven, which
they scruple not at all to call Gods. Where Philo seems to speak of a double
Sun, Moon, and Heaven as Julian did, the one Sensible, the other Intelligible.
Moreover Plotinus himself sometimes complies with this Notion, he calling the
Ideas of the Divine Intellect, (...), Intelligible Gods; as in that place
before cited, where he exhorts men ascending upward above the Soul of the
World, (...), To praise the Intelligible Gods, that is, the Divine Intellect,
which as he elsewhere written is both, (...) One and Many.

We have now given a full account of Apuleius his sense in that Book De Deo
Socratis, concerning the Civil and Poetical Pagan Gods; which was not to assert
a Multitude of Substantial and Eternal Deities or Minds Independent in them;
but only to reduce the Vulgar Theology of the Pagans, both their Civil and
Poetical, into some conformity with the Natural, Real, and Philosophic
Theology; and this according to Platonic Principles. Wherein many other of the
Pagan Platonists, both before and after Christianity concurred with him; they
making the Many Pagan Invisible Gods, to be really nothing but the Eternal
Ideas of the Divine Intellect, (called by them the Parts of the Intelligible
and Archetypal World) which they supposed to have been the Paradigms and
Patterns according to which this Sensible World, and all Particular things
therein were made and upon which they depended, they being only Participations
of them. Wherefore though this may well be looked upon as a Monstrous
Extravagancy, in these Platonic Philosophers, thus to talk of the Divine
Ideas, or the Intelligible and Archetypal Paradigms of things, not only as
Substantial, but also as so many several Animals, Persons, and Gods; it being
their humor thus upon all slight occasions to multiply Gods; yet nevertheless
must it be acknowledged, that they did at the very same time declare, all these
to have been derived from One Supreme Deity, and not only so, but also to exist
in it; as they did likewise at other times, when unconcerned in this business
of their Pagan Polytheism, freely acknowledge all these intelligible Ideas, to
be Really nothing else, but (...), Conceptions in the Mind of God, or the First
Intellect (though not such Slight Accidental and Evanid ones, as those
Conceptions and Modifications of our humane Souls are) and consequently not to
be so many Distinct Substances, Persons, and Gods, (much less Independent Ones)
but only so many Partial Considerations of the Deity.

What a Rabble of Invisible Gods and Goddesses, the Pagans had, besides those
their Dii Nobiles, and Dii Majorum Gentium, their Noble and Greater Gods (which
were the Consentes and Selecti) has been already showed out of St. Austin,
from Varro and others; as namely, Dea Mena, Deus Vagitanus, Dea Levana, Dea
Cunina, Diva Rumina, Diva Potina, Diva Educa, Diva Paventina, Dea Venilia, Dea
Agenoria, Dea Stimula, Dea Strenua, Dea Numeria, Deus Consus, Dea Sentia, Deus
Jugatinus, Dea Virginensis, Deus Mutinus. To which might be added more out of
other places of the same St. Austin, as Dea Deverra, Deus Domiducus, Deus
Domitius, Dea Manturna, Deus Pater Subigus, Dea Matter Prema, Dea Pertunda, Dea
Rusina, Dea Collatina, Dea Vallonia, Dea Seia, Dea Segetia, Dea Tutilina, Deus
Nodotus, Dea Volutina, Dea Patelena, Dea Hostilina, Dea Flora, Dea Lacturtia,
Dea Matura, Dea Runcina. Besides which there are yet so many more of these
Pagan Gods and Goddesses extant in other Writers, as that they cannot be all
mentioned or enumerated by us; diverse whereof have Very Small, Mean, and
Contemptible Offices assigned to them, as their names for the most part do
imply; some of which are such, as that they were not fit to be here
interpreted. From whence it plainly appears, that there was (...), nothing at
all without a God to these Pagans, they having so strong a Persuasion, that
Divine Providence extended it self to all things, and expressing it after this
manner, by assigning to Every thing in Nature, and Every part of the World, and
whatsoever was done by men, some particular God or Goddess by name, to preside
over it. Now that the Intelligent Pagans, should believe in good earnest, that
all these Invisible Gods and Goddesses of theirs, were so many Several
Substantial Minds, or Understanding Beings Eternal and Unmade, really existing
in the World, is a thing in it self Utterly Incredible. For how could any
possibly persuade themselves, that there was One Eternal Unmade Mind or Spirit,
which for example, Essentially presided over The Rockings of Infants Cradles,
and nothing else? another over the Sweeping of Houses? another over Ears of
Corn? another over the Husks of Grain? and another over the Knots of Straw and
Grass, and the like? And the Case is the very same, for those other Noble Gods
of theirs (as they call them) the Consentes, and Selecti; since there can be no
reason given, why those should all of them, be so many Substantial and Eternal
Spirits Self-existent or Unmade, if none of the other were such. Wherefore if
these be not all, so many Several Substantial and Eternal Minds, so many
Selfexisting and Independent Deities, then must they of necessity, be either
Several Partial Considerations of the Deity, viz. the Several Manifestations of
the Divine Power and Providence Personated; or else Inferior Ministers of the
same. And thus have we already showed, that the more High-flown and Platonic
Pagans, (as Julian, Apuleius and others) understood these Consentes and Select
Gods, and all the other Invisible ones, to be really nothing else, but the
Ideas of the Intelligible and Archetypal World, (which is the Divine Intellect)
that is indeed, but Partial Considerations of the Deity, as Vertually and
Exemplarily containing all things: whilst others of them, going in a more plain
and easy way, concluded these Gods of theirs, to be all of them, but several
Names and Notions of the One Supreme Deity, according to the Various
Manifestations of its Power in the world; as Seneca expressly affirms, not
only concerning Fate, Nature and Fortune, etc. but also Liber Pater, Hercules,
and Mercury, (before mentioned by him) that they were Omnia ejusdem Dei Nomina,
vary utentis sua potestate, all Names of One and the same God, as diversely
using his power; and as Zeno in Laertius concludes of all the rest: or else,
(which amounts to the same thing) that they were the Several Powers and Virtues
of One God Fictitiously Personated and Deified; as the Pagans in Eusebius
apologize for themselves, Pr. Ev. L. 3. c. 13. p. 121.
that they did (...), Deifie nothing but the Invisible Powers of that God which
is over all. Nevertheless because those Several Powers of the Supreme God were
not supposed to be all executed immediately by himself, but by certain other
(...), Subservient Ministers under him, appointed to preside over the Several
Things of Nature, Parts of the World, and Affairs of Mankind (commonly called
Demons;) therefore were those Gods sometimes taken also for such Subservient
Spirits, or Demons collectively; as perhaps in this of Epictetus, (...)^ L. 1.
c. 1. p. 85.
When will Zephyrus or the West-wind blow? When it seems good to himself or
to Aeolus; for God has not made thee Steward of the Winds, but Aeolus.

But for the fuller clearing of the whole Pagan Theology, and especially this
one Point thereof, that their (...), was in great part nothing else but (...),
their Polytheism or Multiplicity of Gods, nothing but the Polyonymy of One God,
or his being called by Many Personal Proper Names, Two Things are here
requisite to be further taken notice of; First, that according to the Pagan
Theology, God was conceived to be Diffused throughout the whole World, to
Permeate and Pervade all things, to Exist in all things, and Intimately to Act
all things. Thus we observed before out of Horus Apollo, that the Egyptian
Theologers conceived of God, as (...), a Spirit pervading the whole World, as
likewise they concluded, (...), that Nothing at all Consisted without God.
Which same Theology was Universally entertained also amongst the Greeks. For
Thus Diogenes the Cynick in Laertius, (...), All things are full of him. And
Aristotle or the Writer De Plantis, Lib. 1. cap. 1.
makes God not only to comprehend the whole world, but also to be an Inward
Principle of Life in Animals; (...)^ What is the Principle in the Life or Soul
of Animals? certainly no other than that Noble Animal (or Living Being) that
encompasses and surrounds the whole Heaven, the Sun, the Stars, and the
Planets. Sextus Empiricus thus represents the sense of Pythagoras, Adv. Mathem.
p. 331.
Empedocles, and all the Italick Philosophers; (...). That we men have not only
a conjunction amongst our selves with one another, but also with the Gods above
us, and with Brute Animals below us: because there is One Spirit which like a
Soul, pervades the whole World, Protrept. p. 44.
and unites all the parts thereof together. Clemens Alexandrinus writes thus
of the Stoics, (...), They affirm that God does Pervade all the Matter of the
Universe, and even the most vile parts thereof, which that Father seems to
dislike.; as also did Tertullian, when he represented their Doctrine thus;
Stotci volunt Deum sic per Materiam decucurrisse, quomodo Mel per Favos, the
Stoics will have God, so to run through the Matter, Lib. 15. p. 730.
as the Honey does the Combs. Strabo testifies of the ancient Indian Brachmans,
(...)^ That in many things they Philosophized after the Greekish manner, as
when they affirm that the World had a beginning, and that it would be
Corrupted, and that the Maker and Governor thereof, Pervades the whole of it.
The Latins also fully agreed with the Greeks in this: For though Seneca
somewhere propounds this Question, Vtrum Extrinsecus operi suo Circumfusus sit
Deus, an toti inditus? Whether God be only extrinsically circumfused, about his
work the World, or inwardly insinuating do Pervade it all? yet himself
elsewhere answers it, when he calls God, Divinum Spiritum per omnia, maxima, ac
minima, aequali intention diffusum, A Divine Spirit, Diffused through all
things, whether Smallest or Greatest, with equal intention. God in Quintilians
Theology, is Spiritus omnibus partibus Immistus; and Ille fusus, per omnes
rerum Naturae parts Spiritus, a Spirit which insinuates it self into, and is
Mingled with all the parts of the world; And that Spirit which is diffused
through all the parts of Nature. Apuleius likewise affirms Deum omnia
permeare, That God does permeate all things, and that Nulla res est tam
praestantibus viribus, quae viduata Dei auxilio, sui natura contenta sit, There
is nothing so excellent or powerful, as that it could be content with its own
Nature alone, void of the Divine Aid or Influence: and again, Dei Praesentiam,
non jam cogitatio sola, sed Oculi, and aures, and sensibilis Substantia
comprehendit, That God is not only present to our Cogitation, but also to our
very eyes and ears, in all these sensible things. Servius agreeably with this
doctrine of the Ancient Pagans, determines, that Nulla Pars Elementi sine Deo
est, That there is no part of the Elements devoid of God. And that the Poets
fully closed with the same Theology, is evident from those known passages of
theirs, Jovis omnia plena, and (...), etc. i. e. All the things of Nature, and
Parts of the world, Virg. Georg. L. 4.
are full of God; as also from this of Virgil, -- Deum namque ire per omnes
Terrasque, Tractusque Maris, Coelumque profundum.


Lastly we shall observe that both Plato and Anaxagoras, who neither of them
Confounded God with the World, but kept them both distinct and affirmed God to
be (...), Cratyl. p. 413.
Unmingled with any thing, nevertheless concluded, (...), that he did order and
govern all things passing through and pervading all things; which is the very
same with that Doctrine of Christian Theologers, (...), That God permeates and
passes through all things, Vnmixedly. Which Plato also there in his Cratylus,
plainly making (...) to be a Name for God, etymologizeth it, from (...), i. e.
passing thorough all things, and thereupon gives us the best account of
Heraclitus his Theosophy, that is any where extant (if not rather a Fragment of
Heraclitus his own) in these words, (...)^ They who affirm the Universe to be
in constant motion, suppose a great part thereof, to do nothing else but move
and change; but that there is something which Passes through and Pervades this
whole Universe, by which all those things that are made, are made: and that
this is both the Most Swift, and Most subtle thing; for it could not otherwise
pass through all things, were it not so Subtle, that nothing could keep it out
or hinder it; and it must be most swift, that it may use all things, as if they
stood still, that so nothing might escape it. Since therefore this does preside
over, and Order all things, Permeating and Passing through them; it is called
(...) quasi (...); the Letter Cappa, being only taken in for the more handsome
pronunciation. Here we have therefore Heraclitus his Description of God, namely
this, (...), That Most Subtle and Most Swift Substance, which permeates and
passes through the whole Universe, by which all things that are made, are made.
Now says Plato, some of these Heracliticks, say that this is Fire, others that
it is Heat; but he deriding both these Conceits; concludes with Anaxagoras,
that it is a Perfect Mind, unmixed with any thing; which yet Permeating and
Passing through all things, frames, orders, and disposes all.

Wherefore this being the Universally received Doctrine of the Pagans, that God
was a Spirit or Substance Diffused through the whole World, which Permeating
and Inwardly Acting all things, did Order all; no wonder, if they called him,
in Several Parts of the World and Things of Nature, by several Names; or to use
Cicero's Language, no wonder if Deus Pertinens per Naturam cujusque rei, per
Terras Ceres, per Maria Neptunus, etc. if God pervading the nature of every
thing, were in the Earth called Ceres, in the Sea Neptune, in the Air Juno,
etc. And this very account does Paulus Orosius (in his Historick work against
the Pagans, Dedicated to St. Austin) give of the original of the Pagan
Polytheism, Quidam dum In Multis Deum credunt, Multos Deos, L. 6. c. 1.
indiscreto Timore, sinxerunt, That Some whilst they believe God to be In Many
things, have therefore, out of an indiscreet fear, feigned Many Gods; in which
words he intimates, that the Pagans Many Gods, were really but Several Names of
One God, as existing in Many things, or in the Several Parts of the world; as
the same Ocean is called by several names, as beating upon several Shores.

Secondly the Pagan Theology went sometimes yet a strain higher, they not only
thus supposing, God to Pervade the whole World, and to be Diffused through All
Things (which as yet keeps up some Difference and Distinction betwixt God and
the World) but also Himself to be in a manner All Things. That the ancient
Egyptian Theology, from whence the Theologies of other Nations were derived,
ran so high as this, is evident from that excellent Monument of Egyptian
Antiquity, the Saitick Inscription often mentioned, I am all that Was, Is, and
Shall be. And the Trismegistick Books insisting so much every where upon this
Notion, That God is All Things; (as has been observed) renders it the more
probable, that they were not all Counterfeit and Supposititious; but that
according to the testimony of Jamblichus, they did at least contein (...), some
of the Old Theutical or Hermaical Philosophy, in them. And from Egypt in all
probability, was this Doctrine by Orpheus derived into Greece, the Orphick
Verses themselves running much upon this strain, and the Orphick Theology being
thus Epitomized by Timotheus the Chronographer; That all things were made by
God, and That Himself is All Things. To this purpose is that of Aeschylus,
Grot. Exc. p. 57.
(...)^
(...)^
Et Terra, and Ether, and Poli Arx est Jupiter,
Et Cuncta Solus, and aliquid Sublimius.
And again, Ib. p. 53.
-- (...)
(...)^
(...),
(...)^
-- Nunc ut implacabilis
Apparet Ignis: nunc Tenebris, nunc Aquae
Par ille cerni: Simulat interdum Feram,
Tonitrua, Ventos, Fulmina, and Nubila.
As also this of Lucan amongst the Latins, Lib. 9. v. 580.
-- Superos quid quaerimus ultra?
Jupiter est quodcunque Vides, quocunque moveris.
Whereunto agree also, these passages of Seneca the Philosopher, Quid est Deus?
Quod vides Totum, and quod non vides, Totum. And Sic Solus est Omnia; opus suum
and Extra and Intra tenet: What is God? he is all that you see, and all that
you do not see. And he alone is All Things, he containing his own work not only
without but also within. Neither was this the Doctrine only of those Pagans who
held God to be the Soul of the World, and consequently the whole Animated World
to be the Supreme Deity, but of those others also, who conceived of God as an
Abstract Mind Superior to the Mundane Soul, or rather as a Simple Monad
Superior to Mind also; as those Philosophers, Xenophanes, Parmenides, and
Melissus, who described God to be One and All Things, they supposing that
because all things were From him, they must needs have been first in a manner
In him and Himself All Things. With which agrees the Author of the Asclepian
Dialogue, when he makes, Vnus Omnia, and Creator Omnium; One All Things, and
the Creator of All Things, to be but equivalent Expressions: and when he
affirms, that before things were made, In eo jam tunc erant, unde Nasci
habuerunt; They then Existed in him, from whom afterward they proceeded. So
likewise the other Trismegistick Books, when they give this account of Gods
being both All things that Are, and All things that Are Not, (...), because
those things that Are, he has manifested from himself, and those things that
Are not, he still contains within himself; or as it it is elsewhere
expressed, he does (...), Hide them and Conceal them in himself. And the
Orphick verses gave this same Account likewise of Gods being All Things, (...),
etc. because he first Concealed and Hid them all within himself, before they
were made and thence afterward from himself displayed them, and brought them
forth into Light: Or because -- (...), before they were produced, they were all
contained together in the Womb of God.

Now this was not only a further Ground, of that seeming Polytheism amongst the
Pagans, which was really nothing but the Polyonymy of One God, and their
Personating his Several Powers; but also of another more strange and puzzling
Phenomenon in their Theology, namely, their Personating also, the Parts of the
World Inanimate, and Things of Nature, P. 229.
and bestowing the Names of Gods and Goddesses upon them. It was before
observed out of Moschopulus, that the Pagans did (...), Call the things in
Nature, and the Gods which presided over them, by one and the same Name. As for
Example, they did not only call, the God which presideth over those arts that
operate by Fire, Hephaestus or Vulcan; but also Fire it self. And Demeter or
Ceres, was not only taken by them for that God, who was supposed to Give Corn
and Fruits, but also for Corn it self. So Dionysus or Bacchus did not only
signify, the God that Gives Wine, but also Wine it self. And he instancing
further, in Venus, and Minerva, and the Muses, concludes the same Universally
of all the rest. L. 5.
Thus Arnobius in his Book against the Pagans, In usu sermonis vestri, Martem
pro Pugna appellatis, pro Aqua Neptunum, Liberum Patrem pro Vino, Cererem pro
Pane, Minervam pro Stamine, pro Obscoenis libidinis Venerem. Now we will not
deny, but that this was sometimes done Metonymically, the Efficient Cause, and
the Ruling or Governing Principle, being put for the Effect, or that which was
Ruled and Governed by it. And thus was War frequently styled Mars, De Is. and
Os. p. 379.
and that of Terence may be taken also in this Sense, Sine Cerere and Libero
friget Venus. And Plutarch (who declares his great dislike of this kind of
Language) conceives that there was no more at first in it than thus, (...)^ As
we, when one buys the Books of Plato, commonly say that he buys Plato; and
when one acts the Plays of Menander, that he acts Menander; so did the ancients
not spare to call the Gifts and Effects of the Gods, by the names of those Gods
spectively, thereby honoring them also for their Vtility. But he grants that
afterward this Language was by ignorant Persons abused and carried on further,
Ibid.
and that not without great Impiety; (...)^ Their followers mistaking them, and
thereupon ignorantly attributing the Passions of Fruits, (their Appearances and
Occultations) to the Gods themselves, that preside over them; and so not only
calling them, but also thinking them to be, the Generations and Corruptions of
the Gods, have by this means filled themselves with absurd and wicked Opinions.
Where Plutarch well condemns the Vulgar both amongst the Egyptians and Greeks,
for that in their mournful Solemnities, they sottishly attributed to the Gods,
the Passions belonging to the fruits of the earth; thereby indeed making them
to be Gods. Nevertheless the Inanimate Parts of the World and Things of Nature,
were frequently Deified by the Pagans, not only thus Metonymically, but also in
a further Sense, De N.D.L. 2. p. 222.
as Cicero plainly declares; Tum illud quod erat a Deo natum, Nomine ipsius Dei
nuncupabant, ut cum Fruges Cererem appellamus, Vinum autem Liberum; Tum autem
Res ipsa in qua Vis inest Major, sic appellatur ut ea ipsa Res nominetur Deus.
Both that which proceeds from God, is called by the name of a God, as Corn is
sometimes thus called Ceres, and Wine Liber: and also whatsoever has any
greater Force in it, De Decal. p. 751, 752.
That thing it self is often called a God too. Philo also thus represents the
Religion of the Pagans, as first Deifying Corporeal Inanimate Things, and then
bestowing those Proper Personal Names upon them: (...), etc. (...), etc. Some
have Deified the Four Elements, the Earth, the Water, the Air and the Fire.
Some the Sun and the Moon, and the Planets and Fixed Stars: Others the Heaven,
others the whole World. But that Highest and most Ancient Being, the Parent of
all things, the Chief Prince of this great City, and the Emperor of this
invincible Army, who governs all things salutiferously, Him have they
covered, concealed and obscured, by bestowing Counterfeit Personal Names of
Gods upon each of these things. For the Earth they called Proserpina, Pluto and
Ceres; the Sea Neptune, under whom they place many Demons and Nymphs also as
his Inferior Ministers; the Air Juno; the Fire Vulcan; the Sun Apollo; the
Moon Diana, etc. and dissecting the Heaven into Two Hemispheres, one above the
Earth the other under it, they call these the Dioscuri, feigning them to live
alternately one one day, and the other another. We deny not here but that the
Four Elements, as well as the Sun, Moon, and Stars, were supposed by some of
the Pagans, to be Animated with Particular Souls of their own, (which Ammianus
Marcellinus seems principally to call Spiritus Elementorum, the Spirits of the
Elements, worshipped by Julian) and upon that account to be so many Inferior
Gods themselves. Notwithstanding which, that the Inanimate Parts of these, were
also Deified by the Pagans, may be concluded from hence; because Plato, who in
his Cratylus etymologizeth Dionysus from Giving of Wine, and elsewhere calls
the fruits of the earth (...), De Leg. p. 788
(...), The Gifts of Ceres, does himself nevertheless in compliance with this
Vulgar Speech, call Wine and Water as mingled together in a Glass (or Cup) to
be drunk, Gods: where he affirms that a City ought to be, De Leg. L. 6.
(...)^ so tempered, as in a Cup, where the furious Wine poured out bubbles and
sparkles, but being Corrected by another Sober God (that is, by Water) both
together make a good and moderate Potion. Cicero also tells us, that before the
Roman Admirals went to Sea, they were wont to offer up a Sacrifice to the
Waves. But of this more afterward. However it is certain, that mere Accidents,
and Affections of Things in Nature, were by these Pagans commonly Personated
and Deified, as Time in Sophocles his Electra is a God, (...), For Time is an
easy God; and Love in Plato's Symposium, where it is wondered at, that no Poet
had ever made a Hymn (...), To Love being such and so great a God. Though the
same Plato in his Philebus, P. 12.
when Protarchus had called Pleasure a Goddess too, was not willing to comply
so far there with Vulgar Speech; (...)^ My fear, O Protarchus, concerning the
Names of the Gods, is extraordinary great. Wherefore as to Venus, I am willing
to call her, what she pleases to be called; but Pleasure I know is a Various
and Multiform thing. Wherefore it cannot be denied but that the Pagans did in
some sense or other Deifie or Theologize all the Parts of the World, and Things
of Nature. Which we conceive to have been done at first upon no other Ground
than this, because God was supposed by them, not only to Permeate and Pervade
all things, to be Diffused thorough All, and to Act in and upon All; but also
to be Himself in a manner All things; which they expressed after this way; by
Personating the Things of Nature Severally, and bestowing the Names of Gods and
Goddesses upon them. Only we shall here observe, that this was done especially
(besides the Greater Parts of the World) to Two Sorts of things, First, such in
which Humane Vtility was most concerned: Thus Cicero, N. D. L. 2. p. 222.
Multae aliae Naturae Deorum ex Magnis Beneficiis eorum, non sine causa and a
Graeciae Sapientibus and a Majoribus nostris, constitutae nominataeque sunt:
Many other Natures of Gods have been constituted and nominated, both by the
wise men of Greece, and by our Ancestors, merely for the great Benefits
received from them. The Reason whereof is thus given by him, Quia quicquid
magnam Vtilitatem generi afferret humano, id non sine Divina Bonitate erga
homines fieri arbitrabantur; Because they thought, that whatsoever brought any
great Vtility to mankind, this was not without the Divine Goodness. Secondly,
such as were most wonderful and Extraordinary, or Surprising; to which that of
Seneca seems pertinent, Ep. 41.
Magnorum Fluminum Capita Veneramur. Subita and ex abdito vasti amnis eruptio
Aras habet. Coluntur Aquarum Calentium Fontes; and Stagna quaedam vel Opacitas
vel immensa Altitudo sacravit. We adore the rising Heads and Springs of great
Rivers. Every sudden and plentiful Eruption of Waters out of the hidden Caverns
of the Earth, has its Altars erected to it; and some Pools have been made
Sacred for their immense Profundity and Opacity.

Now this is that which is properly called, the Physiological Theology of the
Pagans, their Personating and Deifying (in a certain sense) the Things of
Nature, whether Inanimate Substances, or the Affections of Substances. A great
part of which Physiological Theology, was Allegorically contained in the
Poetic Fables of the Gods. Eusebius indeed was of opinion, that those Poetic
Fables were at first only Historical, and Herological, but that afterward some
went about to Allegorize them into Physiological Senses, thereby to make them
seem the less impious and ridiculous: Pr. Ev. L. 3. c. 6.
(...), etc. (...)^ Such was the ancient Theology of the Pagans (namely,
Historical, of men deceased, that were worshipped for Gods) which some late
Vpstarts have altered, devising other Philosophical and Physiological senses of
those Histories of their Gods, that they might thereby render them the more
specious, and hide the Impiety of them. For they being neither willing to
abandon those Fopperies of their forefathers, nor yet themselves able to bear
the Impiety of these Fables (concerning the Gods) according to the Literal
Sense of them, have gone about to cure them thus by Physiological
Interpretations. Neither can it be doubted, but that there was some Mixture of
Herology and History, in the Poetic Mythology; Nor denied, that the Pagans of
latter times, such as Porphyrius and others, did excogitate and devise certain
new Allegorical senses of their own, L. 3. c. Cells. p. 123.
such as never were intended. Origin before both him and Porphyry, noting this
of the Pagans, that when the absurdity of their Fables concerning the Gods was
objected and urged against them, some of them did, (...), apologizing for these
things, betake themselves to Allegories. But long before the times of
Christianity, those First Stoics Zeno, Cleanthes, and Chrysippus, were famous
for the great pains which they took in Allegorizing these Poetic Fables of the
Gods. Of which Cotta in Cicero thus, Magnam molestiam suscepit and minime
necessariam, primus Zeno, post Cleanthes, deinde Chrysippus, Commentitiarum
Fabulalarum reddere rationem, and vocabulorum cur quidque ita appellatum sit,
causas explicare. Quod cum facitis, illud profecto confitemini, long aliter
rem se habere atque hominum opinio sit; eos qui Dii appellantur, Rerum Naturas
esse, non Figuras Deorum: Zeno first and after him Cleanthes and Chrysippus
took a great deal more pains than was needful, to give a reason of all those
Commentitious Fables of the Gods, and of the names that every thing was called
by. By doing which they confessed that the matter was far otherwise, than
according to men's opinion, in as much as they who are called Gods in them, were
nothing but the Natures of things. From whence it is plain, that in the Poetic
Theology, the Stoics took it for granted, that the Natures of Things were
Personated and Deified, and that those Gods were not Animal, nor indeed
Philosophical, but Fictitious, and nothing but the Things of Nature
Allegorized. L. 4. p. 196.
Origin also gives us a Taste of Chrysippus his thus Allegorizing, in his
interpreting an obscene Picture or Table of Jupiter and Juno, in Samos; (...)^
This Grave Philosopher in his writings says; that Matter having received the
Spermatick Reasons of God, contains them within it self, for the adorning of
the whole World; and that Juno in this Picture in Samos, signifies Matter, and
Jupiter God. Upon which occasion that pious Father adds, (...)^ For the sake of
which, and innumerable other such like Fables, we will never endure to call The
God over all, by the name of Jupiter, but exercising pure Piety toward the
Maker of the World, will take care not to defile Divine things with impure
Names. And here we see again, according to Chrysippus his Interpretation, that
Hera or Juno, was no Anim^l nor Real God, but only the Nature of Matter
Personated and Deified; that is, a mere Fictitious and Poetic God. And we
think it is unquestionably evident, from Hesiod's Theogonia, that many of these
Poetic Fables, according to their First Intention, were really nothing else
but Physiology Allegorized, and consequently those Gods, nothing but the
Natures of things Personated and Deified. Plato himself, though no friend to
these Poetic Fables, P. 378.
plainly intimates as much, in his Second De Rep. (...)^ The Fightings of the
Gods, and such other things, as Homer has feigned concerning them, ought not
to be admitted into our Commonwealth, whether they be delivered in way of
Allegory, or without Allegories: Because Young men are not able to judge, when
it is an Allegory, and when not. And it appears from Dionysius Halicarnass.
that this was the General opinion concerning the Greekish Fables, that some of
them were Physically, L. 2. p. 68.
and some Tropologically Allegorical: (...), etc. Let no man think me to be
ignorant that some of the Greekish Fables are profitable to men, partly as
declaring the Works of Nature by Allegories, partly as being helpful for humane
life, etc. N.D.L. 2. p. 223.
Thus also Cicero, Alia quoque ex ratione, and quidem Physica, magna fluxit
Multitudo Deorum, qui induti specie humana, Fabulas Poetis suppeditaverunt,
hominum autem vitam Superstitione omni refercerunt.

Eusebius indeed, seems sometimes to cast it as an Imputation upon the whole
Pagan Theology, that it did (...), Deifie the Inanimate Nature; but this is
properly to be understood of this Part of their Theology only, which was
Physiological, and of their Mythology or Poetic Fables of the Gods
Allegorized: it being otherwise both apparently false, and all one as to make
them downright Atheists. For he that acknowledges no Animant God, as has been
declared, acknowledges no God at all, according to the True Notion of him;
whether he derive all things from a Fortuitous Motion of Matter, as Epicurus
and Democritus did, or from a Plastic and Orderly but Senseless Nature, as some
Degenerate Stoics, and Strato the Peripatetick; whose Atheism seems to be thus
described by Manilius, Aut neque Terra Patrem novit, nec Flamma, nec Aer,
Aut Humor, faciuntque Deum per quatuor artus,
Et Mundi struxere Globum, prohibentque requiri
Vltra se quidquam.


Neither ought this Physiological Theology of the Pagans, which consisted only
in Personating and Deifying Inanimate Substances, and the Natures of Things to
be confounded (as it has been by some late Writers) with that Philosophical
Theology of Scaevola, Varro and others, (which was called Natural also, but in
another sense, as True and Real) it being indeed but a Part of the Poetical
first, and afterward of the Political Theology, and owing its Original much to
the Phancies of Poets, whose Humor it was perpetually to Personate Things and
Natures. But the Philosophic Theology properly so called, which according to
Varro was that, de qua multos libros Philosophi reliquerunt; as it admitted
none but Animal Gods, and such as really existed in Nature, (which therefore
were called Natural) namely one Supreme Universal Numen, a Perfect Soul or Mind
comprehending all, and his (...), other Inferior Understanding Beings his
Ministers Created by him, such as Stars and Demons; so were all those
Personated Gods, or Natures of Things Deified, in the Arcane Theology,
interpreted agreeably thereunto.

St. Austin often takes notice of the Pagans thus Mingling and as it were
Incorporating Physiology with their Theology, he justly condemning the same. As
in his 49. Epistle; Neque illinc excusant impii, sua Sacrilega Sacra and
Simulachra, quod eleganter interpretantur quid quaeque significent: Omnis
quippe illa Interpretatio ad Creaturam refertur, non ad Creatorem, cui uni
debetur Servitus Religionis, illa quae uno nomine Latria Graece appellatur.
Neither do the Pagans sufficiently excuse their Sacrilegious Rites and Images,
from hence, because they elegantly (and ingeniously) interpret, what each of
those things signifies. For this Interpretation is referred to the Creature,
and not to the Creator, to whom alone belongs Religious Worship, that which
by the Greeks is called Latria. And again in his Book De Civ. D. L. 6. c. 8.
Atenim habent ista Physiologicas quasdam (sicut aiunt) id est, Naturalium
Rationum Interpretationes. Quasi vero nos in hac Disputatione Physiologiam
quaeramus, and non Theologiam; id est, Rationem Naturae, and non Dei. Quamvis
enim qui verus Deus est, non Opinione sed Natura sit Deus; non tamen omnis
Natura Deus est. But the Pagans pretend, that these things have certain
Physiological Interpretations, or according to Natural Reasons; as if in this
Disputation, we sought for Physiology, and not Theology or the Reason of Nature
and not of God. For although the True God, be not in Opinion only, but in
Nature God, yet is not every Nature, God. But certainly the First and Chief
Ground of this Practice of theirs, thus to Theologize Physiology and Deifie (in
one sense or other) all the Things of Nature, was no other than what has been
already intimated, their supposing God to be, not only Diffused thorough the
whole World, and In all things, but also in a manner All things; and that
therefore he ought to be worshipped in All the Things of Nature, and Parts of
the World.

Wherefore these personated Gods of the Pagans, or those Things of Nature
Deified by them, and called Gods and Goddesses, De N D.L. 3. p. 345.
were for all that, by no means accounted by the Intelligent amongst them, True
and Proper Gods. Thus Cotta in Cicero; Cum Fruges Cererem, Vinum Liberum
dicimus, genere nos quidem sermonis utimur usitato: sed ecquem tam amentem esse
putas, qui illud, quo vescatur, Deum esse credat? Though it be very common and
familiar language amongst us, to call Corn Ceres, and Wine Bacchus, yet who can
think any one to be so mad, as to take that to be really a God, which he feeds
upon? The Pagans really accounted that only for a God, by the worshipping and
invoking whereof, they might reasonably expect benefit to themselves, and
therefore nothing was Truly and Properly a God to them, but what was both
Substantial, and also Animant and Intellectual. L. 10. de L^g.
For Plato writes that the Atheistick Wits of his time, therefore concluded the
Sun, and Moon, and Stars, not to be Gods, because they were nothing but Earth
and Stones (or a certain Fiery Matter) devoid of all Understanding and Sense,
and for this cause, (...), unable to take notice of any Humane Affairs. And
Aristotle affirms concerning the Gods in general, (...), etc. That all men
conceived them to Live, and consequently to Act, since they cannot be supposed
to sleep perpetually as Endymion did. The Pagans, Universally conceived the
Gods to be Happy Animals; and Aristotle there concludes, the happiness of them
all to consist in Contemplation. Lucretius himself would not debar men of that
Language (then vulgarly received amongst the Pagans) of calling the Sea
Neptune, Corn Ceres, Wine Bacchus, and the Earth the Mother of the Gods too,
provided that they did not think any of these for all that, to be Truly and
Really Gods, L. 2. p. 165. Lamb.
Hic siquis Mare Neptunum, Cereremque vocare
Constituit fruges, and Bacchi nomine abuti
Mavolt, quam Laticis proprium proferre vocamen:
Concedamus ut hic, Terrarum dictitet Orbem
Esse Deum Matrem, dum non sit re tamen apse.
And the reason why the Earth was not really a Goddess, is thus given by him,
Terra quidem vero caret omni tempore Sensu. Because it is constantly devoid of
all manner of sense. N.D.L. 2. p. 220.
Thus Balbus in Cicero tells us, that the first thing included in the notion or
Idea of a God, is this, Vt sit Animans, That it be Animant; or endued with
Life, Sense, and Understanding. And he conceiving the Stars to be undoubtedly
such, therefore concludes them to be Gods. Quoniam tenuissimus est Ether, and
semper agitatur and viget, necesse est, quod Animal in eo gignatur, idem quoque
Sensu acerrimo esse. Quare ^um in Aethere Astra gignantur, consentaneum est in
iis Sensum inesse and Intelligentiam. Ex quo efficitur in Deorum numero Astra
esse ducenda. Because the Ether is most subtle, and in continual agitation,
that Animal which is begotten in it, must needs be endued with the quickest and
sharpest sense. Wherefore since the Stars are begotten in the Ether, it is
reasonable to think them to have Sense and Understanding; from whence it
follows, that they ought to be reckoned in the number of Gods. And Cotta in the
Third Book, D.N.D. p. 241
affirms that all men were so far from thinking the Stars to be Gods, that
Multi ne Animantes quidem esse concedant, many would not so much as admit them
to be Animals: plainly intimating, that unless they were Animated, De Is. and
Os. p. 377.
they could not possibly by Gods. Lastly Plutarch for this very reason
absolutely condemns, that whole practice of giving the names of Gods and
Goddesses, to Inanimate things, as Absurd, Impious, and Atheistical, (...)^
They who give the names of Gods to Senseless and Inanimate Natures and Things,
and such as are destroyed by men in the use of them, beget most wicked and
Atheistical opinions in the minds of men: since it cannot be conceived how
these things should be Gods; for nothing that is Inanimate, is a God. And now
we have very good reason to conclude, that the Distinction or Division of Pagan
Gods (used by some) into Animal and Natural (by Natural being meant Inanimate)
is utterly to be rejected, if we speak of their True and Proper Gods; since
nothing was such to the Pagans but what had Life, Sense, and Understanding.
Wherefore those Personated Gods, that were nothing but the Natures of Things
Deified, as such, were but Dii Commentitii and Fictitii, Counterfeit and
Fictitious Gods: or as Origin calls them in that place before cited, (...),
Figments of the Greeks (and other Pagans) that were but Things turned into
Person and Deified. Neither can there be any other sense made, of these
Personated and Deified Things of Nature, than this, that they were all of them
really so many Several Names of One Supreme God, or Partial Considerations of
him, according to the Several Manifestations of himself in his Works. Thus
according to the old Egyptian Theology before declared, God is said to have
both, No Name, and Every Name; or as it is expressed in the Asclepian Dialogue,
Cum non possit Vno quamvis e Multis composito Nomine nuncupari, potius Omni
Nomine vocandus est, siquidem sit Vnus and Omnia; ut necesse sit, aut Omnia
Ipsius Nomine, aut Ipsum Omnium Nomine nuncupari: Since he cannot be fully
declared by any one Name, though compounded of never so many, therefore is he
rather to be called by Every Name, he being both One and All Things: so that
either Every Thing must be called by His Name, or He by the Name of Every
thing. With which Egyptian Doctrine, Seneca seems also fully to agree, when
he gives this Description of God, Cui Nomen Omne convenit, He to whom every
Name belongs; and when he further declares thus concerning him, Quaecunque
voles illi Nomina aptabis; and, Tot Appellationes ejus possunt esse, quot
Munera, You may give him whatsoever Names you please, etc. and, There may be as
many Names of him, as there are Gifts and Effects of his: and lastly, when he
makes God and Nature, to be really One and the same Thing; and, Every thing we
see, to be God. And the Writer De Mundo, is likewise consonant hereunto, when
he affirms that God is, (...), or, may be denominated from Every Nature,
because he is the Cause of all things. We say therefore, that the Pagans in
this their Theologizing of Physiology, and Deifying the Things of Nature, and
Parts of the World, did accordingly Call Every Thing by the Name of God; or God
by the Name of Every Thing.

Wherefore these Personated and Deified Things of Nature were not themselves
Properly and Directly worshipped by the Intelligent Pagans, (who acknowledged
no Inanimate thing for a God) so as to terminate their worship ultimately in
them; but either Relatively only to the Supreme God, or else at most in way of
Complication with him, whose Effects and Images they are, so that they were not
so much themselves worshipped, as God was worshipped in them. Julian Orat. 4*
For these Pagans professed, that they did, (...), look upon the Heaven (and
World) not slightly and superficially; nor as mere Bruit Animals, who take
notice of nothing, but those sensible Phantasms, which from the objects obtrude
themselves upon them; or else as the same Julian, in that Oration, P. 286.
again more fully expresses it, (...), Not view and contemplate the Heaven and
World, with the same eyes, that Oxen and Horses do, but so as from that which
is Visible to their outward senses, to discern and discover another Invisible
Nature under it. That is, they professed to behold all things with Religious
Eyes, and to see God in Every Thing, not only as Pervading all things, and
Diffused thorough all things, but also as Being in a manner All things
Wherefore they looked upon the whole World as a Sacred Thing, and as having a
kind of Divinity in it; it being, according to their Theology, nothing but God
himself Visibly Displayed. And thus was God worshipped by the Pagans, in the
whole Corporeal World taken all at once together, or in the Universe, under the
Name of Pan. As they also commonly conceived of Zeus and Jupiter, after the
same manner, that is, not Abstractly only (as we now use to conceive of God)
but Concretely, together with all that which Proceeds and Emaneth from him,
that is, the Whole World. And as God was thus described in that old Egyptian
Monument, to be All that Was, Is, and Shall be; so was it before observed out
of Plutarch, that the Egyptians took the First God, and the Universe, for One
and the same Thing; not only because they supposed the Supreme God, Vertually
to contain all things within himself, but also because they were wont to
conceive of him, together with his Outflowing, and all the extent of Fecundity,
the whole World displayed from him, all at once, as one entire thing. De Leg. l
7. p. 821.
Thus likewise, do the Pagans in Plato confound (...), and (...), The Greatest
God, and The Whole World together, as being but one and the same thing. And
this Notion was so Familiar with these Pagans, L. 16. p. 761.
that Strabo himself, writing of Moses, could not conceive of his God, and of
the God of the Jews, any otherwise than thus, (...), namely, That which
contains us all, and the Earth, and the Sea, which we call the Heaven and
World, and the Nature of the Whole. By which notwithstanding, Strabo did not
mean, the Heaven or World Inanimate, and a Senseless Nature, but an
Understanding Being, framing the whole World and containing the same, which was
conceived together with it: of which therefore he tells us, that according to
Moses, no wise man would go about, to make any Image or Picture, resembling any
thing here amongst us. From whence we conclude, that when the same Strabo
writing of the Persians, affirms of them, that they did, (...), take the
Heaven for Jupiter, and also Herodotus before him, that they did, (...), Call
the Whole Circle of the Heaven, Jupiter; that is, the Supreme God; the meaning
of neither of them was, that the Body of the Heaven Inanimate, was to them the
Highest God, but that though he were an Understanding Nature, yet framing the
whole Heaven or World and containing the same, he was at once conceived
together with it. Moreover, God was worshipped also by the Pagans, in the
Several Parts of the wrorld, under Several Names; as for example in the Higher
and Lower Ether, under those Names of Minerva and Jupiter; in the Air, under
the name of Juno; in the Fire, under the name of Vulcan; in the Sea, under the
name of Neptune, etc. Neither can it be reasonably doubted, but that when the
Roman Sea-Captains, Sacrificed to the Waves, they intended therein to worship
that God, who acts in the Waves, and whose Wonders are in the Deep.

But besides this, the Pagans seemed to apprehend a kind of necessity, of
worshipping God thus, in his works, and in the Visible things of this World,
because the generality of the Vulgar were then unable to frame any notion or
conception at all of an Invisible Deity, and therefore unless they were
detained in a way of Religion, by such a worship of God as was accommodate and
suitable to the lowness of their apprehensions, would unavoidably run into
Atheism. Nay the most Philosophical Wits amongst them, confessing God to be
Incomprehensible to them, therefore seemed themselves also, to stand in need of
some Sensible Props, to lean upon. Pr. Ev. L. 3. c. 13.
This very account is given by the Pagans, of their practice, in Eusebius,
(...), That God being Incorporeally and Invisibly present in all things, and
Pervading or Passing through all things, it was reasonable, that men should
worship him, by and through those things that are Visible and Manifest. De Leg.
L. 7. p. 821.
Plato likewise represents this as the opinion of the generality of Pagans in
his time, (...), that as for the Greatest God, and the Whole World, men should
not busily and curiously search after the knowledge thereof, nor pragmatically
enquire into the causes of things, it being not pious for them so to do. The
meaning whereof seems to be no other than this, that men ought to content
themselves to worship God in his Works, and in this Visible World, and not
trouble themselves with any further curious Speculations concerning the Nature
of that, which is Incomprehensible to them. Which though Plato professes his
dislike of, yet does that Philosopher himself elsewhere, plainly allow of
worshipping the First Invisible God, in those Visible Images which he has made
of himself, the Sun and Moon and Stars. Di^^^r^ 1*
Maximus Tyrius does indeed exhort men to ascend up, in the Contemplation of
God, above all Corporeal Things; (...), etc. The End of your Journey, (says
he) is not the Heaven, nor those shining Bodies in the Heaven; for though those
be beautiful and Divine, and the Genuine Offspring of that Supreme Deity,
framed after the best manner, yet ought these all to be transcended by you, and
your head lifted up far above the Starry Heavens, etc. Nevertheless he closes
his discourse thus; (...), etc. But if you be too weak and unable to
contemplate that Father and Maker of all things; it will be sufficient for you
for the present to behold his Works, and to Worship his Progeny or Offspring,
which is various and manifold. For there are not only according to the Boeotian
Poet, Thirty Thousand Gods all the Sons and Friends of the Supreme God; but
innumerable. And such in the Heaven are the Stars, Xenoph. Ms* mor. L. 4.
in the Ether Demons, etc. Lastly Socrates himself also, did not only allow of
this way of worshipping God, (because himself is Invisible) in his works that
are Visible, but also commend the same to Euthydemus, (...)^ That I speak the
truth, your self shall know, if you will not stay expecting, till you see the
Forms of the Gods themselves, but count it sufficient for you beholding their
works to worship and adore them. Which he afterward particularly applies to the
Supreme God, who made and contains the whole World, that being Invisible, he
has made himself Visible in his Works, and consequently was to be worshipped
and adred in them. Whether Socrates and Plato, and their genuine Followers,
would extend this any further than to the Animated Parts of the World, such as
the Sun, Moon, and Stars were to them, we cannot certainly determine. But we
think it very probable, that many of those Pagans who are charged with
worshipping Inanimate Things, and particularly the Elements, did
notwithstanding direct their Worship, to the Spirits of those Elements, as
Ammianus Marcellinus tells us Julian did, that is, Chiefly the Souls of them,
all the Elements being supposed by many of these Pagans to be Animated, P. 236,
237.
(as was before observed concerning Proclus) and Partly also, those Demons
which they conceived to inhabit in them and to preside over the parts of them;
upon which account it was said by Plato and others of the Ancients, that (...),
All things are full of Gods, and Demons.

XXXIII. But that these Physiological Gods, that is, the Things of Nature
Personated and Deified were not accounted by the Pagans True and Proper Gods,
much less Independent and Self-existent ones, may further appear from hence,
because they did not only thus Personate and Deifie Things Substantial and
Inanimate Bodies, but also mere Accidents, and Affections of Substances. As for
example First, the Passions of the Mind; (...), says S. Greg. Nazianzen, They
accounted the Passions of the Mind to be Gods, or at least worshipped them as
Gods; that is, built Temples or Altars to their Names. Thus was Hope, not only
a Goddess to the Poet Theognis, (...),
(...).
(Where he Fancifully makes her, to be the only Numen that was left to men in
Heaven, as if the other Gods had all forsaken those Mansions and the World) but
also had Real Temples Dedicated to her at Rome, as that consecrated by
Attillius in the Forum Olitorium, and others elsewhere, wherein she was
commonly pictured or feigned, as a Woman, covered over with a green Pall, and
holding a Cup in her hand. Thus also Love and Desire were Gods or Goddesses
too, as likewise were Care, Memory, Opinion, Truth, Virtue, Piety, Faith,
Justice, Clemency, Concord, Victory, etc. Which Victory was together with
Virtue reckoned up amongst the Gods by Plautus in the Prologue of his
Amphytrio; and not only so, but there was an Altar erected to her also, near
the entrance of the Senate House at Rome, which having been once demolished,
Symmachus earnestly endeavored the restoration thereof, in the Reign of
Theodosius: he amongst other things writing thus concerning it, Nemo Colendam
neget, quam profitetur Optandum, Let no man deny that of right to be
worshipped, which he acknowledges to be wished for, and to be desirable.
Besides all which, Echo was a Goddess to these Pagans too, and so was Night
(to whom they sacrificed a Cock) and Sleep and Death it self, and very many
more such Affections of things, of which Vossius has collected the largest
Catalogue, in his eigh^h Book De Theologia Gentili. And this Personating and
Deifying of Accidental Things, was so familiar with these Pagans, that as St.
Chrysostom has observed, St. Paul was therefore said by some of the Vulgar
Athenians, to have been a Setter forth of strange Gods, when he preached to
them Jesus and the Resurrection, because they supposed him not only to have
made Jesus a God but also Anastasis or Resurrection, a Goddess too. Nay this
Humor of Theologizing the Things of Nature transported these Pagans so far, as
to Deifie Evil things also, that is, things both Noxious and Vicious. Of the
former Pliny thus, H.N.L. 2. c. 7.
Inferi quoque in genera describuntur, Morbique, and multae etiam Pestes, dum
esse placatas trepido metu cupimus. Ideoque etiam public Febri Fanum in
Palatio dedicatum est, Orbonae ad aedem Larium Ara, and Malae Fortunoe
Exquiliis: So great is the number of these Gods, that even Hell or the state of
death it self, Diseases and Many Plagues are numbered amongst them, whilst with
a trembling fear we desire to have these pacified. And therefore was there a
Temple publicly Dedicated in the Palace to the Fever, as likewise Altars
elsewhere erected to Orbona, and to Evil Fortune. Of the latter Balbus in
Cicero, N.D.L. 2.
Quo ex genere Cupidinis and Voluptatis, and Lubentinae Veneris, Vocabula
Consecrata sunt, Vitiosarum rerum and non Naturalium: Of which kind also, are
those Names of Lust, and Pleasure, and Wanton Venery, things Vicious and not
natural, Consecrated and Deified. Cicero in his Book of Laws informs us, that
at Athens there were Temples Dedicated also to Contumely and Impudence, but
withal giving us this censure of such practices, Gruter's Edition a little
otherwise.
Quae omnia ejusmodi detestanda and repudianda sunt, All which kind of things
are to be detested and rejected, and nothing to be Deified but what is Virtuous
or Good. Notwithstanding which, it is certain, that such Evil Things as these,
were Consecrated to no other end, than that they might be Deprecated. Moreover
as these Things of Natures, or Nature of Things, were sometimes Deified by the
Pagans plainly and nakedly in their own Appellative Names, so was this again
sometimes done disguisedly, under other Counterfeit Proper Names: as Pleasure
was Deified, under the Names of Volupia, and of Lubentina Venus; Time,
(according to the Opinion of some) under the Name of Cronos or Saturn, which as
it Produces all things, so devours all things into it self again; Prudence or
Wisdom likewise, under the Names of Athena or Minerva. For it is plain that
Origin understood it thus, C. Cells. L. 8. p. 421.
when Celsus not only approved of Worshipping God Almighty, in the Sun and in
Minerva, as that which was Lawful, but also commended it as a thing Highly
Pious; he making this Reply; (...), etc. (...), etc. We speak well of the Sun,
as a good work of God's, etc. but as for that Athena or Minerva, which Celsus
here joyneth with the Sun, this is a thing Fabulously devised by the Greeks
(whether according to some Mystical, Arcane and Allegorical Sense, or without
it) when they say that she was begotten out of Jupiter 's Brain All Armed. And
again afterward, (...), if it be gran^ed that by Athena or Minerva, be
Tropologically meant Prudence, etc. Wherefore not only according to the
Poetical, but also to the Political and Civil Theology of the Pagans, these
Accidental Things of Nature, and Affections of Substances, Personated, were
made so many Gods and Goddesses, Cicero himself in his Book of Laws approving
of such Political Gods as these; L. 2.
Been verograve; quod Men's, Pietas, Virtus, Fides, consecratur manu: quarum
omnium Romae dedicata public Templa sunt, ut illa qui habeant (habent autem
omnes boni) Deos ipsos in animis suis collocatos putent: It is well, that Mind,
Piety, Virtue and Faith, are consecrated, (all which have their Temples
publicly dedicated at Rome) that so they who possess these things (as all Good
men do) may think that they have the Gods themselves placed in their minds. And
himself makes a Law for them, in his own Commonwealth, but with a Cautionary
Provision, that no Evil and Vicious Things be Consecrated amongst them; Ast
olla, propter quae datur homini adscensus in Coelum, Mentem, Virtutem,
Pietatem, Fidem, earumque laudum delubra sunto. Nec ulla vitiorum Solemnia
obeunto: Let them also worship those things by means whereof, men ascend up to
Heaven, and let there be Shrines or Temples Dedicated to them. But let no
Religious Ceremonies be performed to Vicious things.

Notwithstanding all which according to that Theology of the Pagans which was
called by Varro Natural, (whereby is meant not that which was Physiological
only, but that which is True and Real) and by Scaevola Philosophical; and which
is by both opposed, not only to the Poetical and Fabulous, but also to the
Political and Civil; I say, according to this Theology of theirs, these
Accidental Things of Nature Deified, could by no means be acknowledged for True
and Proper Gods; because they were so far from having any Life and Sense in
them, that they had not so much as (...), any Real Subsistence or Substantial
Essence of their own. And thus does Origin dispute against Minervas Godship, as
Tropologically interpreted, to Prudence, (...)^ P. 422.
If Athena or Minerva be Tropologized into Prudence, then let the Pagans show
what Substantial Essence it has, or that it Really Subsists according to this
Tropology. Which is all one as if he should have said, Let the Pagans then show
how this can be a God or Goddess, which has not so much as any Substantial
Essence, nor Subsists by it self, but is a mere Accidental Affection of
Substances only. And the same thing is likewise urged by Origin, concerning
other such kind of Gods of theirs, as Memory the Mother of the Muses, and the
Graces all naked, in his First Book; where Celsus contended for a multiplicity
of Gods against the Jews; that these things having not (...), any Substantial
Essence or Subsistence, could not possibly be accounted Gods, and therefore
were nothing else, but (...), mere Figments of the Greeks; Things made to have
Humane Bodies, and so Personated and Deified. And we think there cannot be a
truer Commentary upon this Passage of Origen's, than these following verses of
Prudentius, in his Second Book against Symmachus, P. 285.
Desine, si pudor est, Geniilis ineptia, iandem
Res Incorporeas, Simulatis Fingere membris.
Let the Gentiles be at last ashamed, if they have any shame in them, of this
their folly, in describing and setting forth Incorporeal things with
Counterfeit Humane Members. Where Accidents and Affections of Things, such as
Victory was, (whose Altar Symmachus there contended for the Restoration of)
are by Prudentius called Res Incorporeae, Incorporeal Things, accordingly as
the Greek Philosophers concluded, that (...) were (...), Qualities Incorporeal.
Neither is it possible, that the Pagans themselves should be insensible hereof;
and accordingly we find, N.D.L. 3.
that Cotta in Cicero does for this reason utterly banish and explode these
Gods out of the Philosophic and True Theology, Number censes igitur subtiliore
ratione opus esse ad haec refellenda? Nam Mentem, Fidem, Spem, Virtutem,
Honorem, Victoriam, Salutem, Concordiam, caeteraque ejusmodi, Rerum Vim habere
videmus, non Deorum. Aut enim in nobismet insunt ipsis, ut Men's, ut Spes, ut
Fides, ut Virtus, ut Concordia; aut optandae nobis sunt, ut Honos, ut Salus, ut
Victoria. Quare autem in his Vis Deorum sit, tum intelligam cum cognovero. Is
there any need, think you, of any great Subtilty to confute these things? For
Mind, Faith, Hope, Virtue, Honor, Victory, Health, Concord, and the like, we
see them to have the Force of Things, but not of Gods. Because they either
exist in us, as Mind, Hope, Virtue, Concord; or else they are desired to happen
to us, as Honor, Health, Victory (that is, they are nothing but mere Accidents
or Affections of Things) and therefore how they can have the Force of Gods in
them cannot possibly be understood. And again afterward he affirms, Eos qui
Dii appellantur, Rerum Naturas esse, non Figuras Deorum, That those who in the
Allegorical Mythology of the Pagans, are called Gods, are really, but the
Natures of Things, and not the True Figures or Forms of Gods.

Wherefore since the Pagans themselves acknowledged, that those Personated and
Deified Things of Nature, were not True and Proper Gods; the meaning of them
could certainly be no other than this, that they were so many Several Names,
and Partial Considerations of One Supreme God, as manifesting himself in all
the Things of Nature. For that Vis or Force, which Cicero tells us, was that in
all these things, which was called God or Deified, is really no other, than
Something of God in Every Thing, that is Good. Neither do we otherwise
understand, those following words of Balbus in Cicero, N.D.L. 2.
Quarum Rerum, quia Vis erat tanta, ut sine Deo regi non posset, ipsa Res
Deorum Nomen obtinuit; Of which things because the Force is such, as that it
could not be Governed without God, therefore have the Things themselves
obtained the Names of Gods, that is, God was acknowledged and worshipped in
them all, which was Paganically thus signified, by Calling of them Gods. And
Pliny, though no very Divine Person, Not. H.L. 2. c. 7.
yet being ingenious, easily understood this to be the meaning of it; Fragilis
and laboriosa Mortalitas, in Parts ista digessit, Infirmitatis suae memor, ut
Portionibus quisque coleret, quo maximo indigeret; Frail and toilsom,
Mortality, has thus broken and crumbled the Deity into Parts, mindful of its
own Infirmity; that so every one by Parcels and Pieces, might worship that in
God, which himself most stands in need of. Which Religion of the Pagans, thus
worshipping God, not entirely all together at once, as he is One most Simple
Being, Unmixed with any thing, but as it were brokenly, and by piece-meals, as
he is severally Manifested, in all the Things of Nature, and the Parts of the
World, Prudentius thus perstringeth in his Second Book against Symmachus; N.
236.
Tu, me praeterito, meditaris Numina mill,
Quae simules parere meis Virtutibus, ut me
Per varias parts minuas, cui nulla recidi
Pars aut Forma potest, quia sum Substantia Simplex,
Nec Pars esse queo.
From which words of his we may also conclude, that Symmachus the Pagan, who
determined, That it was One Thing that all worshipped, and yet would have
Victory, and such like other things, worshipped as Gods and Goddesses, did by
these and all those other Pagan Gods before mentioned, understand nothing but
so many Several Names, and Partial Considerations of One Supreme Deity,
according to its several Virtues or Powers: so that when he sacrificed to
Victory, he sacrificed to God Almighty, under that Partial Notion, as the Giver
of Victory to Kingdoms and Commonwealths. It was before observed out of
Plutarch, That Osiris was the Supreme Deity, see the Egyptian Inscription, in
Theo. Smyrn. Mathem. c. 47. (...) Osiris the most ancient King of all things.
that the Egyptian Fable of Osiris, being mangled and cut in pieces by Typhon,
did Allegorically signify the same thing, viz. the One Simple Deity's, being
as it were divided (in the Fabulous and Civil Theologies of the Pagans) into
many Partial Considerations of him, as so many Nominal and Titular Gods; which
Isis notwithstanding, that is True Knowledge and Wisdom, according to the
Natural or Philosophic Theology, unites all together into One. And that not
only such Gods as these, Victory, Virtue and the like, but also those other
Gods, Neptune, Mars, Bellona, etc. were all really, but one and the same
Jupiter, acting severally in the world, Plautus himself seems sufficiently to
intimate, in the Prologue of his Amphitryo in these words, Nam quid ego
memorem, ut alios in Tragaediis
Vidi, Neptunum, Virtutem, Victoriam,
Martem, Bellonam, commemorare quae bona
Vobis fecissent? Queis Benefactis meus Pater,
Deum Regnator, Architectus omnibus:


Whereas there was before cited a Passage out of G. I. Vossius his Book, De
Theolog. Gent. which we could not understand otherwise than thus, that the
generality of the Pagans by their Political (or Civil) Gods, meant so many
Eternal Minds Independent and Self-Existent; we now think our selves concerned,
to do Vossius so much right, as to acknowledge, that we have since met with
another place of his in that same Book, wherein he either corrects the former
Opinion, or else declares himself better concerning it, after this manner; that
the Pagans generally conceived, their Political Gods, to be so many Substantial
Minds (or Spirits) not Independent and Self-existent, nor indeed Eternal
neither; but Created by One Supreme Mind or God and appointed by him to preside
over the Several Parts of the World and Things of Nature, as his Ministers.
Which same thing he affirms also, of those Deified Accidents and Affections,
that by them were to be understood, so many Substantial Minds or Spirits
Created, presiding over those several Things, or dispensing of them. His words
in the beginning of his Eighth Book (where he speaks concerning these
Affections and Accidents Deified by the Pagans) are as follows. Hujusmodi
Deorum prope immensa est copia. Ac in Civili quidem Theologia, considerari
solent, tanquam Mentes quaedam, hoc honoris a Summo Deo sortitae, ut
Affectionibus istis praeessent. Nempe crediderunt Deum, quem Optimum Max.
vocabant, non per se omnia curare, quo pacto, ut dicebant, plurimum beatitudini
ejus decederet, sed instar Regis, plurimos habere Ministros and Ministras,
quorum singulos huic illive curae prefecisset. Sic Justitia, quae and Astraea
ac Themis, praefecta erat actibus cunctis, in quibus Justitia attenderetur:
Comus curare creditus est Comessationes. Et sic in caeteris id genus Diis,
nomen ab ea Affectione sortitis, cujus cura cuique commissa crederetur. Quo
pacto si considerentur, non aliter different a Spiritibus sive Angelis bonis
malisque, quam quod hi revera a Deo conditi sint: illae vero Mentes, de quibus
nunc loquimur, sint Figmentum Mentis humanae, pro numero Assectionum, in quibus
Vis esse major videretur, comminiscentis Mentes Affectionibus Singulis
praefectas. Facile autem Sacerdotes sua Commenta persuadere simplicioribus
potuerunt, quia satis videretur verisimile, summae illi Menti, Deorum omnium
Regi, innumeras servire mentes, ut eo perfectior sit Summi Dei beatitudo,
minusque curis implicetur: inque tot Famulantium numero, Summi Numinis Majestas
magis eluceat. Ac talis quidem Opinio erat Theologiae Civilis. Of such Gods as
these, there was an innumerable company amongst the Pagans. And in their Civil
Theology they were wont to be considered, as certain Minds (or Spirits)
appointed by the Supreme God, to preside over the Affections fo Things. They
supposing, that God, whom they called the Best and the Greatest, did not
immediately himself take care of every thing, since that must needs be a
distraction to him, and a hinderance of his happiness^: but that he had as a
King, many He and She-Ministers under him, which had their several offices
assigned to them. Thus Justice which was called also Astrea and Themis, was by
them thought to preside over all those actions, in which Justice was concerned.
And Comus over all Revellings, and the like. Which Gods, if considered after
this manner, will no otherwise differ from Angels good and bad, than only in
this, that these Latter are Beings really created by God; but the former the
Figments of men only; they, according to the number of Affections, that have
any greater force in them, devizing and imagining certain Minds to preside over
each of them. And the vulgar might therefore be the more easily led into this
persuasion by their Priests, because it seemed reasonable to them, that that
Supreme Mind, who is the King of all the Gods, should have many other Minds as
his subservient Ministers under him, both to free him from Solicitous Care, and
also to add to his Grandeur and Majesty. And such was the Doctrine of the Civil
Theology. Where though Vossius speak Particularly, of that kind of Pagan Gods,
which were nothing but Affections and Accidents Deified, (which no man in his
wits could possibly suppose to be themselves True and Proper Gods, they having
no Subsistence of their own) That these by the generality of the Vulgar Pagans,
were conceived to be so many Created Minds or Spirits, appointed by the Supreme
God, to preside as his Ministers over those several Affections of Substances;
yet does he plainly imply the same, of all those other Political Gods of these
Pagans likewise, that they were not looked upon by them, as so many Unmade,
Self-existent, and Independent Beings, but only as Inferior Minds or Spirits,
created by the Supreme God, and by him appointed to preside over the Several
Parts of the World, and Things of Nature, and having their Several Offices
assigned to them. Wherefore as to the main, We and Vossius are now well agreed,
viz. That the ancient Pagans asserted no such thing as a Multitude of
Independent Deities; so that there only remain, some Particular Differences of
smaller moment, betwixt us.

Our selves have before observed, that Aeolus was probably taken by Epictetus
in Arrianus, (not indeed for One, but) for Many Created Ministers of the
Supreme God, or Demons Collectively; appointed by him to preside over the
Winds, in all the several Parts of the World. And the Pagans in St. Austin,
seem to interpret those Deified Accidents and Things of Nature after the same
manner, as the Names of certain Unknown Gods or Demons (one or more) that were
appointed to preside over them respectively, Civ. D. L. 4. c 24.
or to dispense the same. Quoniam sciebant Majores nostri nemini talia, nisi
aliquo Deo largiente concedi, quorum Deorum nomina non inveniebant, earum rerum
nominibus appellabant Deos, quas ab iis sentiebant dari; aliqua vocabula inde
fl^ctentes: sicut a Bello Bellonam nuncupaverunt non Bellum; sicut a cunis
Cuninam non, Cunam; sicut a segetibus Segetiam non Segetem; sicu^ a Pomis
Pomonam non Pomum; sicut a bobus Bobonam non Bovem. Aut certe nulla vocabuli
declinatione sicut res ipsae nominantur: ut Pecunia dicta est Dea quae dat
pecuniam, non omnino pecunia Dea ipsa pu^ata: Ita Virtus quae dat virtutem,
Honor qui honorem, Concordia quae concordiam, Victoria quae victoriam dat. Ita,
inquiunt, cum Felicitas Dea dicitur, non ipsa quae datur sed, Numen illud
attenditur, a quo Felicitas datur. Because our Forefathers knew well that these
things, do not happen to any, without the special Gift and Favor of some God;
therefore were those Gods, whose names they knew not, called from the names of
those very things themselves, which they perceived to be bestowed by them,
there being only a little Alteration made in them, as when the God that causes
War, was called not Bellum but Bellona; the God which presideth over Infants
Cradles not Cuna but Cunina; that which gives Corn Segetia; and that which
affords apples Pomona, etc. But at other times, this was done without any
Declension of the Word at all, they calling both the Thing and the God, which
is the Bestower of it, by one and the self same name. As Pecunia does not only
signify Money, but also the Goddess which gives Money; Virtus the Goddess
which gives Virtue; Honor the God that bestows honor; Concordia the Goddess
that causes Concord; Victory the Goddess which affords Victory. So also when
Felicity is called a Goddess, by it is not meant, that thing which is given,
but that Divine Power, from whence it is given. Here, I say, the Pagans may
seem to have understood, by those Deified Things of Nature, certain Inferior
Gods or Demons (One or More) the Ministers of the Supreme God, appointed by him
to preside over those several Things respectively, or to dispense the same.
Neither can we deny, but that in so much ignorance and diversity of Opinions as
there was amongst the Pagans, some might possibly understand, those Political
Gods and Deified Things also, after the way of Vossius, for so many Single
Minds or Spirits, appointed to preside over those Several Things respectively,
throughout the whole World, and nothing else. Nevertheless it seems not at
all probable, that this should be the General Opinion amongst the Civilized
Pagans, that all those Gods of theirs, were so many Single Created Minds or
Spirits, each of them appointed to preside over some One certain thing every
where throughout the Whole World, and nothing else. As for Example, that the
Goddess Victory, was One Single Created She-Spirit, appointed to bestow
Victory, to whosoever at any time enjoyed it, in all parts of the World: and
so, that the Goddess Justice should be such another Single Mind or Spirit,
created to dispense Justice every where and meddle with nothing else. And the
like of all those other Accidental Things, or Affections Deified, as Virtue,
Honor, Concord, Felicity, etc.

And Lactantius Firmianus, De Eal. Rel. c. 7.
taking notice of that Profession of the Pagans, to worship nothing but One
Supreme God and his Subservient Ministers Generated or created by him,
(according to that of Seneca in his Exhortations, Genuisse Regni sui Ministros
Deum; that the Supreme God had generated other Inferior Ministers of his
Kingdom under him, which were called by them also Gods) plainly denies all the
Pagan Gods save One, to be the Created Ministers of that One Supreme, he making
this Reply; Verum hi neque Dii sunt, neque Deos se vocari, aut coli volunt,
etc. Nec tamen illi sunt qui vulgo coluntur, quorum and exiguus and certus est
numerus: But these Ministers of the Divine Kingdom, or Subservient Created
Spirits, are neither Gods, nor would they be called Gods, or honored as such,
etc. Nor indeed are they those Gods, that are now vulgarly worshipped by the
Pagans, of which there is but a Small and Certain number. That is, the Pagan
Gods, are reduced into certain Ranks, and the Number of them is determined by
the Utilities of Humane Life; of which, their Noble and Select Gods, are but a
few. Whereas, says he, the Ministers of the Supreme God, are according to
their own Opinion, not Twelve nor Twenty, nor Three Hundred and Sixty, but
Innumerable; Stars, and Demons.

Moreover Aristotle in his Book against Zeno (supposing the Idea of God, to be
this, the Most Powerful of all things, Arist. in Xen. Zen. Gor. p. 1246.
or the Most Perfect Being) objecteth thus, that according to the Laws of
Cities and Countries (that is, the Civil Theology) there seems to be no One
absolutely Powerful Being, but One God is supposed to be most Powerful as to
one thing, and another as to another: (...)^ Whereas Zeno takes it for granted,
that men have an Idea in their minds of God, as One the most Excellent and most
Powerful Being of all; this does not seem to be according to Law, (that is, the
Civil Theology) for there the Gods are mutually Better one than another,
respectively as to several things; and therefore Zeno took not this Consent of
mankind concerning God, from that which vulgarly seems. From which passage of
Aristotle's we may well conclude, that the Many Political Gods of the Pagans,
were not all of them vulgarly looked upon, as the Subservient Ministers of One
Supreme God, and yet they generally acknowledging, (as Aristotle himself
confesses) a Monarchy, and consequently not many Independent Deities; it must
needs follow, as Zeno doubtless would reply, that these their Political Gods,
were but One and the same Supreme Natural God, as it were Parcell'd out, and
Multiplied; that is, receiving Several Denominations, according to Several
Notions of him; and as he exercises Different Powers, and produces Various
Effects. And this we have sufficiently proved already to have been the general
sense of the Chief Pagan Doctors; that these Many Political and Popular Gods,
were but the Polyonymy of One Natural God, that is, either Partial
Considerations of him, or his Various Powers and Virtues, Effects and
Manifestations in the World, severally Personated and Deified.

And thus does Vossius himself afterward confess also; That according to the
Natural Theology, the Many Pagan Gods, were but so many Several Denominations
of One God; though this Learned Philologer does plainly straiten and confine
the Notion of this Natural Theology too much, and improperly call the God
thereof, the Nature of Things; however acknowledging it such a Nature, as was
endued with Sense and Understanding. His Words are these, Dispar vero sententia
Theologorum Naturalium, L. 8. c. 1.
qui non aliud Numen agnoscebant quam Naturam Rerum, eoque omnia Gentium Numina
referebant, etc. Nempe men's eorum fuit, sicut Natura esset occupata, circa hanc
vel illam Affectionem, ita Numina Nominaque Deorum variare. Cum igitur
ubicunque Vim aliquam majorem viderent, ita Divinum aliquid crederent: eo etiam
devenere, ut immanem Deorum Dearumque fingerent Catervam. Sagaciores interim
haec cuncta, Vnum esse Numen aiebant: puta Rerum Naturam, quae licet una foret,
pro variis tamen Effectis varia sortiretur nomina, vario etiam afficeretur
cultu. But the Case is very different as to the Natural Theologers, who
acknowledged no other God but the Nature of Things, and referred all the Pagan
Gods to that. For they conceived that as Nature was occupied about several
things, so were the Divine Powers and the Names of Gods, multiplied and
diversified. And wherever they saw any Greater Force, there did they
presently conceit something Divine, and by that means came they at length to
feign an innumerable company of Gods and Goddesses. But the more sagacious in
the mean time affirmed, all these to be but One and the same God; to wit the
Nature of Things, which though Really but One, yet according to its various
Effects both received diverse Names, and was Worshipped after different manners.
Where Vossius calls the Supreme God of these Natural Theologers, the Nature of
Things; as if the Natural Theology had been denominated from Physics, or
Natural Philosophy only, whereas we have already showed, that the Natural
Theology of Varro and Scaevola, was of equal extent with the Philosophic;
whose only Numen, that it was not a Blind and Unintelligible Nature of Things,
does sufficiently appear, from that History thereof before given by us: as also
that it was called Natural in another sense, as Real; and as opposite to
Opinion, Fancy and Fabulosity, or what has no Reality of Existence any where
in the World. Thus does St. Austin distinguish betwixt Natura Deorum, the True
Nature of the Gods, C.D.L. 6. c. 5.
and Hominum Instituta, the Institutes of Men concerning them. As also he sets
down the Difference, betwixt the Civil and Natural Theology, according to the
Mind of Varro in this manner, Ibid.
Fieri potest ut in Vrbe, secundum Falsas opiniones ea colantur and credantur,
quorum in Mundo vel extra Mundum Natura sit nusquam: It may come to pass, that
those Things may be worshipped and believed in Cities, according to False
opinions; which have no Nature or Real Existence any where, either in the World
or without it. Wherefore if instead of this Nature of Things, which was
properly the God of none but only of such Atheistick Philosophers as Epicurus
and Strato, we substitute that Great Mind or Soul of the whole World, which
Pervadeth All Things, and is Diffused thorough All; (which was the True God of
the Pagan Theists) this of Vossius will be unquestionably true, concerning
their Natural Theologers, that according to them, those Many Poetical and
Political Gods before mentioned, were but One and the same Natural or Real God;
who in respect of his Different Virtues, Powers, and Effects, was called by
several Names, and worshipped after different manners. Yet nevertheless so, as
that according to those Theologers, there were Really also Many other Inferior
Ministers of this One Supreme God, (whether called Minds or Demons) that were
supposed to be the Subservient Executioners of all those several Powers of his.
And accordingly we had before, this full and true account of the Pagans Natural
Theology set down out of Prudentius. -- In Vno
Constituit jus omne Deo, cui serviat ingens
Virtutum ratio, Variis instructa Ministris.
Viz. That it acknowledged One Supreme Omnipotent God, ruling over all, who
displayeth and exercises his Manifold Virtues and Powers in the world, (all
severally Personated and Deified in the Poetic and Civil Theologies) together
with the subservient Ministry of other Inferior Created Minds, Understanding
Beings; or Demons, called also by them Gods.

It is very true, as we have already declared, that the more High-flown
Platonic Pagans, did reduce those Many Poetical and Political Gods, and
therefore doubtless all the Personated and Deified Things of Nature too, to the
Platonic Ideas, or First Paradigms and Patterns of Things in the Archetypal
World, which they affirmed to have been begotten from the Supreme Deity, that
is, from the First Hypostasis of the Platonic Trinity; and which were commonly
called by them (...), Intelligible Gods, as if they had been indeed, so many
Distinct Substances and Persons. And as we have also proved out of Philo, that
this High-flown Paganick Theology, was ancienter than either Julian or
Apuleius; so do we think it not unworthy our Observation here, that the very
same Doctrine, is by Celsus imputed also to the Egyptian Theologers, as
pretending to worship Brute Animals no otherwise, Orig. C. Cells. L. 3. p. 120.
than as Symbols of those Eternal Ideas; (...)^ Celsus also adds, That we
Christians deride the Egyptians, without cause, they having many Mysteries in
their Religion, for as much as they profess, that perishing Brute Animals are
not worshipped by them, but the Eternal Ideas. According to which of Celsus it
should seem, that this Doctrine of Eternal Ideas, as the Paradigms and Patterns
of all things here below in this Sensible World, was not proper to Plato nor
the Greeks; but common with them to the Egyptians also. Which Eternal Ideas,
however supposed to have been Generated from, that First Divine Hypostasis of
the Platonic and Egyptian Trinity, and called Intelligible Gods; were
nevertheless acknowledged by them, all to exist in One Divine Intellect,
according to that of Plotinus, (...), that the Intelligibles exist no where of
themselves, without Mind or Intellect; which Mind or Intellect, being the
Second Divine Hypostasis, these Intelligible and Invisible Gods, (however
Generated from God) yet are therefore said by Julian in his Book against the
Christians, both to Coexist with God, and to Inexist in him. To which purpose
also, is this other Passage of Julian's in his Sixth Oration, P. 347.
(...)^ For God is All things, forasmuch as he contains within himself, the
Causes of all things, that any way are; whether of Immortal things Immortal; or
of Corruptible and Perishing things, not Corruptible but Eternal also, and
always remaining; which therefore are the Causes of their perpetual Generation,
and New production. Now these Causes of All things contained in God, are no
other than The Divine Ideas. Wherefore from hence it plainly appears, that
these Platonic and Egyptian Pagans, who thus reduced their Multiplicity of
Gods to the Divine Ideas, did not therefore make them to be so many Minds or
Spirits, really distinct from the Supreme God, (though dependent on him too)
but indeed only so many Partial Considerations of One God, as being All things,
that is, containing within himself the Causes of all things. And accordingly we
find in Origin, that as the Egyptian Theologers called their Religious Animals,
Or. C. Cells. P. 102.
Symbols of the Eternal Ideas, so did they also call them, Symbols of God.
(...)^ Celsus applauds the Egyptian Theologers talking so magnificently and
mysteriously of those Brute Animals worshipped by them, and affirming them to
be, certain Symbols of God.

And now we have given some account of the Polyonymy of the One Supreme God, in
the Theologies of the Pagans: or of his being called by Many Proper Personal
Names, carrying with them an Appearance of So many Several Gods. First, that
God had many several Names bestowed upon him, from many Different Notions and
Partial Considerations of him, according to his Universal and All-comprehending
Nature. Janus, as the Beginning of the World, and All things, and the First
Original of the Gods. Whom therefore that ancient Lyrick Poet, Septimius Apher,
accordingly thus invoked; O cate rerum Sator! O PRINCIPIVM DEORVM!
Stridula cui Limina, cui Cardinei Tumultus,
Cui reserata mugiunt aurea Claustra Mundi.
Genius, as the Great Mind and Soul of the whole World. Saturn, as that Hidden
Source and Principle, from which all Forms and Lives issue forth, and into
which they again retire; being there laid up as in their Secret Storehouse: Or
else as one of the Egyptian or Hermaick Writers expresses it, that which does,
(...), make all things out of it self, and unmake them into it self again. This
Hetrurian Saturn, answering to the Egyptian Hammon, that likewise signified
Hidden, and is accordingly thus interpreted by Jamblichus, (...), he that
brings forth the secret Power of the Hidden Reasons of things (contained
within himself) into Light. God was also called Athena or Minerva, as Wisdom
diffusing it self through all things: and Aphrodite Urania, the Heavenly Venus
or Love. Thus Phanes, Orpheus his Supreme God, (so called according to
Lactantius, Quia cum adhuc nihil esset, Primus ex Infinito apparuerit, because
when there was yet nothing, he First appeared out of that Infinite Abyss, but
according to Proclus, because he did (...), discover and make manifest the
Intelligible Unities (or Ideas) from himself; though we think the Conjecture of
Athanasius Kircherus to be more probable than either of these, that Phanes was
an Egyptian Name;) this Phanes, I say, was in the Orphick, and Egyptian
Theology, as Proclus upon Plato's Timaeus informs us, styled (...), Tender and
Soft Love. And Pherecydes Syrus likewise affirmed, (...), That Jupiter was
turned all into Love, when he went about to make the world. Besides which,
there were other such Names of the Supreme God and more than have been
mentioned by us; as for example, Summanus amongst the ancient Romans, that
afterward grew obsolete,: C.D.L. 4. c. 23
of which St. Austin thus; Romani veteres nescio quem Summanum, cui Nocturna
Fulmina tribuebant, coluerunt magis quam Jovem, ad quem Diurna Fulmina
pertinebant. Sed postquam Jovi Templum insigne ac sublime constructum est,
propter aedis dignitatem, sic ad eum multitudo confluxit, ut vix inveniatur qui
Summani nomen, quod audiri jam non potest, se saltem legisse meminerit: The
ancient Romans, worshipped I know not what God called Summanus, more than they
did Jupiter. But after that a stately and magnificent Temple was erected to
Jupiter, they all betook themselves thither; in so much that the Name of
Summanus now not at all heard, is scarcely to be found in any ancient writings.

Again as the Pagans had certain other Gods, which they called Special; so were
these but Several Names of that Supreme God also, according to Particular
Considerations of him, either as Presiding over certain Parts of the World, and
Acting in them; or as Exercising certain Special Powers and Virtues in the
World; which Several Virtues and Powers of One God, Personated and Deified by
the Pagans, though they had an appearance also of Many Distinct Gods; yet were
they really nothing but Several Denominations of One Supreme God: who as yet is
considered as a Thing distinct from the World and Nature.

But Lastly, as God was supposed by these Pagans, not only to Pervade All
things, and To Fill All things, but also, he being the Cause of All things, to
be Himself in a manner All things; so was he called also by the Name of Every
thing, or Every thing called by His Name: that is, the several Things of Nature
and Parts of the World were themselves Verbally Deified by these Pagans, and
called Gods and Goddesses. Not that they really accounted them such in
themselves, but that they thought fit in this manner to acknowledge God in
them, as the Author of them all. For thus the Pagans in St. Austin, Vsque
adeone, inquiunt, Majores nostros insipientes fuisse credendum est, ut haec
nescirent Munera Divina esse, non Deos? Can you think that our Pagan Ancestors
were so sottish, as not to know, that these Things are but Divine Gifts, and
not Gods themselves? And Cicero also tells us, that the meaning of their thus
Deifying these Things of Nature, was only to signify, that they acknowledged
The Force of all things to be Divine, and to be Governed by God; and that
whatsoever brought any great Vtility to Mankind, was not such Without the
Divine Goodness. They conceiving also, that the Invisible and Incomprehensible
Deity, which was the Cause of All things, ought to be worshipped in All its
Works and Effects, in which it had made it self Visible, Pr. Evan. L. 3. c. 13.
accordingly as they declare in that place of Eusebius before cited in part,
(...)^ That they did not Deifie those Visible Bodies of the Sun, and Moon and
Stars, nor the other Sensible Parts of the World themselves, but those
Invisible Powers of the God over all, that were displayed in them. For they
affirm, that that God who is but One, but yet Fills all things with his
various Powers, and passes through all things, forasmuch as he is Invisibly and
Incorporeally present in all, is reasonably to be worshipped in and by those
Visible Things.

Athanasius Bp. of Alexandria, in his Book against the Greeks, reduces all the
False Gods of the Pagans, under Two general Heads; the First, Poetical,
Fictitious or Fantastical Gods; the Second, Creatures or Real Things of Nature
Deified by them. His words are these; (...), etc. Since this Reason or
Discourse of ours, has sufficiently convinced, both the Poetical Gods of the
Pagans to be no Gods at all; and also that they who Deifie the Creatures, are
in a great Error; and so has confuted the whole Pagan Idolatry, proving it to
be mere Ungodliness and Impiety, there is nothing now but the True Piety left;
he who is worshipped by us Christians, being the only True God, the Lord of
Nature, and the Maker of all Substances. From whence we may observe, that
according to Athanasius, the Pagan Poetic Gods, were no Real Things in Nature,
and therefore they could be no other, than the Several Notions and Powers of
the One Supreme God Deified, or Several Names of him. So that Athanasius his
Poetic Gods, or (...), Gods fabulously devised by the Poets, were chiefly
those Two Kinds of Pagan Gods, first mentioned by us; that is, the Various
Considerations of the One Supreme Numen, according to its general Notion,
expressed by so many Proper Names; and Secondly his Particular Powers diffused
thorough the World, severally Personated and Deified. Which considered, as so
many distinct Deities, are nothing but mere Fiction and Fancy, without any
Reality. And this do the Pagans themselves in Athanasius, acknowledge, (...),
P. 1^.
They say, that the names of those Gods are merely Fictitious, and that there
does no where Really Exist any such Jupiter, or Saturn, or Juno, or Mars; but
that the Poets have feigned them to be so many persons Existing, to the
deception of their Auditors. Notwithstanding which, that Third Sort of Pagan
Gods also mentioned by us, which were Inanimate Substances and the Natures of
Things Deified, may well be accounted Poetical Gods likewise; because though
those things themselves be Real and not Feigned, yet is their Personation and
Deification mere Fiction and Fancy: and however the first occasion thereof
sprung, from this Theological Opinion or Persuasion, That God who is In All
Things, and is the Cause of All Things, ought to be worshipped In All Things,
especially he being himself Invisible; yet the making of those things
themselves therefore to be so many Persons and Gods, was nothing but Poetic
Fiction and Phantastry, accordingly as their old Mythology and Allegorical
Fables of the Gods, run much upon this strain.

XXXIV. Hitherto have we declared the Sense of the Pagans in General, those
also being included, who supposed God to be a Being Elevated above the World,
That they agreed in these Two Things. First the Breaking and Crumbling as it
were, of the Simple Deity, and Parcelling out of the same into Many Particular
Notions and Partial Considerations, according to the Various Manifestations, of
its Power and Providence in the world; by the Personating and Deifying of which
Severally, they made as it were, so Many Gods of One. The chief Ground whereof
was this, because they considered not the Deity according to its Simple Nature,
and Abstractly only; but Concretely also with the World, as he Displayeth
himself therein, Pervadeth all, and Diffuseth his Virtues thorough all. For as
the Sun reflected by Grosser Vapors, is sometimes Multiplied, and the same
Object beheld through a Polyedrous Glass, by reason of those many Superficies,
being represented in several places at once, is thereby rendered Manifold to the
Spectator; So One and the same Supreme God, considered Concretely with the
World as Manifesting his Several Powers and Virtues in it, was multiplied into
Several Names, not without the Appearance of so Many Several Gods. Whereas
(...) with those ancient Pagans, was the same thing with (...), That which has
Many Names, all one with that which has Many Powers: According to this of
Callimachus concerning Diana, (...),
(...).
And this of Virgil concerning Alecto, -- Tibi Nomina Mill,
Mill nocendi Arts.
And accordingly the Many Pagan Gods are in Plato's Cratylus, interpreted as
the Many Powers of One God Diffused through the World. And the Pagan Theologers
seemed to conceive, this to be more suitable to the Pomp, State and Grandeur, of
the Supreme God, for him to be considered Diffusively, and called by Many
Names, signifying his Many Several Virtues and Powers (Polyonymy being by them
accounted an Honor) rather than to be contracted and shrunk all up, into One
General Notion, of a Perfect Mind, the Maker or Creator of the whole World. The
Second Thing in which the Pagans agreed is, their Personating and Deifying also
the Parts of the World, and Things of Nature themselves, and so making them so
many Gods and Goddesses too. Their meaning therein being declared to be really
no other than this; That God who does not only Pervade all things, but also was
the Cause of All things, and therefore himself is in a manner All things, ought
to be worshipped in all the Things of Nature and Parts of the World: as also
that the Force of every thing was Divine, and that in all things that were
Beneficial to mankind, The Divine Goodness ought to be acknowledged.

We shall now observe how both those forementioned Principles, of Gods
Pervading all things, and his Being All things, which were the Chief Grounds of
the Seeming Polytheism of the Pagans, were improved and carried on further, by
those amongst them, who had no Higher Notion of the Supreme Deity, than as the
Soul of the World. Which Opinion that it found entertainment amongst so many of
them, probably might be from hence, because it was so obvious for those of them
that were Religious to conceive, that as themselves consisted of Body and Soul,
so the Body of the Whole World, was not without its Soul neither: and that
their Humane Souls were as well derived from the Life and Soul of the World, as
the Earth and Water in their Bodies was, from the Earth and Water of the World.
Now whereas the more refined Pagans, as was before observed, supposed God to
Pervade and Pass thorough All things (...) Vnmixedly; these concluded God to
be, (according to that Definition of him in Quintilian, taken in a rigid sense)
Spiritum omnibus Partibus Immistum, a Spirit Immingled with all the Parts of
the World: or else in Manilius his Language, Infusumque Deum Caelo, Terrisque
Fretoque, Infused into the Heaven, Earth, and Seas: Sacroque meatu Conspirare
Deum, and intimately to conspire with his own Work the World, as being almost
one with it. Upon which account he was commonly called Nature also, that being
thus defined by some of the Stoics, Deus Mundo permistus, God Mingled
throughout with the World, and Divina Ratio toti Mundo insita, The Divine
Reason inserted into the whole World. Which Nature notwithstanding, in way of
distinction from the Particular Natures of things, was called (...), and
Communis Natura, the Common Nature. And it was plainly declared by them, not to
be a Senseless Nature; according to that of Balbus in Cicero, Natura est quae
continet Mundum omnem, eumque tuetur; atque ea quidem non sine Sensu, atque
Ratione: It is Nature by which the whole World is contained and upheld, but
this such a Nature as is not without Sense and Reason. As it is elsewhere said
to be, Perfect and Eternal Reason, the Divine Mind and Wisdom containing also
under it, all the (...), the Spermatick Principles by which the things of
Nature (commonly so called) are effected. Wherefore we see that such
Naturalists as these, may well be allowed to be Theists; (Moses himself in
Strabo being accounted one of them) whereas those that acknowledge no Higher
Principle of the World, than a Senseless Nature; (whether Fortuitous, or Orderly
and Methodical) cannot be accounted any other than Absolute Atheists. Moreover
this Soul of the World, was by such of these Pagans as admitted no Incorporeal
Substance, it self concluded to be a Body too, but (...), a Most Subtle and
Most Swift Body, as was before observed out of Plato (though endued with
Perfect Mind and Understanding, as well as with Spermatick Reasons) which
insinuating it self into all other Bodies, did Permeate and Pervade the whole
Universe, and frame all things, inwardly Mingling it self with all. Heraclitus
and Hippasus thinking this to be Fire, and Diogenes Apolloniates Air; whom
Simplicius, who had read some of his then extant Works, vindicates from that
Imputation of Atheism, which Hippo and Anaximander lie under.

Again, As Simplicius describes God, to be (...). Omnia ante omnia. In
Epictet. p^ 234
whereas the more Sublimated Pagans affirmed the Supreme God to be All, so as
that he was nevertheless something Above All too, he being Above the Soul of
the World; (and probably Aeschylus in that forecited passage of his, is to be
understood after this manner, (...), Jupiter is the Either, Jupiter is the
Earth, Jupiter is the Heaven; Jupiter is All things, and yet something Higher
than all; or Above all:) those Pagans who acknowledged no Higher Numen, than
the Soul of the World; made God to be All Things in a grosser sense, they
supposing the whole Corporeal World Animated to be also the Supreme Deity. For
though God to them, were Principally and Originally, that Eternal Unmade Soul
and Mind, which diffuseth it self thorough all things, yet did they conceive,
that as the Humane Soul and Body, both together, make up one whole Rational
Animal, or Man; so this Mundane Soul, and its Body the World, did in lke manner
both together, make up One Entire Divine Animal, or God.

It is true indeed, that as the Humane Soul does Principally act in some one
Part of the Body, which therefore has been called the Hegemonicon and
Principale, some taking this to be the Brain, others the Heart, but Strato in
Tertullian ridiculously, the Place betwixt the Eyebrows; so the Stoics did
suppose the Great Soul or Mind of the World, to act Principally in some one
Part thereof, (which what it was notwithstanding they did not all agree upon)
as the Hegemonicon or Principale; and this was sometimes called by them,
Emphatically, God. But nevertheless they all acknowledged this Mundane Soul, as
the Souls of other Animals, to Pervade, Animate, or Enliven and Actuate, more
or less its whole Body, The World. This is plainly declared by Laertius in the
Life of Zeno. (...)^ The Stoics affirm, that the World is governed by Mind and
Providence, this Mind passing through all the Parts of it, as the Soul does in
us: Which yet does not act in all parts alike, but in some more, in some less:
it passing through some parts only as a Habit, (as through the bones and
Nerves) but through others as Mind or Understanding, (as through that which is
called the Hegemonicon or Principale.) So the whole World being a Living and
Rational Animal, has its Hegemonicon or Principal Part too, which according to
Antipater is the Ether, to Possidonius the Air, to Cleanthes the Sun, etc. And
they say also, that this First God is, as it were, sensibly Diffused through
all Animals and Plants, but through the Earth it self, only as a Habit.
Wherefore the whole World, being thus Acted and Animated by one Divine Soul, is
it self according to these Stoics also The Supreme God. P. Ev. L. 15. c. 25.

L. 5 p. 235.


Thus Didymus in Eusebius, (...), The Stoics call the whole World God; and
Origin against Celsus, (...)^ The Greeks universally affirm the World to be a
God, but the Stoics, the First and Chief God^ And accordingly Manilius, Qua
pateat Mundum Divino Numine verti
Atque Ipsum esse Deum:
Whereby it may appear the World to be Governed by a Divine Mind, and also it
self to be God. As likewise Seneca the Philosopher, Totum hoc quo continemur,
and Vnum est, and Deus est; This whole World, within which we are contained, is
both One thing, and God. Which is not to be understood, of the Mere Matter of
the World, as it is nothing but a Heap of Atoms, or as endued with a Plastic
and Senseless Nature only; but of it as Animated by such a Soul, as besides
Sense was originally endued with perfect Understanding; and as deriving all its
Godship from thence. C.D.L. 7. c. 6.
For thus Varro in St. Austin declares, both his own, and the Stoical Sense
concerning this Point, Dicit idem Varro, adhuc de Naturali Theologia
praeloquens, Deum se arbitrari esse Animam Mundi (quem Graeci vocant (...)) and
hunc ipsum Mundum esse Deum. Sed sicut Hominem Sapientem, cum sit ex Corpore
and Animo, tamen ab Animo dici Sapientem; ita Mundum Deum dici ab Animo, cum
sit ex Animo and Corpore: The same Varro discoursing concerning Natural
Theology, declares that according to his own sense God is the Soul of the
World, (which the Greeks call Cosmos) and that this World it self is also God.
But that this is so to be understood, that as a Wise man, though consisting of
Soul and Body, yet is denominated Wise only from his Mind or Soul; so the World
is denominated God, from its Mind or Soul only, it consisting both of Mind and
Body.

Now if the Whole Animated World be the Supreme God, it plainly follows from
thence, that the Several Parts and Members thereof, must be the Parts and
Members of God; and this was readily acknowledged by Seneca, Membra sumus
Corporis magni; We are all Members of One great Body: and Totum hoc Deus est,
Socii ejus and Membra sumus; This whole World is God, and we are not only his
Members, but also his Fellows or Companions; as if our Humane Souls, had a
certain kind of Fellowship also, with that Great Soul of the Universe. And
accordingly, the Soul of the World, and the whole Mundane Animal, was
frequently worshipped by the Pagans, in these its several Members; the chief
Parts of the World, and the most important Things of Nature; as it were by
Piecemeal. Nevertheless it does not at all follow from thence, that these were
therefore to them Really so many Several Gods; for then not only every Man, and
every Contemptible Animal, every Plant and Herb and Pile of Grass, every River
and Hill, and all things else whatsoever, must be so many several Gods. And
that the Pagans themselves did not take them for such, Origin observes against
that Assertion of Celsus; That if the Whole were God, then the Several Parts
thereof must needs be Gods, or Divine too: (...)^ L. 5. p. 234.
From hence it would follow, that not only Men must be Divine and Gods, but
also all Brute Animals too (they being Parts of the World) and Plants to boot.
Nay Rivers, and Mountains, and Seas, being Parts of the World likewise, (if the
Whole World be God) must according to Celsus needs be Gods also. Whereas the
Greeks themselves will not affirm this; but they would only call those Spirits
or Demons, which preside over these Rivers and Seas, Gods. Wherefore this
Universal Assertion of Celsus, is false even according to the Greeks
themselves; That if the whole be God, then all the Parts thereof must needs be
Divine or Gods. It following from thence that Flies, and Gnats, and Worms, and
all kind of Serpents, and Birds, and Fishes, are all Divine Animals or Gods:
Which they themselves, who assert the World to be God, will not affirm.

Wherefore though it be true, that the Pagans did many times Personate and
Deifie, the Chief Parts of the World, and Things of Nature, as well as they did
the Several Powers and Virtues of the Mundane Soul, diffused through the whole
World, yet did not the intelligent amongst them, therefore look upon these, as
so many True and Proper Gods, but only worship them as Parts and Members of One
Great Mundane Animal; or rather, Worship the Soul of the whole World, their
Supreme Deity, in them all, as its various Manifestations. This St. Austin
intimates, when writing against Faustus the Manichean, he prefers even the
Pagan Gods before the Manichean; Jam vero Coelum, and Terra, and Mare, and Aer,
and Sol, and Luna, and caetera sydera omnia, haec manifesta oculis apparent,
atque ipsis sensibus praesto sunt. Quae cum Pagani tanquam Deos colunt, vel
tanquam PARTS VNIVS MAGNI DEI (nam universum Mundum quidam eorum putant
MAXIMVM DEVM) ea colunt quae sunt. Vos autem cum ea colatis, quae omnino non
sunt, propinquiores essetis Verae Pietati, si saltem Pagani essetis, qui
Corpora colunt, etsi non colenda, tamen vera. Now the Heaven, Earth, Sea, and
Air, Sun, Moon, and Stars, are Things all manifest and really present to our
senses, which when the Pagans Worship as Gods, or as PARTS OF ONE GREAT GOD,
(for some of them think the Whole World to be the GREATEST GOD) they Worship
things that are; so that you worshipping things that are not, would be nearer
to true Piety than you are, were you Pagans and worshipped Bodies too; which
though they ought not to be worshipped, yet are they True and Real Things. But
this is further insisted upon by the same St. Austin in his Book De C. D. where
after that large Enumeration of the Pagan Gods before set down; L. 4. c. 11.
he thus convinces their Folly in worshipping the Several Divided Members,
Parts and Powers, of the One Great God, after that manner Personated; Haec
omnia quae dixi, and quaecunque non dixi (non enim omnia dicenda arbitratus
sum) Hi omnes Dii Deaeque sit Vnus Jupiter; sive sint ut quidam volunt omnia
ista Parts ejus, sive Virtutes ejus, sicut eis videtur quibus eum placet esse
Mundi Animum; quae sententia velut magnorum, multorumque Doctorum est. Haec,
inquam, si ita sint, quod quale sit, nondum interim quaero, Quid perderent, si
Vnum Deum colerent prudentiori Compendio? Quid enim ejus contemneretur, cum
ipse coleretur? Si autem metuendum sit ne Praetermissae sive Neglectae Parts
ejus irascerentur: non ergo ut volunt velut Vnius Animantis haec tota vita est,
quae Omnes simul continet Deos, quasi Suas VIRTVTES, vel MEMBRA, vel PARTS:
sed suam quaeque Pars habet vitam a caeteris separatam, si praeter alteram
irasci altera potest, and alia placari alia concitari. Si autem dicitur Omnia
simul, id est, Totum ipsum Jovem potuisse offendi, si PARTS ejus non etiam
singillatim, minutatimque colerentur, stulte dicitur. Nulla quippe earum
praetermitteretur, cum ipse Vnus qui haberet Omnia, coleretur. All these
things, which we have now said, and many more which we have not said (for we
did not think fit to mention all) All these Gods and Goddesses, let them be One
and the same Jupiter: whether they will have them to be his PARTS, or his
POWERS and VERTVES, according to the sense of those who think God to be the
Soul or Mind of the Whole World; which is the opinion of many and great
Doctors. This I say, if it be so, which what it is, we will not now examine;
What would these Pagans lose, if in a more prudent compendium, they should
worship One only God? For what of him could be despised, when his whole self
was worshipped? But if they fear, left his PARTS pretermitted, or neglected,
should be angry or take offense; then is it not as they pretend, the Life of
One Great Animal, which at once conteins all the Gods, as his VERTVES or
MEMBERS or PARTS, but every Part has its own Life by it self, separate from
the rest, since One of them may be angry when another is pleased, and the
contrary. But if it should be said that all together, that is, the whole
Jupiter might be offended, if his Parts were not worshipped all of them
Severally and Singly, this would be foolishly said, because none of the Parts
can be pretermitted, when He, that has All, is Worshipped.

Thus do the Pagans in Athanasius also declare, that they did not worship the
several Parts of the World, as Really so many True and Proper Gods, but only as
the Parts or Members, of their One Supreme God, that Great Mundane Animal (or
Whole Animated World) taken all together as one thing; (...)^ But the Pagans
themselves will acknowledge, that the Divided Parts of the World, taken
severally, are but indigent and imperfect things; nevertheless do they contend,
that as they are by them joined all together, into One Great Body (enlivened by
one Soul) so is the whole of them truly and properly God. And now we think, it
is sufficiently evident, that though these Pagans Verbally Personated and
Deified, not only the several Powers and Virtues, of the One Supreme God or
Mundane Soul, diffused thoroughout the whole World, but also the several Parts
of the World it self, and the Natures of Things, yet their meaning herein was
not, to make these in themselves really, so many several True and Proper Gods,
(much less Independent Ones) but to worship One Supreme God (which to them was
the whole Animated World) in those his several Parts and Members; as it were by
Piecemeal, or under so many Inadequate Conceptions,

The Pagans therefore were plainly Divided in their Natural Theology, as to
their opinions concerning the Supreme God; some of them conceiving him to be
nothing Higher, than a Mundane Soul: Whereas others of them, to use Origen's
Language, Cont. Cells. p. 260.
did (...), Transcend all the sensible Nature, and thinking God not at all to
be seated there, looked for him, above all Corporeal things. Now the Former of
these Pagans, worshipped the whole Corporeal World, as the Body of God; but the
Latter of them, though they had Higher thoughts of God, than as a Mundane Soul;
yet supposing Him to have been the Cause of all things, and so at first to have
Contained all things within himself; as likewise that the World after it was
made, was not Cut off from him, nor subsisted alone by it self, as a Dead
Thing, but was Closely united to him, and Livingly dependent on him; these, I
say, though they did not take the World to be God, or the Body of God, yet did
they also look upon it as (...), as that which was Divine and Sacred; and
supposed that God was to be worshipped in All, or that the whole World was to
be worshipped, as his Image or Temple. Thus Plutarch, though much disliking the
Deifying of Inanimate Things, does himself nevertheless approve, of worshipping
God in the whole Corporeal World, he affirming it to be (...), a most Holy, and
most God-becoming Temple. And the ancient Persians or Magi, who by no means
would allow of worshipping God in any Artificial Temples made with men's hands,
did notwithstanding thus worship God, Sub Dio, and upon the Tops of Mountains,
in the whole Corporeal World, as his Natural Temple, De Leg. L. 2. p. 335.
as Cicero testifies; Nec sequor Magos Persarum, quibus auctoribus Xerxes
inflammasse Templa Graeciae dicitur, quod Parietibus includerent Deos quibus
omnia deberent esse patentia ac libera, quorumque hic Mundus Omnis Templum
esset and Domicilium: Neither do I adhere to the Persian Magi, by whose
suggestion and persuasion, Xerxes is said to have burnt all the Temples of the
Greeks, because they enclosed and shut up their Gods within walls, to whom all
things ought to be open and free, and whose Temple and Habitation this whole
World is. And therefore when Diogenes Laertius writes thus of these Magi, that
they did, (...), make Fire and Earth and Water to be Gods, but condemn all
Statues and Images; we conceive the meaning hereof to be no other than this,
that as they worshipped God in no Temple, save only that of the whole World, so
neither did they allow any other Statues of Images of him, than the Things of
Nature, and Parts of the World; such as Fire, and Earth, and Water, called
therefore by them, in this sense and no other, Gods. For thus are they clearly
represented by Clemens Alexandrinus, Protrept. p. 43.
and that according to the express Testimony of Dino; (...)^ Dinon affirms,
that the Persian Magi sacrificed under the open Heavens, they accounting Fire
and Water to be the only Statues and Images of the Gods. For I would not here
conceal their ignorance neither, who thinking to avoid One Error fall into
another; whilst they allow not Wood and Stones to be the Images of the Gods,
as the Greeks do, nor Ichneumones and Ibides, as the Egyptians, but only Fire
and Water, as Philosophers. Which difference betwixt the Pagan Theologers, that
some of them looked upon the whole World as God, or as the Body of God, others
only as the Image, or the Temple of God; is thus taken notice of by Macrobius
upon Scipio's Dream, L. 1. c. 14.
where the World was called a Temple. Been autem Vniversus Mundus Dei Templum
vocatur, propter illos qui aestimant, nihil esse aliud Deum, nisi Coelum ipsum
and Caelestia ista quae cernimus. Ideo ut Summi Omnipotentiam Dei, ostenderet
posse vix intelligi, nunquam posse videri, quicquid humano subjicitur aspectui
Templum ejus vocavit; ut qui haec veneratur ut Templa, cultum tamen maximum
debeat Conditori; sciatque quisquis in usum Templi hujus inducitur, ritu sibi
vivendum Sacerdotis: The whole World is well calledhere the Temple of God, in
way of opposition to those, who think God to be nothing else, but the Heaven it
self, and those Heavenly things which we see, (or the whole Sensible World
Animated:) Wherefore Cicero, that he might show the Omnipotence of the First
and Supreme God, to be such as could scarcely be understood, but not at all
perceived by Sense, he calls whatsoever falls under humane sight, His
Temple; that so he that worshippeth these things as the Temple of God, might in
the mean time remember, that the chief Worship is due to the Maker and Creator
of them; as also that himself ought to live in the World like a Priest or
Mysta, holily and religiously. And thus we see that the Pagans were universally
Cosmolatrae, or World-worshippers, in one sense or other: not that they
worshipped the World as a Dead and Inanimate thing, but either as the Body of
God, or at least as the Temple or Image of him. Neither of which terminated
their worship, in that which was Sensible and Visible only, but in that great
Mind or Soul, which Framed and Governs the whole World Understandingly:
though this was called also by them (not the Nature of things, but) (...), The
Common Nature, and (...) or (...), the Nature of the Universe, because it
contained under it, the Spermatick Reasons, or Plastic Principles of the whole
World.

Furthermore these Pagan Theists Universally acknowledging the whole World to
be an Animal, and that Mundane Animal also to be a God; those of them who
supposed it not to be the First and Highest God, did consequently all conceive
it, as has been already observed, to be either a Second or at least a Third
God. And thus Origin, (...)^ The Greeks do plainly affirm the whole World to be
a God; some of them, as the Stoics, the First God; others, as the Platonists,
(to whom may be added the Egyptians also) the Second God: though some of these
Platonists call it the Third God. Those of the Platonists who called the
Mundane Animal, or Animated World, the Second God, looked upon that whole
Platonic Trinity of Divine Hypostases ((...) and (...)) all but as One First
God: but those others of them who called it a Third God, supposed a greater
distinction betwixt those Three Hypostases* and made so many several Gods of
them; the First, a Monad or Simple Goodness; the Second, Mind or Intellect; the
Third, Psyche or the Universal Soul, which also without any more ado they
concluded to be the Immediate Soul of this Corporeal World, Existing likewise
from Eternity with it. Now this Second God, which was the whole Animated World
as well to the Egyptians as the Platonists, was by them both said to be, not
only the Temple and Image, but also the Son of the First God. That the
Egyptians called the Animated World, the Son of God, P. 329, 330, 331.
has been already proved; and that the other Pagans did the like also, is
evident from this of Celsus, where he pretends, that the Christians called
their Jesus, the Son of God, in imitation of those Ancient Pagans, who had
styled the World so; Orig. C. Cells. p. 308.
(...)^ Whence these Christians came to call their Jesus, the Son of God, I
shall now declare. Namely because our Ancestors had called, the World as made
by God, the Son of God, and God. Now is there not a goodly similitude (think
you) betwixt these two Sons of God, Orig. C. Cells. p. 208.
theirs and ours? Upon which words of his, Origin writes thus, (...), Celsus
supposed, us Christians to have borrowed, this Appellation of the Son of God,
from the Pagans, they calling the World, as made by God, the Son of God, and
God. Wherefore these Pagans, who looked upon the whole Animated World only as
the Second God, and Son of God, did unquestionably also worship the First God,
in the World, and that probably by Personating and Deifying his several Parts
and Members too. Thus do we understand, what that was which gave occasion to
this mistake of late Writers, that the Pagans worshipped the Inanimate Parts of
the World, as such, for True and Proper Gods; viz. their not perceiving, that
they worshipped these only, as the Parts or Living Members of One Great Mundane
Animal, which was to them, if not the First God, yet at least the Second God;
the Temple, Image, and Son, of the First God.

And now have we (as we conceive) given a full account of the Seeming
Polytheism of the Pagans, not only in their Poetical and Fabulous, but also
their Political or Civil Theology; the Former of which was nothing but Fancy
and Fiction, and the Conforming of Divine, to Humane Things; the Latter nothing
but Vulgar Opinion and Error, together with the Laws and Institutes of
Statesmen and Politicians, designed Principally to amuze the Vulgar, and keep
them the better in obedience and subjection to Civil Laws. Besides which the
Intelligent Pagans, generally acknowledged another Theology, which was neither
Fiction, nor mere Opinion and Law, but Nature and Philosophy, or Absolute Truth
and Reality: according to which Natural and Philosophic Theology of theirs,
there was only One Unmade Self-originated Deity, and many other Created Gods,
as his Inferior Ministers. So that those many Poetical and Political Gods,
could not possibly be looked upon otherwise, than either as the Created
Ministers of One Supreme God, whether taken Singly or Collectively; or else as
the Polyonymy and Various Denomination of him, according to several Notions and
Partial Conceptions of him; and his several Powers and Manifestations in the
World, Personated and Deified. Which latter we have already proved to have been
the most generally received Opinion of the Pagan Theologers; according to that
of Euclides the Philosopher, (...), There is One Supreme Good (or Highest
Deity) called by Many Names: and according to that of Antisthenes before cited,
That the Many Popular Gods, were but One and the same Natural God, L. 1. c. 5.
viz. as Lactantius adds, Summae totius Artifex, The Maker of the whole World.

We shall conclude with repeating what has been already suggested, that though
the Intelligent Pagans, did Generally disclaim their Fabulous Theology; St.
Austin telling us, that when the absurdities thereof were urged against them,
they would commonly make such replies as these, C.D.L. 4. c. 10
Absit, inquiunt, Fabularum est ista Garrulitas; and again, Rursus, inquiunt,
ad Fabulas redis; Far be it from us (say they) to think so or so, this is
nothing but the garrulity of idle Fables, and, You would bring us again to
Fables; and though they owned another Theology besides their Civil also, which
was the Natural and Philosophical, as the only True, yet did they
notwithstanding acknowledge a kind of necessity, that in those times at least,
there should be besides the Natural and Philosophical Theology, which the
Vulgar were not so capable of, another Theology framed and held forth, that
might be more accommodate to their apprehensions. Thus that Roman Pontifex
Scaevola in St. Austin declares, Expedire existimat falli in Religione
Civitates, That it was expedient (as he thought) that Cities and Commonwealths,
should be deceived in their Religion, or have something False or Fabulous
intermingled with it. He giving this reason for the same, Because the Natural
and Philosophic Theology, contained many things in it, which though True, yet
would be hurtful for the Vulgar to know; as for example, Quod Verus Deus nec
Sexum habeat, nec Aetatem, nec definita Corporis Membra, That the True God has
neither Sex, nor Age, nor bodily Members; and that Hercules and Aesculapius,
etc. were not Gods but Men, obnoxious to the same infirmities with others, and
the like. And the Learned Varro, in his Book of Religions, publicly maintained
the same Doctrine; Varro de Religionibus loquens, evidenter dicit, Multa esse
Vera quae vulgo scire non sit Vtile; Multaque quae tametsi Falsa sint, ali^er
existimare Populum expediat: and ideo Graecos Teletas and Mysteria
taciturnitate parietibusque clausisse, etc, That there were many things True in
Religion, which it was not convenient for the Vulgar to know; as likewise many
things False, of which it was expedient they should think otherwise: and that
for this cause, the Greeks enclosed their Teletae or Mysteries within walls,
and kept them under a Seal of Secrecy. Upon which of Varro St. Austin thus
notes, Hic certe totum Consilium prodidit Sapientium, per quos Civitates and
Populi regerentur; Varro here plainly discovers and betrays the whole counsel
and secrecy of Statesmen and Politicians, by whom Cities and Nations were
governed, and their very Arcanum of Government, namely this, That People were
to be deceived in their Religion, for their own good and the good of their
Governors. The same Father there adding, That Evil Demons were much gratified
with this Doctrine, and liked this Fraud and Imposture very well, which gave
them an advantage to Rule and Tyrannize, as well over the Deceivers as the
Deceived. Lastly Strabo also, though otherwise a grave and sober Writer, speaks
freely and broadly to the same purpose, (...)^ It is not possible, that women
and others of the Vulgar sort, should be conducted and carried on toward
Piety, Holiness and Faith, merely by Philosophic Reason and Truth; but this
must be done by Superstition, and that not without the help of Fables and
Prodigious or Wonderful Narrations. From whence it is plain, that Strabo did
not only allow a necessity of a Civil Theology besides the Natural and
Philosophical, but also of a Fabulous and Poetical one too. And this is a thing
the less to be wond^ed at in these Pagans, because some Christians also seem to
acknowledge a kind of truth herein; Synesius himself writing after this manner;
(...)^ That which is easy and ordinary will be contemned by the Vulgar, or
Common People; and therefore there is need of something Strange and Prodigious
in Religion for them. C. Ap. L. 2.
Flavius Josephus, making this Free Acknowledgment, concerning the Wise men
among the Greeks, (...), That they held the same things concerning God which
the Jews did, adds nothwithstanding afterward, (...), That they were afraid to
declare the Truth of this their Doctrine to the Vulgar, prepossessed with other
Opinions. And indeed they did not think it safe to declare the Natural and True
Theology, promiscuously to all; Plato himself intimating as much in these
Words, (...)^ That as it was hard, to find out the Maker of this Universe, so
neither, being found out, could he be declared to the vulgar. Wherefore since
God was so hard to be understood, they conceived it necessary, that the Vulgar
should be permitted, to Worship him in his Works, by Parts and Piecemeal,
according to the various Manifestations of himself; that is, should have a
Civil Theology at least, distinct from the Natural and Philosophical, if not
another Fabulous one too.

XXXV. We have now dispatched the First of those Three Heads proposed to be
insisted on, viz. That the Pagans worshipped One and the same Supreme God,
under Many Personal Names, so that much of their Polytheism, was but Seeming
and Fantastical, and indeed nothing but the Polyonymy of One Supreme God, they
making Many Poetical and Political Gods of that One Natural God: and thus
worshipping God by Parts and Piecemeal; according to that clear
acknowledgement of Maximus Madaurensis before cited; Vnius Summi Dei Virtutes,
per Mundanum Opus Diffusas, nos multis Vocabulis invocamus; and dum Ejus quasi
quaedam Membra carptim variis Supplicationibus prosequimur, Totum colere
videmur; The virtues of the One Supreme God diffused throughout the whole
World, we (Pagans) invoke under many several Names, and so prosecuting with our
supplications, his as it were Divided Members, must needs be thought to worship
him whole, we leaving out nothing of him. We shall proceed to the Second Head
proposed, That besides this Polyonymy of One Supreme God, in the Poetical and
Civil Theology of the Pagans, which was their Seeming and Fantastic
Polytheism, they had another Real Polytheism also, they acknowledging in their
Natural and Philosophic Theology likewise, a Multiplicity of Gods, that is, of
Substantial Understanding Beings, Superior to men, really Existing in the
world. Which though they were called by them Gods, yet were they not therefore
supposed to be (...) and (...), Unmade and Self-existent, or Independent
Beings, Page.. 243, 254.
but all of them (One only excepted) (...), Generated Gods, according to the
larger Notion of that word before declared, that is, though not (...), yet at
least, (...), though not as Made in time, yet as Produced from a Superior
Cause. Plutarch propounding this for one amongst his Platonic Questions, Why
(...), the Highest or Supreme God, was called by Plato, both The Father and
Maker of all things, gives this Reply to it in the Words before cited; (...),
That perhaps he was said to be the Father of all the Generated Gods, and of
Men, (as he is also styled in Homer) but the Maker of all other Irrational and
Inanimate Beings. From which Passage of Plutarch's it plainly appears, that the
(...), The One Highest God, being every way (...), Unmade and unproduced, was
thought to be the Maker or Father of all the other Gods, therefore called
(...). Which is further plainly declared elsewhere by the same Plutarch in
these words; Sympos. L. 8. c. 1.
(...)^ Plato calls the One Unmade and Eternal God, the Father and Maker of
the World, and of all other things Generated. And though some of those Many
Gods of Plato's were by him also called (...) or Eternal, yet were they
likewise, (...) too, in another sense, that is Produced and Derived by way of
Emanation, from that One, who is every way (...), Vnderived and Independent
upon any other Cause. Theol. P.L. 3. c. 7.
And thus Proclus Universally pronounces; (...)^ All the Gods owe, their Being
Gods, to the First God. He adding, that he is therefore called (...), The
Fountain of the Godhead.

Wherefore the Many Gods of the Intelligent Pagans, were derived from One God,
and but (...), (as Plutarch somewhere calls them) The Subservient Powers, or
Ministers of the One Supreme Unmade Deity. Which (as has been before observed)
was frequently called by these Pagans (...), God, (...), or in way of Eminency;
as likewise were those other Inferior or Generated Gods, in way of distinction
from him called (...) The Gods. And accordingly the sense of Celsus is thus
represented in Origin, L 4. p. 200.
(...)^ That the Gods were the Makers of the Bodies of all Animals, the Souls
of them only, being the Work of God. Moreover these Inferior Gods, are styled
by Ammianus Marcellinus, Substantiales Potestates, Substantial Powers, L. 22^
probably in way of distinction from those other Pagan Gods, that were not
Substantial, but only so many Names and Notions of the One Supreme God, or his
Powers severally Personated and Deified, Which Substantial Powers of Am.
Marcellinus, (as Divination and Prophecy was by their means imparted to men)
were all said to be subject to that One Sovereign Deity called Themis: whom
(says he) the ancient Theologers seated In Cubili and Solio Jovis, in the
Bedchamber and Throne of Jupiter; as indeed some of the Poets have made her to
be the wife of Jupiter, and others his Sister. And Anaxarchus in Plutarch
styles her (...), Jupiter's Assesor, Vit. Alex.
though that Philosopher abused the Fable, and grossly depraved the meaning of
it, as if it signified (...), That whatsoever is done by the Sovereign Power,
is therefore Just and Right: whereas the True Moral t^ereof was this, That
Justice or Righteousness sits in Counsel with God, and in his Mind and Will,
prescribes Laws to Nature and the whole World. Themis therefore was another
Name of God, amongst the (...), according to his Universal Confideration,
besides those before mentioned: and when Plato in his Book of Laws, L. 11.
would have men to swear by the Names of those Three Gods, Jupiter, Apollo, and
Themis; these were but so many several Partial Notions of the One Supreme
Deity; the meaning thereof being no other than this, De Dea Themide p. 39^
as Pighius observes, Timore Divino, Veritate ipsa, ac Aequitate sanciri
debere Juramenta. In Jove enim Summi Numinis Potestatem, Falsi ac Perjurii
Vindicem; in Apolline Veritatis Lumen; in Themide, Jus, Fas atque Licitum esse
intelligitur. Est enim Themis, ipsa Lex aeterna atque Vniversalis, Mundo ac
Naturae praescripta; or according to Cicero, Ratio recta Summi Jovis. And
Ficinus in his Commentary as to the main agrees herewith. So that, when the
Pagan Theologers affirmed, the Numen of Themis to preside over the Spirits of
the Elements, and all those other Substantial Powers, from whom Divination was
participated to men; their meaning therein was clearly no other that this; That
there was One Supreme Deity ruling over all the other Gods, and that the Divine
Mind, which prescribes Laws to Nature and the whole World, and conteins all
the Fatal Decrees in it, according to the Evolution of which, things come to
pass in the World, was the Fountain from whence all Divination proceeded; as
these Secrets were more or less imparted from thence to those Inferior Created
Spirits. The Philosophy of the Pagan Theology amongst the Greeks was plainly no
other than this; That there is One Unmade Self-existent Deity the Original of
all, and that there are many other Substantial Powers or Spirits, created by
it, as the Ministers of its Providence in the World: but there was much of
Poetry or Poetic Fancy, intermingled with this Philosophy, as the Flourish to
it, to make up their Pagan Theology.

Thus, as has been before declared, the Pagans held both One God, and Many
Gods, in different senses: One Unmade Self-existent Deity, and Many Generated
or Created Gods. Onatus the Pythagorean declaring that they who asserted one
only God and not Many, Understood not what the Dignity and Majesty of the
Divine Transcendency consisted in, namely in ruling over Gods: and Plotinus
conceiving that the Supreme God was most of all Glorified, not by being
Contracted into One, but by having Multitudes of Gods, Derived from him, and
Dependent on him; and that the Honor done to them, redounded unto him. Where
there are Two Things to be distinguished; First, that according to the Pagan
Theists, God was no Solitary Being; but that there were Multitudes of Gods, or
Substantial Powers, and Living Understanding Natures, Superior to men, which
were neither Self-existent, nor yet Generated out of Matter, but all Generated
or Created from One Supreme. Secondly, that forasmuch as these were all
supposed to have some Influence more or less, upon the Government of the World,
and the Affairs of Mankind, they were therefore all of them conceived to be the
due Objects of men's Religious Worship, Adoration and Invocation; and
accordingly was the Pagan Devotion scattered amongst them all. Nor were the
Gods of the Oriental Pagans neither, mere Dead Statues and Images, as some
would conclude from the Scripture, but Living Understanding Beings, Superior
to men, (though worshipped in Images) according to that Reply of the Chaldeans
in Daniel to Nebuchadnezzar, when he required them to tell his Dream, There is
none other that can show this thing before the King, Except Those Gods whose
Dwelling is not with Flesh; that is, The Immortal Gods, or who are exalted
above the Condition of Humane Frailty. Though some conceive, that these words
are to be understood of a Peculiar sort of Gods; namely, that this was such a
thing, as could not be done by those Demons and Lower Aerial Gods, which
frequently converse with men, but was reserved to a Higher Rank of Gods, who
are above humane converse. Now as to the Former of these Two Things, that God
is no Solitary Being, but that there are Multitudes of Understanding Beings
Superior to Men, the Creatures and Ministers of One Supreme God; the
Scriptures both of the Old and New Testament fully agree with the Pagans
herein. Thousand Thousands ministered unto him, Daniel 7.1^.
and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him, Heb. 12.22:
and Ye are come to an innumerable Company of Angels. But the Latter of them,
That Religious Worship and Invocation does of right belong to these Created
Spirits, is constantly denied and condemned in these Writings, that Being a
thing peculiarly reserved, to that one God, who was the Creator of Heaven and
Earth. And thus is that Prophecy of Jeremy to be understood, expressed in the
Chalday Tongue, that so the Jews might have it in readiness for those Chaldean
Idolaters, when they came into Babylon, Jeremy 10.11.
Thus shall ye say unto them, the Gods that have not made the Heavens and the
Earth, shall perish from the Earth, and from under these Heavens. That is,
there shall come a time, when none shall be Religiously Worshipped any where
upon the face of the whole Earth, save only that God who made the Heavens and
the Earth, and he without Images too. Which Prophecy, but in part yet
fulfilled, shall then have its complete accomplishment, when the Kingdoms of
this world, Rev. 11.15*
shall become the Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ. And thus is the
Controversy rightly stated betwixt the Pagans and the Christians by
Lactantius. L. 1.
Sed fortasse quaerat aliquis a nobis, quod apud Ciceronem quaerit Hortensius;
Si Deus Vnus est, quae esse beata Solitudo queat? Tanquam nos qui unum esse
dicimus, Desertum ac Solitarium esse dicamus. Habet enim Ministros, quos
vocamus Nuntios. Et est istud verum quod dixisse Senecam supra retuli: Genuisse
Regni sui Ministros Deum. Verum hi neque Dii sunt, neque Deos se vocari aut
coli volunt: quippe, qui nihil praeter Jussum ac Voluntatem Dei faciant. As if
we who say, there is but one God, therefore made a Solitary and Deserted Deity.
Whereas we acknowledge that God has his Ministers, whom we call Angels: And we
grant that to be true, which was before cited out of Seneca, That God has
Generated or Created Ministers of his Kingdom. But these are neither Gods, nor
would they be called Gods, nor worshipped; forasmuch as they only Execute the
will and command of God. And again afterward to the same purpose, Si eos
multitudo delectat, non Duodecim dicimus, nec Trecentos sexaginta quinque (ut
Orpheus) sed innumerabiles, and arguimus eorum errores in diversum, qui tam
paucos putant. Sciant tamen quo nomine appellari debeant; ne Deum Verum
violent, cujus Nomen exponunt, dum Pluribus tribuunt, etc. If Multitude delight
them, we say not, that there are Twelve, nor yet three hundred sixty five, as
Orpheus, but innumerable. And we tax their error on the contrary who think
them to be so few. Nevertheless let them know, by what name they ought to be
called, Lest they violate the true God, whose Name is profaned, when it is
given to many. From which passages of Lactantius it plainly appears, that the
main Controversy between the Christians and the Pagans, was then only this,
Whether or no, the Created Ministers of the Supreme God, might be called Gods,
and Religiously Worshipped. But this Pagan Objection against the Solitary Deity
of the Christians, is by some ancient Christian Writers also otherwise
answered; namely from those Three Hypostases or Persons of the Trinity; they
affirming upon that account, that though Christians did not acknowledge such a
Multitude of Gods, as the Pagans, yet did they not therefore make God a
Solitary and Steril Being, before the Creation neither, as the Jews did; but
went in a middle way betwixt Jews and Pagans: they interpreting also Moses his
Faciamus Hominem, to this sense.

XXXVI. We shall now show Particularly what these Many Gods of the Pagans were.
It has been often observed, That the Pagans were divided in their Philosophic
or Natural Theology, as to their Opinions concerning the Supreme God: some of
them thinking, (...), That the Supreme Deity was an Abstract Being, Elevated
above Nature and the Whole World: but others that he was nothing higher, than
an Anima Mundi, or Soul of the World. Now the former of these Two were chiefly
amongst the Greeks, the Pythagoreans and the Platonists, who had accordingly
several Distinctions amongst them concerning their Gods, as between the (...)
and the (...), The Supermundane and the Mundane Gods; The (...) and the (...),
the Eternal and the Generated Gods; that Latter word being now taken in a
narrower and more confined sense, for such as were made in Time, or had a
Beginning of their Existence: and Lastly, the (...) and the (...), the
Intelligible and the Sensible Gods. And the (...) and (...), Supermundane,
Eternal, and Intelligible Gods, of these Pythagoreans and Platonists, were
first of all and Principally, those (...), (as Plotinus calls them) those Three
Divine Hypostates, that have the Nature of Principles in the Universe, viz.
Tagathon or Hen, Nous and Psyche; or Monad, Mind, and Soul.. That this Trinity
was not first of all a mere Invention of Plato's, but much ancienter than him,
is plainly affirmed by Plotinus in these words, (...)^ En. 5 L. 1.
That these Doctrines are not new, nor of yesterday; but have been very
anciently delivered, though obscurely (the discourses now extant being but
Explications of them) appears from Plato's own writings; Parmenides before him
having insisted on them.

Now it is well known, that Parmenides was addicted to the Pythagorick Sect,
and therefore probable, that this Doctrine of a Divine Triad was one of the
Arcanums of that School also. Which is further confirmed from hence, because
Numenius a famous Pythagorean entertained it, as such. In. Ar. Phys. fol. 50.
And Moderatus (as Simplicius informs us) plainly affirms, this Trinity of
Principles, to have been a Pythagorick Cabbala; (...)^ This (Moderatus)
declares, that according to the Pythagoreans, the First One or Unity, is above
all Essence; that the Second One, which is that which truly is, and
Intelligible, according to them, is the Ideas; and that the Third, which is
Psychical or Soul, partaketh both of the Frist Unity, and of the Ideas. Lastly
we have Jamblichus his Testimony also in Proclus to the same purpose; (...),
That there were Three Gods also praised by the Pythagoreans. Now we have before
showed, that Pythagoras his Philosophy, was derived from the Orphick Cabala,
which Proclus in another place thus fully testifies, Theol. Plat. L. 1. c. 5.
(...)^ All the Theology of the Greeks, was derived from the Orphick
Mystagogia; Pythagoras being first instructed by Aglaophemus in the Orphick
Orgia, or Mysteries concerning the Gods; and Plato being the next who received
a perfect knowledge of all these Divine things, both out of the Pythagorick and
the Orphick writings. And that a Trinity was part of that Orphick Cabala, we
have already proved, out of Amelius, he affirming (in Proclus) that Plato's
Three Kings were the same with Orpheus his Trinity, of Phanes, Vranus, and
Cronus. Moreover, since all these Three, Orpheus, Pythagoras, and Plato,
traveling into Egypt, were there initiated in that Arcane Theology of the
Egyptians (called Hermaical) it seems probable (as was before observed) that
this Doctrine of a Divine Triad, was also part of the Arcane Theology of the
Egyptians. It has been also noted, that there were some footsteps of such a
Trinity in the Mithraick Mysteries amongst the Persians, derived from
Zoroaster; as likewise that it was expressly contained in the Magic or Chalday
Oracles, of whatsoever authority they may be. Moreover it has been signified,
that the Samothracians had very anciently a certain Trinity of Gods, that were
the Highest of all their Gods, and that called by an Hebrew name too, Cabbirim,
or the Mighty Gods: and that from thence the Roman Capitoline Trinity of Gods,
was derived. The second whereof was Minerva, which amongst the Latins, as
Athena amongst the Greeks, was understood to signify the Divine Wisdom.
Lastly, the Ternary or Triad, was not only accounted a Sacred Number amongst
the Pythagoreans, but also as containing some Mystery in Nature, was therefore
made use of by other Greeks and Pagans, in their Religious Rites; De Coelo L.
1. c. 5.
as Aristotle informs us; (...)^ Wherefore from Nature, and as it were
observing her Laws, have we taken this Number of Three, making use of the same
in the Sacrifices of the Gods, and other Purifications.

Now since it cannot well be conceived, how such a Trinity of Divine
Hypostases, should be first discovered merely by humane Wit and Reason, though
there be nothing in it (if rightly understood) that is repugnant to Reason: and
since there are in the ancient Writings of the Old Testament, certain
significations of a Plurality in the Deity, or of more than one Hypostasis, we
may reasonably conclude, that which Proclus asserteth of this Trinity, as it
was contained in the Chaldaick Oracles, to be true, that it was at first (...),
a Theology of Divine Tradition or Revelation, or a Divine Cabala, viz. amongst
the Hebrews first, and from them afterward communicated to the Egyptians and
other Nations. Neither ought it to be thought any considerable Objection to the
contrary, because the Platonists, Pythagoreans, and other Pagan Theologers, did
not express this their Trinity, in the very words of the Athanasian Creed, nor
according to the Form of the Nicene Council. Forasmuch as this Mystery was
gradually imparted to the World, and that first but sparingly to the Hebrews
themselves, either in their Written or Oral Cabala; but afterward more fully
under Christianity, the whole Frame whereof was built thereupon. Nevertheless
was it not so distinctly and precisely determined, nor so punctually and
scrupulously stated amongst the Christians neither, till after the rising up of
Heresies concerning it. Nor when all was done, did the Orthodox themselves at
first Universally agree, in the signification of the word (...) Co-essential or
Consubstantial. Nor lastly is it a thing at all to be wondered at, that in such
a Difficult and Mysterious Point, as this, there should be some diversity of
apprehensions amongst the reputed Orthodox Christians themselves; and much less
therefore amongst Pagans and Philosophers. However we freely acknowledge, that
as this Divine Cabala, was but little understood by Many of those who
entertained it among the Pagans, so was it by diverse of them, much Depraved and
Adulterated also.

For first, the Pagans universally called, this their Trinity, a Trinity of
Gods, (...), and (...), the First, the Second, and the Third God^; as the more
Philosophical amongst them, called it also a Trinity of Causes, and a Trinity
of Principles, and sometimes a Trinity of Opificers; thus is this Cabala of the
Trinity styled in Proclus, In Timae. Plat. p. 93. Ibid.
(...), the Tradition of the Three Gods. And accordingly is it said of Numenius
by him, that (...), he did (...), having praised the Three Gods, Tragically or
Affectedly called them, the Grandfather, the Son, and the Nephew. Numenius
thereby intimating, that as the Second of these Gods, was the Offspring of the
First God, so the Third called the Nephew of the First, was derived both from
him and from the Second, from the First as the Grandfather, and from the
Second, as the Father of him. Harpocration likewise, Atticus, and Amelius, are
said by Proclus, to have entertained this same Cabala or Tradition of the Three
Gods, the Latter of these styling them, (...), and (...), Three Kings, and
Three Opificers or Makers of the whole world. In like manner Plotinus speaking
of the Second of these Three Hypostases, Enn 5. L. 5. c. 3.
(that is, (...) the First Mind or Intellect) calls him (...) the Second God,
(...) (...)^ And this Nature is God, I say a Second God, offering himself to
view, before that other God can be seen, who is Seated above, this being as it
were the Glorious Throne of him. For it is not fit, that he should be
immediately Seated in any thing that is Inanimate; nor in mere Soul neither,
but that there should be such an immense Pulchritude and Splendor shining
before him; like the Pomp and Procession before the Great King. He also
elsewhere mentions all these Three Gods together, making this World to be an
Image of them all. (...). En. 2. L. 3. c 18*
Wherefore this World may well be called an Image, it depending upon that
above, as an Image in a Glass, which is Threefold. Whereof the First and Second
God always stand Immovably; the Third likewise is in it self Stable too, but
accidentally moved, by reason of the Mobility of matter, and things below it.
And that we may here give a Taste of the Mystical Theology and Enthusiasm of
these Platonists too; Porphyrtus in the Life of Plotinus affirms, that both
Plotinus and Himself, had sometimes experience of a kind of Ecstatick Union
with the First of these Three Gods, that which is above Mind and Understanding;
(...)^ Plotinus often endeavoring to raise up his mind to the First and
Highest God; That God sometimes appeared to him, who has neither Form nor
Idea, but is placed above Intellect, and all that is Intelligible: to whom I
Porphyrius affirm my self to have been once united in the Sixty eighth year of
my age. And again afterward, (...), Plotinus his chief aim and scope was, to
be united to, and conjoined with the Supreme God, who is above all, which scope
he attained unto, Four several times, whilst my self was with him, by a certain
ineffable Energie. That is, Plotinus aimed at such a kind of Rapturous and
Ecstatick Union with the (...), and (...), the First of the Three Highest Gods,
(called The One and The Good) as by himself is described toward the latter end
of his Last Book. Where he calls it (...), and (...), and (...), a kind of
Tactual Union, and a certain Presence better than Knowledge, and the joining of
our own Center, as it were, with the Center of the Universe. Thus we see that
the Platonic Trinity, is a Trinity of Gods, of which Three Gods therefore, the
Second and the Third must of necessity be Inferior Gods, because otherwise,
they would be Three Independent Gods, whereas the Pagan Theology Expressly
disclaims a Plurality, of Independent and Self-originated Deities,

But since according to the Principles of Christianity, which was partly
designed to oppose and bear down the Pagan Polytheism, there is One only God to
be acknowledged; the meaning whereof notwithstanding seems to be chiefly
directed, against the Deifying of Created Beings, or giving Religious Worship
to any, besides the Uncreated, and the Creator of all: moreover, since in the
Scripture which is the only true Rule and Measure of this Divine Cabala of the
Trinity, though the (...) or Word be said to have been, With God (that is, God
the Father) and also it self to Be God (that is, not a Creature) yet is it no
where called An Other, or Second God. Therefore cannot we Christians entertain
this Pagan Language of a Trinity of Gods, but must call it either a Trinity of
Divine Hypostases, or Subsistences, or Persons, or the like. Nevertheless it is
observable, that Philo, though according to his Jewish Principles, he was a
zealous Opposer of the Pagan Polytheism and Idolatry, yet did he not for all
that, scruple to call the (...) the Divine Word, after the Platonic way, (...)
a Second God; as not suspecting this to clash with the Principles of his
Religion, or that Second Commandment of the Decalogue, Thou shall have no other
Gods before my Face; possibly because he conceived, that this was to be
understood of Creature-Gods only; whereas his Second God, the Divine (...) or
Word, is declared by him to be (...), Eternal, and therefore according to the
Jewish Theology Uncreated. However this Language of a Second and Third God, is
not so excusable in a Jew, as it might be in a Pagan; because the Pagans
according to the Principles of their Religion, were so far from having any
Scrupulosity; against a Plurality of Gods, (so long as there was only One
Fountain of the Godhead acknowledged) that they rather accounted it an honor
to the Supreme God, as has been already showed, that he should have Many
other, not only Titular Gods under him, but also such as were Religiously
Worshipped: Wherefore besides this Second and Third God, they also did
luxuriate in their other Many Creature-gods. And indeed St. Austin does upon
this account, seem somewhat to excuse the Pagans for this their Trinity of
Gods, C. D. L. 10. c. 23.
and Principles, in these words, Liberis enim verbis loquuntur Philosophi, nec
in rebus ad intelligendum difficillimis, offensionem religiosarum aurium
pertimescunt. Nobis autem ad certam Regulam loqui fas est, ne Verborum
licentia, etiam in rebus, quae in his significantur, impiam gignat opinionem.
Nos autem non dicimus Duo vel Tria Principia, cum de Deo loquimur: sicut nec
Duos Deos vel Tres, nobis licitum est dicere, quamvis de Vnoquoque loquentes,
vel de Filio, vel de Spiritu Sancto, etiam singulum quemque Deum esse fateamur.
The Philosophers use Free Language, nor in these things which are extremely
difficult to be understood, did they at all fear the offending of any Religious
and Scrupulous ears. But the Case is otherwise with us Christians, for we are
tied up to Phrases, and ought to speak according to a certain Rule, lest the
licentious use of words, should beget a wicked Opinion in any concerning those
things that are signified by them. That is, though this might be in a manner
excusable in the Pagans, because each of those Three Hypostases is God,
therefore to call them severally Gods, and all of them a Trinity of Gods, and
Principles; they having no such Rule then given them to govern their Language
by as this, That though the Father be God, the Son God, and the Holy Ghost God,
yet are they not Three Gods, but One God: yet is not this allowable for us
Christians, to speak of a Second or Third God or Principle, or to call the Holy
Trinity a Trinity of Gods, notwithshanding that when we speak of the Father or
of the Son, or of the Holy Ghost severally, we confess each of them to be God.

And indeed when the Pagans thus spoke of a First, Second and Third God, and no
more, though having Innumerable other Gods besides, they did by this Language
plainly imply, that these Three Gods of theirs, were of a very different kind,
from all the rest of their Gods; that is, not (...) but (...), not Created, but
Eternal and Uncreated Ones. And that many of them did really take this Whole
Trinity of Gods, for the (...) in general, the Divine Numen, and sometimes call
it the First God too, in way of distinction from their Generated Gods; will be
showed afterward. So that the (...) the First God, was used in different senses
by these Pagans, sometimes in a larger sense, and in way of opposition to all
the (...) the Generated or Created Gods, or the Gods that were made in Time
together with the World; and sometime again, more Particularly, in way of
distinction from those Two other Divine Hypostases Eternal, called by them the
Second and Third God. Which First of the Three Gods, is also frequently by them
called (...), God, Emphatically and by way of Excellency, they supposing a
Gradual Subordination in these Principles.

Neither was this Trinity of Divine Subsistences only thus ill-languag'd by the
Pagans generally, when they called it a Trinity of Gods; but also the Cabala
thereof, was otherwise much Depraved and Adulterated, by several of the
Platonists and Phythagoreans. For first, the Third of these Three Hypostases
commonly called Psyche, is by some of them made to be (...) the Immediate Soul
of the Corporeal World, informing, acting, and enlivening it, after the same
manner as the Souls of other Animals do their respective Bodies; insomuch that
this Corporeal World it self, as together with its Soul it makes up one
Complete Animal, was frequently called the Third God. This Proclus affirms of
Numenius the Pythagorean, (...), That the World according to him, was the Third
God. And Plotinus, being a great Reader of this Numenius, seems to have been
somewhat infected by him with this conceit also, though contrary to his own
Principles; from those words befored cited out of him, (...), the World, as is
commonly said, is the Third God.

Now if the World be not a Creature, then is there no Created Being at all, but
all is God. But not only Timaeus Locrus, but also Plato himself, calls it,
(...), that is, a Created God, the word (...) being here put for that, which
after it once was not, is brought into Being; which is the proper Notion of a
Creature. So that the Animated World, is by Plato made to be only the chief of
all the (...), that is, the Creature-Gods. Wherefore it is plain that in this
Trinity of some Platonists and Pythagoreans, wherein the World is made to be
the Third God, there is a confused Jumble of Created, and Uncreated Beings
together. For the First of those Gods is the Father and Fountain of all, or the
Original of the Godhead. And the Second, forasmuch as he is called by them,
both (...) and (...), the Maker, and the Opificer of the whole World, he
therefore can be no Creature neither: whereas the Third, which is said to be
the World, was by Numenius himself also expressly called, both (...) and (...),
the Work or Thing Made, that is, plainly, the Creature of both the Former.
Proclus thus fully represents his sense, (...)^ Numenius called the First of
the Three Gods, the Father; the Second of them the Maker; and the Third the the
Work or Thing Made; so that according to Numenius there were two Opificers or
Creators of the World, the First and the Second God; and the World it self
(that is, the Thing Made and Created by them both) is said to be the Third God.

And that this Notion of the Trinity, is an Adulterated One, may be also
further concluded from hence, because according to this Hypothesis, they might
have said that there were Three Hundred and more Gods, as well, as that there
are Three: since all the other (...), Generated Gods, might have come into the
Number too, as well as the World, they being Parts thereof, and Gods that
differ not in kind from it but only in degree. Wherefore these Philosophers
ought not to have made a Trinity of Gods, distinguished from all the rest, but
rather First to have distributed their Gods into (...) and (...), that is
Eternal or Uncreated, and Created Gods, and then to have subdivided those
Created Gods, into the Whole World, and the Parts thereof Animated.

But because it may be here alleged in favor of this Spurious Hypothesis of
the Trinity, That the World was accounted the Third God, only by Accident, in
respect of its Soul, which is properly that Third God; though Numenius with
others plainly affirm the World it self, as (...) and (...), as the Work and
Thing Made, to be the Third; we shall therefore reply to this, that even the
Soul of the Mundane Animal it self, according to Timaeus, and Plato, and
others, is affirmed to be (...), a Generated God, that is, such as was produced
from Nonexistence into Being, and therefore truly and properly a Creature.
Which Aristotle observing, therefore took occasion to tax Plato as
contradicting himself, in making the Soul of the World a Principle, that is,
the Third God, and yet supposing it to be (...), not Eternal but Made or
Created together with the Heaven, of which something before. Wherefore we
conclude, that this ancient Cabala of the Trinity, was Depraved and
Adulterated, by those Platonists and Pythagoreans, who made either the World it
self, or else (...), an Informing Soul of the World, to be the Third Hypostasis
thereof, they Mingling Created and Uncreated Beings together, in that which
themselves notwithstanding call a Trinity of Causes and of Principles.

And we think it highly probable that this was the true Reason, why Philo,
though he admitted the Second Hypostasis of the Platonic, and Phythagorick (if
not Egyptian) Trinity, called by him (...), the Divine Word, and styled (...),
the Second God, and as Eusebius adds, (...) The Second Cause, yet he would not
Platonize or Pythagorize any further, so as to take in that Third God or Cause,
supposed by so many of them to be the Soul of the whole World, as an Animal;
because he must then have offered violence to the Principles of his own
Religion, in making the whole Created World a God: which Practice is by him
condemned in the Pagans. It is true, that he somewhere sticks not to call God
also, the Soul of the World, as well as the Mind thereof, whether he meant
thereby (...), That God who is before the Word, or else rather the Word it
self, the Second God, (according to him the Immediate Creator and Governor of
the same) nevertheless he does not seem to understand thereby, such a deeply
Immersed Soul, as would make the World an Animal, and a God, but a more
Elevated One, that is, (...), a Supermundane Soul.

To this First Depraviation of that (...), that Theology of Divine Tradition,
and ancient Cabbala of the Trinity, by many of the Platonists and Pythagoreans,
may be added another, That some of them declaring the Second Hypostasis of
their Trinity to be the Archetypal World, or (...), as Philo calls it, the
World that is compounded and made up of Ideas, and contains in it all those
kinds of things Intelligibly that are in this Lower World Sensibly; and further
concluding, that all these several Ideas of this Archetypal and Intelligible
World, are really so many distinct Substances, Animals, and Gods; have thereby
made that Second Hypostasis, not to be One God, but a Congeries and Heap of
Gods. These are those Gods commonly called by them, (...) Intelligible Gods,
not as before in way of distinction from the (...) the Sensible Gods (which is
a more general notion of the word) but from from those other Gods of theirs
(afterward to be insisted on also) called (...) Intellectual Gods. P. 357.
Proclus upon Plato's Politia concludes, that there is no Idea of Evil, for
this reason, because if there were, (...)^ that very Idea of Evil also would it
self be a God, because Every Idea is a God, as Parmenides has affirmed.
Neither was Plotinus himself, though otherwise more sober, altogether
uninfected with this Fantastic Conceit, of the Ideas being all of them Gods,
he writing thus concerning the Second God, The First Mind or Intellect; En. 5.
L. 1 c. 7.
(...), That he being begotten by the First God, (that is, by way of Emanation,
and from Eternity) generated all Entities together with himself, the
Pulchritude of the Ideas, which are all Intelligible Gods. Apuleius also (as
has been already noted) grossly and fulsomely imputes the same to Plato, in
those words, Quos Deos Plato existimat, Veros, Incorporales, Animales, sine
ullo neque fine neque exordio, sed prorsus ac retro aeviternos, ingenio ad
summam beatitudinem porrecto, etc. And he with Julian and others, reduce the
Greater part of the Pagan Gods, to these Ideas of the Intelligible or
Archetypal World, as making Apollo for Example, to be the Intelligible Sun, the
Idea of the Sensible; and Diana, the Intelligible Moon, and the like for the
rest. Lastly, it has been observed also that the Egyptian Theologers,
pretended in like manner, to Worship these Intelligible Gods, or Eternal Ideas,
in their Religious Animals, as Symbols of them.

Philo indeed Platonized so far, as to suppose God to have made an Archetypal
and Intelligible World, before he made this Corporeal and Sensible: De Mun.
Opif. p. 6.
(...)^ God intending to make a Visible World, first formed an Intelligible
One; that so having an Incorporeal, and most God-like Pattern before him, he
might make the Corporeal World agreeably to the same, this Younger an Image of
that Older, that should contein as many Sensible kinds in it, as the other did
Intelligible. But it is not possible (says he) to conceive this World of Ideas
to exist in any place. Nay according to him, Moses himself philosophized also
after the same manner, in his Cosmopaeia, describing in the First Five Verses
of Genesis, the making of an Intelligible Heaven and Earth, before the
Sensible; P. 6.
(...), etc. The Creator first of all made, an Incorporeal Heaven and an
Invisible Earth; the Ideas of Air and Vacuum; Incorporeal Water and Air; and
last of all Light, which was also the Incorporeal and Intelligible Paradigm of
the Sun and Stars, and that from whence their Sensible Light is derived. But
Philo does not plainly make these Ideas of the Intelligible and Archetypal
World, to be so many distinct Substances, and Animals; much less Gods: though
he somewhere takes notice of those, who admiring the Pulchritude of both these
Worlds, did not only Deifie the whole of them, but also their several Parts;
that is, the Several Ideas of the Intelligible World also, as well as the
Greater Parts of the Sensible; an Intelligible Heaven and Earth, Sun and Moon;
they pretending to worship those Divine Ideas, in all these Sensible things.
Which high-flown Platonic Notion, as it gave Sanctuary and Protection, to the
grossest and foulest of all the Pagan Superstitions and Idolatries, when the
Egyptians would worship Brute Animals, and other Pagans, all the Things of
Nature, ( Inanimate Substances, and mere Accidents) under a pretense of
worshipping the Divine Ideas in them; so did it directly tend to absolute
Impiety, Irreligion, and Atheism; there being few that could entertain any
thoughts at all of those Eternal Ideas, and scarcely any who could thoroughly
persuade themselves, that these had so much Reality in them, as the Sensible
things of Nature; as the Idea of a House, in the mind of an Architect, has not
so much Reality in it, as a Material House, made up of Stones, Mortar and
Timber; so that their Devotion must needs sink down wholly into those Sensible
Things, and themselves naturally at length fall, into this Atheistick
Persuasion; That the Good Things of Nature, are the only Deities.

Here therefore have we a Multitude of Pagan Gods Supermundane and Eternal,
(though all depending upon One Supreme) the Gods by them properly called, (...)
Intelligible, or the Divine Ideas. And we cannot but account this for another
Depravation of the ancient Mosaic Cabbala of the Trinity, that the Second
Hypostasis thereof, is made to be the Archetypal World, and all the Divine
Ideas, as so many distinct Substances, Animals, and Gods; that is, not One God,
but a whole World of Gods.

But over and besides all this, some of these Platonists and Pythagoreans, did
further Deprave and Adulterate, the ancient Hebrew or Mosaic Cabbala of the
Trinity, (the certain Rule whereof is now only the Scriptures of the New
Testament) when they concluded, that as from the Third Hypostasis of their
Trinity, called (...), The First Soul, there were Innumerable other Particular
Souls derived, namely the Souls of all Inferior Animals, that are Parts of the
World; so in like manner, that from their Second Hypostasis, called (...), The
First Mind or Intellect, there were innumerable other (...) Particular Minds or
Intellects Substantial Derived, Superior to the First Soul; and not only so,
but also, That from that First and Highest Hypostasis of all, called (...), and
(...), The One, and The Good, there were derived likewise many Particular
(...), and (...), Unities and Goodnesses Substantial, Superior to the First
Intellect. N. 21.
Thus Proclus in his Theologick Institutions, (...)^ After the First One, (and
from it) there are many Particular Henades or Unities; after the First
Intellect and from it, many Particular Noes, Minds or Intellects; after the
First Soul, many Particular and Derivative Souls; and lastly, after the
Universal Nature, many Particular Natures, and Spermatick Reasons. Where it may
be obiter observed, that these Platonists supposed, below the Universal Psyche,
or Mundane Soul, a Universal (...), or Substantial Nature also, but so as that
besides it, there were other Particular (...), Seminal Reasons, or Plastic
Principles also.

As for these Noes, and that besides the First Universal Mind or Intellect,
there are other Particular Minds or Intellects Substantial, a Rank of Beings
not only immutably Good and Wise, but also every way Immovabl^, and therefore
above the Rank of all Souls, that are Self-moveable Beings; Proclus was not
singular in this, but had the concurrence of many other Platonists with him;
amongst whom Plotinus may seem to be one, from this Passage of his besides
others, (...)^ P. 653.
That Souls are Immortal, and every Mind or Intellect, we have elsewhere
largely proved. Upon which words Ficinus thus, Hic, and supra and infra saepe,
per verba Plotini notabis, Plures esse Mentium Animarumque Substantias inter se
distinctas, quamvis inter eas Vnio sit Mirabilis: Here and from many other
places, before and after, you may observe, that according to Plotinus there are
many Substantial Minds, distinct from Souls, though there be a wonderful Union
betwixt them. Moreover, that there was also above these Noes or Immovable but
Multiform Minds, not only one Perfect Monad, and First Good, but also a Rank of
Many Particular Henades or Monades, and Agathotetes; was besides Proclus and
others, In Epict. Ench. p. 9.
asserted by Simplicius also; (...)^ The Highest Good (says he) produces all
things from himself, in several Ranks and Degrees; The First, the Middle, and
the Last or Lowest of all. But the First and the next to himself, does he
produce like himself, One Goodness Many Goodnesses, and one Unity or Henade,
Many Henades. And that by these Henades and Autoagathotetes, he means
Substantial Beings, that are Conscious of themselves, appears also from these
following words, (...)^ P. 11.
Those Beings which are first produced from the First Good, by reason of their
Sameness of Nature with him, are immovably and unchangeably Good, always fixed
in the same Happiness, and never indigent of Good or falling from it, because
they are all Essentially Goodnesses. Where afterward he adds something
concerning the (...) also, that though these were a Rank of Lower Beings, and
not (...), not Essentially Goodnesses, but only by Participation; yet being by
their own Nature also Immovable, they can never degenerate, nor fall from that
Participation of Good. Notwithstanding which, we must confess that some of
these Platonists, seem to take the word Henades sometimes in another sense, and
to understand nothing else thereby, but the Intelligible Ideas before
mentioned; though the ancient Platonists and Pythagoreans were not wont to call
these Unities, but Numbers.

And now have we discovered, more of the Pagans Inferior Gods, Supermundane
and Eternal; viz. besides those (...), those Intelligible Gods; Troops of
Henades and Autoagathotetes, Unities and Goodnesses; and also of Noes,
Immovable Minds or Intellects; or as they frequently call them, (...), and
(...), Henadical (or Monadical) Gods, and Intellectual Gods.

But since these Noes, or (...), are said to be all of them in their own nature
a Rank of Beings above Souls, and therefore Superior to that First Soul, which
is the Third Hypostas^s of this Trinity; as all those Henades or (...), those
Simple Monadical Gods, are likewise yet a higher Rank of Beings above the No's,
and therefore Superior to the Second Hypostasis also, the First Mind; and yet
all these Henades and Noes, however supposed by these Philosophers to be
Eternal, forasmuch as they are Particular Beings only, and not Universal,
cannot be placed higher than in the Rank of Creatures; it follows from hence
unavoidably, that both the Second and Third Hypostasis of this Trinity, as well
the First Mind as the First Soul, must be accounted Creatures also; because no
Created Being, can be Superior to any thing Uncreated. Wherefore Proclus and
some others of those Platonists, plainly understood this Trinity no otherwise,
than as a certain Scale or Ladder of Beings in the Universe; or a Gradual
Descent of things from the First or Highest, by steps downward, lower and
lower, so far as to the Souls of all Animals. For which cause, Proclus to make
up this Scale complete, adds to these three Ranks and Degrees, below that Third
of Souls, a Fourth of Natures also; under which there lies nothing but the
Passive Part of the Universe, Body and Matter. So that, their Whole Scale, of
all that is above Body, was indeed not a Trinity, but a Quaternity, or Four
Ranks and Degrees of Beings, one below another; the First of Henades or
Unities, the Second of Noes, Minds or Intellects, the Third of Souls, and the
Last of Natures: these being as it were so many Orbs and Spheres, one within
and below another. In all which several Ranks of Being, they supposed One First
Universal, and Vnparticipated, as the Head of each respective Rank, and Many
Particular, or Participated Ones: as One First Universal Henade, and Many
Secondary Particular Henades; One First Universal Nous, Mind or Intellect, and
Many Secondary and Particular Noes or Minds; One First Universal Soul, and Many
Particular Souls; and Lastly One Universal Nature, and Many Particular Natures.
In which scale of Beings, they Deified, besides the First (...) and (...), One,
and Good, not only the First Mind, and the First Soul, but also those other
Particular Henades, and Noes universally; and all Particular Souls above
Humane: leaving out besides them and Inferior Souls, that Fourth Rank of
Natures, because they conceived, that nothing was to be accounted a God, but
what was Intellectual and Superior to Men. Wherein though they made Several
Degrees of Gods, one below another, and called some (...) and some (...), some
Eternal, and some Generated, or Made in time; yet did they no where clearly
distinguish, betwixt the Deity properly so called, and the Creature, nor show
how far in this Scale, the True Deity went, and where the Creature began. But
as it were melting the Deity by degrees, and bringing it down lower and lower,
they made the Juncture and Commissure betwixt God and the Creature, so smooth
and close, that where they indeed parted, was altogether undiscernible. They
rather implying them, to differ only in Degrees, or that they were not Absolute
but Comparative Terms, and consisted but in More and Less. All which was
doubtless a gross Mistake of the ancient Cabbala of the Trinity.

This is therefore that Platonic Trinity, which we oppose to the Christian,
not as if Plato's own Trinity in the very Essential Constitution thereof, were
quite a Different Thing from the Christian; it self in all probability having
been at first derived from a Divine or Mosaic Cabbala; but because this
Cabbala, (as might well come to pass in a thing so Mysterious and Difficult to
be conceived) has been by diverse of these Platonists and Phytagoreans,
Misunderstood, Depraved and Adulterated, into such a Trinity, as Confounds the
Differences between God and the Creature, and removes all the Bounds and
Landmarks betwixt them: sinks the Deity lower and lower by Degrees; (still
multiplying of it, as it goes) till it have at length brought it down to the
Whole Corporeal World, and when it has done this, is not able to stop there
neither, but extends it further still, to the Animated Parts thereof, Stars and
Demons. The Design or Direct Tendency thereof, being nothing else but to lay a
Foundation, for Infinite Polytheism, Cosmolatry (or World-Idolatry) and
Creature-Worship. Where it is by the way observable, that these Platonic
Pagans, were the only Public and Professed Champions against Christianity; for
though Celsus were suspected by Origin to have been indeed an Epicurean, yet
did he at least Personate a Platonist too. The reason whereof might be; not
only because the Platonic and Pythagorick Sect, was the Divinest of all the
Pagans, and that which approached nearest to Christianity and the Truth,
(however it might by accident therefore prove the worst, as the Corruption of
the Best thing,) and by that means could with greatest confidence, hold up the
Bucklers against Christianity and encounter it; but also because the Platonic
Principles, as they might be understood, would of all other, serve most
plausibly to defend the Pagan Polytheism and Idolatry.

Concerning the Christian Trinity, we shall here observe only Three Things;
First, that it is not a Trinity of mere Names or Words, nor a Trinity of
Partial Notions and Inadequate Conceptions, of One and the Same Thing. For such
a kind of Trinity as this, might be conceived, in that First Platonic
Hypostasis it self, called (...) and (...) The One and The Good, and perhaps
also in that First Person of the Christian Trinity; namely of Goodness, and
Understanding or Wisdom, and Will or Active Power, Three Inadequate Conceptions
thereof. It Is true, that Plotinus was so high flown, as to maintain, that the
First and Highest Principle of all, by reason of its Perfect Unity and
Simplicity, is above the Multiplicity of Knowledge and Understanding, and
therefore does not so much as (...), in a proper sense, Understand it self:
Notwithstanding which, this Philosopher himself adds that it cannot therefore
be said to be Ignorant nor Unwise neither; these Expressions belonging only to
such a Being, as was by Nature Intellectual, En. 6. L. 7. c. 37.
(...), Intellectus nisi intelligat, demens merito judicatur. And he seems to
grant, that it has a certain Simple Clarity and Brightness in it, Superior to
that of Knowledge: As the Body of the Sun has a certain Brightness Superior to
that Secondary Light which streameth from it; and that it may be said, to be
(...) Knowledge it self, that does not Understand, as Motion it self does not
Move. But this can hardly be conceived by ordinary Mortals, that the Highest
and most Perfect of all Beings, should not fully comprehend it self, the Extent
of its own Fecundity and Power, and be conscious of all that proceeds from
it, though after the most Simple manner. And therefore this high-flown conceit
of Plotinus (and perhaps of Plato himself too) has been rejected by latter
Platonists, as Fantastical, and Unsafe: for thus Simplicius, (...), In Epict.
p. 235.
But it must needs have also the most perfect Knowledge, since it cannot be
ignorant of any thing, that is produced from it self. And St. Austin in like
manner, confutes that Assertion of some Christians, that the (...), or Eternal
Word, was that very Wisdom and Understanding by which the Father himself was
wise; as making it nothing, but an Inadequate Conception of God. But this
opinion, that the Christian Trinity is but a Trinity of Words, or mere Logical
Notions, and Inadequate Conceptions of God, has been plainly condemned by the
Christian Church in Sabellius and others. Wherefore we con-clude it to be a
Trinity of Hypostases, or Subsistences, or Persons.

The Second Thing that we observe concerning the Christian Trinity is this,
that though the Second Hypostasis or Person thereof, were begotten from the
First, and the Third Proceeds both from the First and Second; yet are neither
this Second nor Third, Creatures; and that for these following Reasons. First,
because they were not made (...), as Arius maintained, that is, from an
Antecedent Nonexistence brought forth into being, nor can it be said of either
of them, Erat Quando Non erant, that once they were not, but their Going forth
Was from Eternity, and they were both Coeve and Coeternal with the Father.
Secondly, because they were not only Eternal Emanations (if we may so call
them) but also Necessary, and therefore are they both also, Absolutely
Vndestroyable and Vnannihilable. Now according to true Philosophy and Theology,
no Creature could have existed from Eternity, nor be Absolutely Vndestroyable,
and therefore that which is both Eternal, and Vndestroyable, is ipso facto
Uncreated. Nevertheless, because some Philosophers have asserted (though
erroneously) both the whole World's Eternity, and its being a Necessary
Emanation also from the Deity, and consequently, that it is Vndestroyable; we
shall therefore further add, that these Second and Third Hypostases or Persons
of the Holy Trinity, are not only therefore Uncreated, because they were both
Eternal, and Necessary Emanations, and likewise are Vnannihilable; but also
because they are Universal, each of them comprehending the Whole World, and all
created things under it; which Universality of theirs, is the same thing with
Infinity: Whereas all other Beings besides this Holy Trinity, are Particular
and Finite. Now we say, that no Intellectual Being, which is not only Eternal;
and Necessarily Existent, or Vndestroyable; but also Universal or Infinite, can
be a Creature.

Again in the Last place we add, that these Three Hypostases or Persons, are
truly and really One God. Not only because they have all Essentially One and
the same Will, according to that of Origin, C. Cells. p. 386.
(...), We worship, the Father of Truth, and the Son the Truth it self, being
Two Things as to Hypostasis; but one in Agreement, Consent, and Sameness of
Will: but also because they are Physically (if we may so speak) One also; and
have a Mutual (...), and (...), Inexistence, and Permeation of one another;
according to that of our Savior Christ, I am In the Father, and the Father In
Me. And the Father that Dwells In Me, he does the Works. We grant indeed,
that there can be no Instance of the like Unity or Oneness found in any Created
Beings; nevertheless we certainly know from our very selves, that it is not
impossible, for two distinct Substances, that are of a very different Kind from
one another, the One Incorporeal, the other Corporeal, to be so closely united
together, as to become One Animal and Person; much less therefore should it be
thought impossible, for these Three Divine Hypostases, to be One God.

We shall conclude here with Cnfidence, that the Christian Trinity, though
there be very much of Mystery in it, yet is there nothing at all of plain
Contradiction to the Undoubted Principles of Humane Reason, that is, of
Impossibility to be found therein, as the Atheists would pretend, who cry down
all for Nonsense and Absolute Impossibility, which their Dull Stupidity cannot
reach to, or their Infatuated Minds easily comprehend, and therefore even the
Deity it self. And it were to be wished, that some Religionists and
Trinitarians did not here symbolize too much with them, in affecting to
represent the Mystery of the Christian Trinity, as a thing directly
contradictious to all Humane Reason and Understanding; and that perhaps out of
design to make men surrender up themselves and Consciences, in a Blind and
Implicit Faith, wholly to their Guidance: as also to debauch their
Understandings by this means, to the swallowing down of other Opinions of
theirs, plainly repugnant to Humane Faculties. As who should say, he that
believes the Trinity, (as well all must do, if we will be Christians) should
boggle at nothing in Religion never after, nor scrupulously chew or examine any
thing: as if there could be nothing more Contradictious or Impossible to Humane
Understanding propounded, than this Article of the Christian Faith.

But for the present we shall endeavor only to show, that the Christian
Trinity (though a Mystery, yet) is much more agreeable to Reason, than that
Platonic or Pseudo-Platonick Trinity before described; and that in those Three
Particulars then mentioned. For First, when those Platonists and Pythagoreans,
interpret their Third God, or Last Hypostasis of their Trinity to be either the
World, or else a (...), such an Immediate Soul thereof, as together with the
World its Body, makes up One Animal and God; as there is plainly too great a
Leap here betwixt their Second and Third Hypostasis, so do they Debase the
Deity therein too much, confound God and the Creature together, laying a
Foundation not only for Cosmo-Latry or World-Idolatry in general, but also for
the grossest and most sottish of all Idolatries, the worshipping of the
Inanimate Parts of the World themselves, in pretense as Parts and Members of
this great Mundane Animal, and Sensible God.

It is true indeed that Origin and some others of the ancient Christian
Writers, have supposed, that God may be said in some sense to be the Soul of
the World. L. 2. c. 1.
Thus in that Book Peri Archon, Sicut Corpus nostrum unum ex multis Membris
aptatum est, and ab una Anima continetur, ita and Vniversum Mundum, velut
Animal quoddam Immane opinandum puto; quod quasi ab una Anima, Virtute Dei ac
Ratione teneatur. Quod etiam a Sancta Scriptura indicari arbitror, per illud
quod dictum est per Prophetam; Nonne Coelum and Terram ego repleo, dicit
Dominus? and Coelum mihi Seeds, Terra autem Scabellum pedum meorum; Et quod
Salvator cum ait, non esse jurandum neque per Coelum, quia Seeds Dei est, neque
per Terram quia Scabellum pedum ejus. Sed and illud quod ait Paulus, Quoniam in
ipso Vivimus and Movemur and Sumus. Quomodo enim in Deo Vivimus, and Movemur,
and Sumus, nisi quod in Virtute sua Vniversum constringit and continet Mundum?
As our own Body is made up of many Members, and contained by One Soul, so do I
conceive that the whole World is to be looked upon, as One huge great Animal,
which is contained as it were by One Soul, the Virtue and Reason of God. And so
much seems to be intimated by the Scripture in sundry places; as in that of the
Prophet, Do not I fill Heaven and Earth? And again, Heaven is my Throne and the
Earth my Footstool. And in that of our Savior, Swear not at all, neither by
Heaven, because it is the Throne of God, nor by the Earth because it is his
Footstool. And lastly in that of Paul to the Athenians, For in him we Live and
Move, and have our Being. For how can we be said to Live and Move, and have our
Being in God, unless because he by his Virtue and Power, does Constringe and
Contein the whole World? And how can Heaven be the Throne of God, and the Earth
his Footstool, unless his Virtue and Power fill all things both in Heaven and
Earth? Nevertheless, God is here said by Origin, to be but Quasi-Anima, As it
were The Soul of the World: As if he should have said, That all the Perfection
of a Soul, is to be attributed to God, in respect of the World; he Quickening
and Enlivening all things, as much as if he were the Very Soul of it, and all
the Parts thereof were his Living Members. And perhaps the whole Deity ought
not to be looked upon, according to Aristotle's Notion thereof, merely as
(...), an Immovable Essence, for then it is not conceivable, how it could
either Act upon the World, or be Sensible of any thing therein: or to what
purpose any Devotional Addresses should be made by us to such an Vnaffectible,
Inflexible, Rockie and Adamantine Being. Wherefore all the Perfection of a
Mundane Soul, may perhaps be attributed to God in some sense, and he called,
Quasi-Anima Mundi, As it were the Soul thereof: Though St. Cyprian would have
this, properly to belong to the Third Hypostasis or Person of the Christian
Trinity, viz. The Holy Ghost. But there is something of Imperfection also,
plainly cleaving and adhering to this Notion of a Mundane Soul, besides
something of Paganity likewise necessarily consequent thereupon, which cannot
be admitted by us. Wherefore God, or the Third Divine Hypostasis, cannot be
called the Soul of the World in this sense, as if it were so Immersed
thereinto, and so Passive from it, as our Soul is Immersed into, and Passive
from its Body. Nor as if the World and this Soul together, made up one Entire
Animal, each Part whereof, were incomplete alone by it self. And that God or
the Third Hypostasis of the Christian Trinity, is not to be accounted in this
Sense properly, the Soul of the World, according to Origin himself, Peri Arch.
L. 1. c. 6.
we may learn from these words of his; Solius Dei, id est, Patris, and Filii,
and Spiritus Sancti, Naturae, id proprium est; ut sine Materiali Substantia,
and absque ulla Corporeae adjectionis societate intelligatur subsistere: It is
proper to the Nature of God alone, that is, of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost, to subsist without any Material Substance, or Body Vitally
United to it. Where Origin affirming, that all Created Souls and Spirits
whatsoever, have always some Body or other Vitally United to them, and that it
is the Property only of the Three Persons of the Holy Trinity, not to be
Vitally United to any Body, as the Soul thereof; whether this Assertion of his
be true or no (which is a thing not here to be discussed) he does plainly
hereby declare, that God or the Third Hypostasis of the Trinity, is not to be
accounted in a true and proper sense, the Soul of the World.

And it is certain that the more Refined Platonists, were themselves also, of
this Persuasion; and that their Third God, or Divine Hypostasis, was neither
the Whole World (as supposed to be Animated) nor yet (...), the Immediate Soul
of this Mundane Animal, but only (...), a Supermundane Soul; that is, such a
thing as though it Preside over the Whole World, and take Cognizance of all
things in it, yet is not properly an Essential Part of that Mundane Animal, In
Timae. p. 93, 94.
but a Being Elevated above the same. For thus Proclus plainly affirms, not
only of Amelius but also of Porphyrius himself, who likewise pretended to
follow Plotinus therein; (...)^ After Amelius, Porphyrius thinking to agree
with Plotinus, calls the Supermundane Soul, the Immediate Opificer or Maker of
the World, and that Mind or Intellect, to which it is converted, not the
Opificer himself, but the Paradigm thereof. And though Proclus there make a
question whether or no, this was Plotinus his true meaning, yet Porphyrius is
most to be credited herein, he having had such an intimate acquaintance with
him. Wherefore according to these Three Platonist, Plotinus, Amelius, and
Porphyrius, the Third Hypostasis of the Platonic Trinity, is neither the
World, nor the Immediate Soul of the Mundane Animal; but a certain Supermundane
Soul, which also was (...) the Opificer and Creator of the World, and therefore
no Creature. Now the Corporeal World, being supposed by these Platonists also,
to be an Animal, they must therefore needs acknowledge a Double Soul, one
(...), the Immediate Soul of this Mundane Animal, and another (...), a
Supermundane Soul, which was the Third in their Trinity of Gods, or Divine
Hypostases, the Proper and Immediate Opificer of the World. And the same in all
probability, was Plato's opinion also, and therefore that Soul, which is the
only Deity, that in his Book of Laws he undertakes to prove, was (...) a
Supermundane Soul, and not the same with that (...) that Mundane Soul, whose
Genesis or Generation is described in his Timaeus; the Former of them being a
Principle and Eternal; the Latter made in Time, together with the World; though
said to be Older than it, because in order of Nature before it. And thus we see
plainly, that though some of these Platonists and Pythagoreans, either
Misunderstood or Depraved, the Cabbala of the Trinity, so as to make the Third
Hypostasis thereof, to be the Animated World, which themselves acknowledged to
be, (...) and (...), a Creature and Thing made; yet others of the more Refined
of them, supposed this Third Hypostasis of their Trinity, to be, not a Mundane
but a Supermundane Soul, and (...), not a Creature, but the Creator or Opificer
of the Whole World.

And as for the Second Particular proposed; it was a gross Absurdity in those
Platonists also, to make the Second, in their Trinity of Gods, and Hypostases,
not to be one God or Hypostasis, but a Multitude of Gods and Hypostases: as
also was that a Monstrous Extravagancy of theirs, to suppose the Ideas, all of
them, to be so many distinct Substances and Animals. P. 320. Rig.
Which besides others Tertullian in his Book De Anima thus imputes to Plato;
Vult Plato esse quasdam Substantias Invisibiles, Incorporeales, Supermundiales,
Divinas, and Aeternas, quas appellat Ideas, id est, Formas and Exempla, and
Causas Naturalium istorum manifestorum, and subjacentium Corporalibus: and
illas quidem esse Veritates, haec autem Imagines earum: Plato conceives, that
there are certain Substances, Invisible, Incorporeal, Supermundial, Divine and
Eternal; which he calls Ideas, that is, Forms, Exemplars and Causes of all
these Natural and Sensible Things, they being the Truths, but the other the
Images. Neither can it be denied, but that there are some odd Expressions in
Plato, sounding that way, who therefore may not be justified in this, nor I
think in some other Conceits of his, concerning these Ideas; as when he
contends that they are not only the Objects of Science, but also the Proper and
Physical Causes of all things here below; as for example, that the Ideas of
Similitude and Dissimilitude, are the Causes of the Likeness and Unlikeness of
all things to one another by their Participation of them. Nevertheless it
cannot be at all doubted, but that Plato himself and most of his Followers very
well understood, that these Ideas, were all of them, really nothing else but
the Noemata or Conceptions, of that one Perfect Intellect, which was their
Second Hypostasis; and therefore they could not look upon them in good earnest,
as so many Distinct Substances Existing severally and apart by themselves out
of any Mind; however they were guilty of some Extravagant Expressions
concernning them. Wherefore when they called them, (...), Essences or
Substances (as they are called in Philo (...) the most necessary Essences)
their true meaning herein was only this, to signify that they were not such
Accidental and Evanid things, as our Conceptions are, they being the Standing
Objects of all Science, at least, if not the Causes also of Existent Things.
Again when they were by them sometimes called Animals also, they intended only
to signify thereby that they were not mere Dead Forms, like Pictures drawn
upon Paper, or Carved Images and Statues. And thus Amelius the Philosopher,
plainly understood that Passage of St. John the Evangelist, So Clem Al. S.
Cyril. S. Aug. and other Latins.
concerning the Eternal (...), he pointing the Words otherwise than our Copies
now do, (...), That which was made, in him was Life: this Philosopher glossing
after this manner upon it, (...), In whom whatsoever was made, was Living, and
Life, and True Being. Lastly no wonder if from Animals these Ideas forthwith
became Gods too, to such men, as took all occasions possible to multiply Gods;
in which there was also something of that Scholastic Notion, Quicquid est in
Deo, est Deus, Whatsoever is in God is God. But the main thing therein, was a
piece of Paganick Poetry; these Pagan Theologers being Generally possessed with
that Poetic humor of Personating Things and Deifying them. Wherefore though
the Ideas were so many Titular Gods to many of the Platonic Pagans, yet did
Julian himself (for Example) who made the most of them, suppose them all (...),
to Coexist with God and Inexist in him, that is, in the First Mind, or Second
Hypostasis of their Trinity.

Lastly whereas Proclus and others of the Platonists intermingle Many
Particular Gods with those Three Universal Principles or Hypostases, of their
Trinity, as Noes, Minds, or Intellects Superior to the First Soul; and Henades
and Agathotetes, Unities and Goodnesses Superior to the First Intellect too;
thereby making those Particular Beings, which must needs be Creatures,
Superior to those Hypostases that are Universal and Infinite, and by
consequence Creaturizing of them; this Hypothesis of theirs (I say) is
altogether Absurd and Irrational also: there being no Created Beings
Essentially Good and Wise, but all by Participation, nor any Immovable Natures
amongst them whose (...) is their (...), their Essense their Operation; but all
Mutable and Changeable, and probably, as Origin and others of the Fathers add,
Peri Arch^n L. 1. c. 8. p. 625.
Lapsable and Peccable. Nulla Natura est, quae non recipiat Bonum and Malum,
Excepta Dei Natura, quae Bonorum omnium Fons est; and Christi Sapientia,
Sapientiae enim Fons est, and Sapientia utique Stultitiam recipere non potest;
and Justitia est, quae nunquam profecto Injustitiam capiet; and Verbum est vel
Ratio, quae u^ique Irrationalis effici non potest; Sed and Lux est, and Lucem
certum est quod Tenebrae non comprehendent. Similiter and Natura Spiritus
Sancti, quae sancta est, non recipit Pollutionem; Naturaliter enim vel
Substanti^li^er Sancta est. Siqua autem alia Natura Sancta est, ex Assumptione
hoc vel Inspiratione Spiritus sancti habet, ut sanctisicetur, non ex sua Natura
hoc possidens, sed ut Accidens; propter quod and decidere potest, qoud accidit.
There is no Nature, which is not capable both of Good and Evil, excepting only
the Nature of God, who is the Fountain of all Good; and the Wisdom of Christ,
For he is the Fountain of Wisdom, and Wisdom it self never can receive Folly;
he is also Justice it self which can never admit of Injustice and the Reason
and Word it self, which can never become Irrational;; he is also the Light it
self, and it is certain that Darkness cannot comprehend this Light, nor
insinuate it self with it. In like manner the Nature of the Holy Ghost, is such
as can never receive Pollution, it being Substantially and Essentially Holy.
But whatsoever other Nature is Holy, it is only such in way of Participation
and by the Inspiration of this Holy Spirit; so that Holiness is not its very
Nature and Essence, but only an Accident to it, and whatsoever is but
Accidental may fail. All Created Beings therefore having but Accidental
Goodness and Wisdom, may Degenerate and fall into Evil and Folly. Which of
Origen's is all one as if he should have said, there is no such Rank of Beings
as Autogaathotetes, Essential Goodnesses, there being only one Being
Essentially Good, or Goodness it self. Nor no such Particular Created Beings
existing in Nature, as the Platonists call Noes neither, that is, Minds or
Intellects Immovable, Perfectly and Essentially Wise, or Wisdom it self, whose
(...) is their (...), whose Essence is their Operation, and who consequently
have no Flux at all in them, nor Successive Action; (only the Eternal Word and
Wisdom of God being such) who also are absolutely Ununitable to any Bodies. It
is true that Origin did sometimes make mention of (...), Minds or Intellects,
but it was in another sense, he calling all Souls, as first Created by God, and
before their Lapse, by that name: which was as much as if he should have said,
though some of the Platonists talk much of their Noes, yet is there nothing
answerable to that name, according to their Notion of them, but the only Noes
really existing in Nature, are, Vnfallen but Peccable Souls; he often
concluding, that the Highest Rank of Created Beings, are indeed no better than
those which the Platonists commonly call (...), or Souls. By which Souls he
understood first of all, Beings in their own nature Selfmoveable, and Active;
whereas the No's of the Platonists are altogether Immovable and above Action.
And then again, such Beings or Spirits Incorporeal, as exist not Abstractly and
Separately from all Matter, as the No's of the Platonists were supposed to do,
but are Vitally Vnitable to Bodies, so as together with those Bodies, to
compound and make up One Animal. Thus, I say, Origin conceived even of the
Highest Angelical, and Arch-Angelica Orders, that they were eall of them (...),
Souls United to Bodies, but such as were Pure, Subtle and Ethereal: however he
supposed it not Impossible for them to sink down into Bodies, more Gross and
Feculent. And it is certain that many of the Ancient Christian Writers
concurred with Origin herein, that the Highest Created Spirits were no Naked
and Abstract Minds, but Souls clothed with some Corporeal Indument. Lastly,
Origen's Souls were also supposed to be all of them, endowed with Liberum
Arbitrium or Free Will, and consequently to be Self-improvable and
Self-impairable; and no Particular Created Spirits to be absolutely in their
own Nature Impeccable, but Lapsible into Vicious Habits: Whereas as the
Platonic Noes, are supposed to be such Beings, as could never Fall nor
Degenerate. And the Generality of the Christian Writers seemed to have
consented or conspired with Origin in this also, they supposing him who is now
the Prince of Devils, to have been once an Angel of the Highest Order. Thus
does St. Jerome determine; Solus Deus est, in quem Peccatum non cadit; caetera
cum sint Liberi Arbitrii, possunt in utramque partem suam flectere voluntatem:
God is the only Being, that is absolutely incapable of sin, but all other
Beings, having Free Will in them, may possibly turn their Will to either way,
that is, to Evil as well as to Good. It is certain, that God in a sense of
Perfection, is the most Free Agent of all, neither is Contingent Liberty
Universally denied to him; but here it is made the only Privilege of God, that
is, of the Holy Trinity, to be devoid of Liberum Arbitrium, namely as it
implies Imperfection, that is, Peccability and Lapsibility, in it.

It is true that some of the Platonic Philosophers, suppose that even in that
Rank of Beings called by them Souls, though they be not Essentially Immutable
but all Self-moveable, and Active, yet there are some of them of so high a
Pitch and Elevation, as that they can never Degenerate, nor sink down into
Vicious Habits. Thus Simplicius for one; In Epist. p. 12, 13.
(...) (...)^ But the First and Highest of Souls which were Immediately
produced from what are Essentially Good, although they have some abatement in
them, they being not Goodnesses Essentially, but desirous of Good; nevertheless
are they so near a kin to that Highest Good of all, as that they do Naturally
and Indivulsively cleave to the same, and have their Volitions always uniformly
directed toward it, they never declining to the worser. Insomuch that if
Proaeresis, be taken for the Choosing of one thing before another, perhaps
there is no such thing as Proaeresis to be imputed to them, unless one should
call the choosing of the First Goods, Proaeresis. By these higher Souls,
Simplicius must needs understand, either the Souls of the Sun, Moon and Stars,
or else those of the Superior Orders of Demoniack or Angelick Beings. Where
though he make a Question, Whether Proaeresis or Deliberation belong to them,
yet does he plainly imply that they have none at all of that Lubricous Liberum
Arbitrium or Free Will belonging to them, which would make them capable of Vice
and Immorality as well as Virtue.

But whatever is to be said of this, there seems to be no necessity at all, for
admitting that Assertion of Origen's, that all Rational Souls whatsoever, even
those of Men and those of the highest Angelical Orders are Universally of one
and the same Nature, and have no Fundamental or Essential Difference in their
Constitution; and consequently that all the difference that is now betwixt
them, did arise only from the Difference of their Demeanor, or Use of that
Power and Liberty, which they all alike once had. So that Thrones, and
Dominions, and Principalities, and Powers, were all made such by their Merits;
and Humane Souls though now sunk so low, yet are not absolutely Incapable of
Commencing Angels, or ascending to those highest Altitudes: as it is not
impossible, according to him neither, but that the Highest Angels also, the
Seraphim and Cherubim, might in length of time, not only Degenerate into
Devils, but also sink down into Humane Bodies, His reason for which Monstrous
Paradox is only this, that the Divine Justice cannot otherwise well be salved,
but God must needs be a (...), an Acepter of Persons, should he have
Arbitrarily made such vast Differences amongst Intellectual Beings, Which
Ground he also extends so far, as to the Humane Soul of our Savior Christ
himself, as being not Partially appointed to that transcendent Dignity, of its
Hypostatick Union, but by reason of its most faithful adherence to the Divine
Word and Wisdom, in a Pre-existent State, beyond all others Souls, which he
endeavors thus to prove from the Scripture, (...), L. 1. c. 6.
Quod dilectionis Perfectio, and affectus sinceritas, ei inseparabilem cum Deo
fecerit Vnitatem, ita ut non fortuita fuerit, aut cum Personae acceptione,
Animae ejus assumptio, sed Virtutum suarum sibi merito delata; audi ad eum
Prophetam dicentem, Dilexisti Justitiam and odisti iniquitatem, propterea unxit
te Deus, Deus tuus, oleo laetitiae prae participibus tuis: Dilectionis ergo
merito ungitur Oleo laetitiae Anima Christi, id est, cum Verbo Dei Vnum
efficitur. Vnge namque oleo laetitiae, non aliud intelligitur quam Spiritu
Sancto repleri. Prae Participibus autem dixit; quia n^n Gratia Spiritus sicut
Prophetis ei data est, sed ipsius Verbi Dei in ea Substantialis inerat
Plenitudo. That the Perfection of Love and Sincerity of Divine Affection,
procured to this Soul its Inseparable Union with the Godhead, so that the
Assumption of it was neither Fortuitous nor Partial, or with Prosopolepsie (the
Acception of Persons) but bestowed upon it justly for the Merit of its Virtues;
hear (says he) the Prophet thus declaring to him; Thou have loved
Righteousness and hated Iniquity, therefore has God, even thy God, anointed
thee with the oil of Gladness above thy Fellows. The Soul of Christ therefore
was anointed with the oil of Gladness or made one with the Word of God, for the
Merits of Love and faithful adherence to God; and no otherwise. For to be
anointed with the oil of Gladness, here properly signifies nothing else, but to
be replenished with the Holy Ghost. But when it is said, that he was thus
anointed above his Fellows, this intimates, that he had not the Holy Ghost
bestowed upon him, only as the Prophets and other Holy men had, but that the
Substantial Fullness of the Word of God dwelt in him. But this Reason of
Origen's seems to be very weak, because if there be a Rank of Souls below
Humane, specifically differing from the same, as Origin himself must needs
confess (he not allowing the Souls of Brutes to have been Humane Souls Lapsed,
as some Pythagoreans and Platonists conceited, but renouncing and disclaiming
that Opinion as monstrously Absurd and Irrational) there can be no reason
given, why there might not be as well other Ranks and Orders of Souls Superior
to those of Men, without the Injustice of Prosopolepsie, as besides Simplicius,
Plotinus and the Generality of other Platonists conceived.

But least of all can we assent to Origin, when from this Principle, that Souls
as such, are Essentially endowed with Liberum Arbitrium or Free Will and
therefore never in their own Nature Impeccable, he infers those Endless
Circuits of Souls Upwards and Downwards, and so makes them to be never at rest,
denying them any Fixed State of Holiness and Happiness by Divine Grace; such as
wherein they might be free from the Fear and Danger of ever losing the same. Of
whom St. Austin therefore thus, Illum and propter alia nonnulla, and maxim
propter alternantes sine cessatione beatitudines and miserias, and statutis
seculorum intervallis ab istis ad illas, atque ab illis ad istas Itus ac
Reditus Interminabiles; non immerito reprobavit Ecclesia: quia and hoc quod
Misericors videbatur, amisit, faciendo sanctis Veras Miserias, quibus poenas
luerent, and Falsas Beatitudines, in quibus verum ac securum, hoc est, sine
Timore certum, sempiterni boni gaudium, non haberent. The Church has
deservedly rejected Origin, both for certain other opinions of his, and
especially for those his Alternate Beatitudes and Miseries without end, and for
his infinite Circuits, Ascents and Descents of Souls from one to the other, in
restless Vicissitudes and after Periods of Time. Forasmuch as hereby he has
quite lost, that very Title of Pitiful or Merciful, which otherwise he seemed
to have deserved, by making so many True Miseries for the best of Saints, in
which they should successively undergo Punishment and Smart; and none but False
Happinesses for them, such as wherein they could never have any True or Secure
joy, free from the Fear of losing that Good which they possess. For this
Origenical Hypothesis, seems directly contrary to the whole Tenor of the
Gospel, promising Eternal and Everlasting Life, to those, who believe in
Christ, and Perseveringly obey him; 1 John 2. This is the Promise that he has
Promised us, even Eternal Life: and Titus 1.2. In hope of Eternal Life, which
God that cannot Lie has promised. And, God so loved the World, that he gave
his only Begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not perish, but
have Everlasting Life: and lest all this should be taken for a Periodical
Eternity only, John 3.26. He that believes in me shall never die. And possibly
this might be the Meaning of St. Paul, 2 Timothy 1.10. when he affirms of our
Savior Christ, That he has abolished Death, and brought Life and Immortality
to Light thorough the Gospel; not because he was the First who had discovered
and published to the World, the Souls Immortality, which was believed before,
not only by all the Pharisaick Jews, but also by the Generality of Pagans too;
but because these for the most part held their Endless Circuits and
Transmigrations of Souls; therefore was he the First who brought Everlasting
Life to Light, and gave the World assurance, in the Faith of the Gospel, of a
Fixed and Permanent State of Happiness, and a never fading Crown of Glory to be
obtained, Him that overcomes, will I make a Pillar in the Temple of my God,
and he shall go no more out, Apoc. 3.12.

Now the Reason why we mentioned Origin here, was because he was a Person, not
only thoroughly skilled in all the Platonic Learning, but also one who was
sufficiently addicted to those Dogmata, he being commonly conceived to have had
too great a kindness for them; and therefore had there been any Solidity of
Reason, for either those Particular Henades, or Noes of theirs, Created Beings
above the Rank of Souls, and consequently according to the Platonic
Hypothesis, Superior to the Universal Psyche also, (which was the Third
Hypostasis in their Trinity, and seems to answer to the Holy Ghost in the
Christian:) Origin was as likely to have been favorable thereunto, as any
other. But it is indeed manifestly repugnant to Reason, that there should be
any such Particular, that is, Created Henades, and (...) Essential Goodnesses,
Superior to the Platonic First Mind; or any such Noes, and (...), Essential
Wisdoms, Superior to their Universal Psyche, it being all one, as if in the
Christian Trinity; besides the First Person or the Father, one should suppose a
Multitude of Particular Paternities Superior to the Second, and also besides
that Second Person, the Son or Word, a Multitude of Particular Sons or Words,
all Superior to the Third Person the Holy Ghost. For this is plainly to make a
Breach upon the Deity; to confound the Creator and Creature together; and to
suppose a company of such Creaturely- Gods, as imply a manifest contradiction
in the very Notion of them.

Wherefore we shall here observe, that this was not the Catholic Doctrine of
the Platonic School, that there were such Henades and Noes, but only a private
Opinion of some Doctors amongst them, and that of the latter sort too. For
First, as for those Henades, as there are not the least Footsteps of them to be
found any where in Plato's Writings, so may it be plainly gathered from them,
that he supposed no such thing. Forasmuch as in his Second Epistle, where he
describes his Trinity, he does not say of the First, (...) about the First are
the First, as he does of the Second (...), and of the Third (...), about the
Second are the Second, and about the Third the Third; but of the First he
says, (...), About the King of all things, are all things; and for his sake
are all Things; and he is the cause of all Things that are good: Wherefore here
are no Particular Henades and Autoagathotetes, Unities and Goodnesses, about
the First (...) and (...), One and Good; but all Good things are about him, he
being both the Efficient and Final Cause of all. Moreover Plotinus throughout
all his Works discovers not the Least suspicion neither, of these Henades and
Agathotetes, this Language being scarcely to be found any where in the Writings
of any Platonists, Seniour to Proclus: who also as if he were conscious that
this assumentum to the Platonic Theology, were not so defensible a thing, does
himself sometime as it were tergiversate and decline it by equivocating in the
Word Henades, taking them for the Ideas, or the Intelligible Gods before
mentioned. As perhaps Synesius also uses the Word, in his First Hymn, when God
is called by him (...),
(...).
The First Henad of Henades; and the First Monad of Monades: That is, The First
Idea of Good, and Cause of all the Ideas. And as for the Particular Noes, Minds
or Intellects, these indeed seem to have crept up somewhat before Plotinus his
time, he besides the Passage before cited, elsewhere giving some Intimations of
them, P. 847, 8^8.
as Enn. 6. L. 4. c. 4. (...); But how can there be many Souls, and many Minds,
and not only one, but many Entia? From which and other places of his, Ficinus
concluded Plotinus himself really to have asserted, above the Rank of Souls, a
Multitude of other Substantial Beings, called (...) or (...), Minds or
Intellects. Nevertheless Plotinus speaking of them so uncertainly, and making
such an Union betwixt all these Noes, and their Particular Respective Souls; it
may well be questioned, whether he really took them, for any thing else, but
the Heads and Summities of those Souls; he supposing that all Souls, have a
Mind in them, the Participation of the First Mind; as also a Unity too, the
Participation of the First Unity; whereby they are capable of being conjoined
with both: Enn. L. 5. c. 11.
(...)^ There must needs be Mind in us, as also the Principle and Cause of
Mind, God. Not as if he were divided, but because though remaining in himself,
yet he is also considered in Many, as capable to receive him. As the Center,
though it remain in it self, yet is it also in every Line, drawn from the
Circumference, each of them, by a certain Point of its own, touching it. And by
some such Thing in us, is it, that we are capable of touching God, and of being
United to him, when we direct our Intention toward him. And in the next
Chapter he adds, (...), etc. That though we have these things, in us, yet do we
not perceive them, being for the most part idle and asleep as to these higher
Energies; as some never at all exercise them. However those do always act;
Mind, and that which is before Mind, Unity; but every thing which is in our
Souls, is not perceived by us unless come to the Whole, when we dispose our
selves toward it, etc. Where Plotinus seems to make, the No's or Minds, to be
nothing else, but something in Souls, whereby they partake of the First Mind.
And it is said of Porphyrius, who was well acquainted with Plotinus his
Philosophy that he quite discarded and rejected these Noes or Intellects, as
Substances really distinct from the First Mind, and separate from Souls. And it
is certain that such Minds as these, are no where plainly mentioned by Plato,
he speaking only of Minds in Souls, but not of any Abstract and Separate Minds
save only one. And though some might think him to have given an Intimation of
them in his (...), (before mentioned) his Second about the Second Things, or
Second Things about the Second; yet by these may very well be understood, the
Ideas; as by the Third Things about the Third, all Created Beings. Wherefore we
may conclude, that this Platonic or rather Pseudo-Platonick Trinity, which
confounds the Differences betwixt God and the Creature, and that probably in
favor of the Pagan Polytheism and Idolatry; is nothing so agreeable to Reason
it self, as that Christian Trinity before described, which distinctly declares
how far the Deity goes, and where the Creature begins: namely, that the Deity
extends so far as to this Whole Trinity of Hypostases; and that all other
things whatsoever, this Trinity of Persons only excepted, are truly and
properly their Creatures, produced by the joint concurrence and Influence of
them all, they being really but One God,

But it is already manifest, that all the forementioned Depravations and
Adulterations of that Divine Cabbala of the Trinity, and that Spurious Trinity
described, (which because asserted by some Platonists, was called Platonical,
in way of distinction from the Christian) cannot be justly charged neither upon
Plato himself, nor yet upon all his Followers Universally. But on the contrary
we shall now make it appear, that Plato and some of the Platonists, retained
much of the Ancient Genuine Cabbala, and made a very near approach to the True
Christian Trinity; forasmuch as their Three Hypostases, distinguished from all
their other Gods, seem to have been none of them accounted Creatures, but all
other things whatsoever the Creatures of them.

First therefore we affirm, that Plato himself, does in the beginning of his
Timaeus, very carefully distinguish betwixt God and the Creature, he
determining the Bounds between them, after this manner: (...) (...)^ We being
here to treat, concerning the Universe, judge it necessary to begin with a
Distinction, betwixt that which always Is, and has no Ortus or Generation; and
that which is Made, but never truly Is. The Former of which, being always like
it self and the same, is comprehensible by Intellection with Reason, or is the
Object of Knowledge; the latter of them, that which is Made and Perishes, but
never truly Is, is not properly Knowable, but Opinable only, or the Object of
Opinion together with Irrational Sense. Now every thing that is made must of
necessity be made by some Cause. The reason why Plato being to treat of the
Universe, begins here with this Distinction, was, as Proclus well observes,
because, (...)^ It is either one of our Common Notions, or a thing
Mathematically Demonstrable, that there must be something Eternal, or which was
never Made, but always was, and had no Beginning. And it is evident by Sense
and experience that all things are not such, but that some things are Made and
Perish again, or Generated and Corrupted. Now the Latter Platonists, being
strongly possessed with a Prejudice, of the World's Eternity, or that it had no
Beginning, have offered strange violence to Plato's Text in this place, and
wrested his words to quite a different sense from what he intended; as if by
his (...) That which is Made, he did not at all mean, That which had a
Beginning, but only, that whose Duration is, Flowing and Successive or
Temporary, which might notwithstanding be without Beginning; and as if he
supposed the whole Corporeal World to be such, which though it has a
Successive and Temporary Duration, yet was without any Beginning. And the
Current ran so strong this way, that even Boethius, that Learned Christian
Philosopher, was himself also carried away with the force thereof, he taking it
for granted likewise, Consol. Phil. L. 5. Pro. 6.
that Plato held the Eternity of the World in this sense, that is, its Being
without Beginning, Non recte quidam, (says he) qui cum audiunt visum Platoni,
Mundum hunc nec habuisse Initium Temporis, nec habiturum esse defectum; hoc
modo Conditori Conditum Mundum fieri Coaeternum putant. Aliud est enim, per
Interminabilem duci vitam, quod Mundo Plato tribuit; aliud Interminabilis Vitae
totam pariter complexum esse praesentiam; quod Divinae Mentis proprium esse
manifestum est. Neque Deus, Conditis rebus Antiquior videri debet, Temporis
Quantitate, sed Simplicis potius proprietate Naturae. Some when they hear,
Plato to have held, that the World had no beginning, nor shall never have an
end, do not rightly from thence infer, That Plato therefore made the World
Coeternal with God, because it is One Thing always to Be, and another thing,
to possess an Endless Life all at once; which is proper to the Divine Mind.
Neither ought God to be thought Older than the World, in respect of Time, but
only in Respect of the Simplicity of his Nature. To which purpose he adds
afterward, Itaque si dignarebus Nomina velimus imponere, Platonem sequentes,
Deum quidem Aeternum, Mundum vero dicemus esse Perpetuum: Therefore, if we
would give proper Names to things agreeable to their Natures, following Plato,
we should say, That God was Eternal; but the World only Perpetual. But as this
Doctrine of the latter Platonists, quite frustrates Plato's Design in this
place, which was to prove or assert a God, because if the World had no
beginning, though its Duration be never so much Successive, yet would it not
follow from thence, that therefore it must needs have been made by some other
Cause; so is it directly contrary to that Philosopher's own Words; himself
there declaring, that by his (...), Ortum, or That which is Made he did not
understand only, That whose Duration is Successive, but also (...), That which
had a beginning of its Generation, and (...), That which begun from a certain
Epoch of Time; or that which Once was not, and therefore must needs be brought
into being by some other Cause. So that Plato there plainly supposed, all
Temporary Beings, once to have had a Beginning of their Duration, as he
declares in that very Timaeus of his, that Time it self was not Eternal, or
without Beginning, but Made together with the Heaven or World; and from thence
does he infer, that there must of neccessity be, another Eternal being, viz.
such as has both a Permanent Duration, and was without Beginning, and was the
Cause both of Time and the World: for as much as nothing can possibly be made
without a Cause; that is, nothing which once was not, could of it self come
into Being, but must be produced by some other thing; and so at last we must
needs come, to something which had no Beginning. Wherefore Plato, thus taking
it for granted, that whatsoever has a Temporary and Flowing Duration, was not
without Beginning; as also that whatsoever was without Beginning, has a
Permanent Duration or Standing Eternity; does thus state the Difference betwixt
Uncreated and Created Beings, or betwixt God and Creature: namely, that
Creature is That whose, Duration being Temporary or Successive, once had a
Beginning; and this is his, (...), That which is Made, but never truly Is, and
that which (...); Must of necessity be Produced by some Cause; but that
whatsoever is without Beginning, and has a Permanent Duration, is Uncreated or
Divine; which is his (...), That which always Is, and has no Generation, nor
was ever Made. Accordingly as God is styled in the Septuagint Translation, of
the Mosaic Writings, (...), He that Truly is.

Now as for this (...) or (...), this Eternal Nature, which always Is, and was
never Made, Plato speaks of it, not Singularly only, as we Christians now do,
but often in the Paganick way Plurally also; as when in this very Timaeus, he
calls the World, (...), a Made or Created Image, of the Eternal Gods. By which
Eternal Gods he there meant doubtless that (...), and (...), and (...), that
First, and Second, and Third; which in his Second Epistle to Dionysius, he
makes to be the Principles of All things; that is, his Trinity of Divine
Hypostases, by whose Concurrent Efficiency, and according to whose Image and
Likeness, the whole World was made; as Plotinus also plainly declares in these
words of his before cited, (...)^ This World is an Images always Iconized, or
perpetually Renewed (as the Image in a Glass is) of that First, Second, and
Third Principle, which are always Standing; that is, fixed in Eternity, and
were never Made. For thus Eusebius records, that the Ancient Interpreters of
Plato expounded this First, Second and Third of his in the forementioned
Epistle, of a Trinity of Gods; (...). Pr. Ev. L. 11. c. 20.
These things do the Interpreters of Plato refer, to the First God; and to the
Second Cause; and to the Third the Soul of the World; they calling this also
the Third God. Wherefore we think there is good reason to conclude, that those
Eternal or Uncreated Gods of Plato in his Timaeus, whose Image or Statue this
whole Generated or Created World is said by him to be, were no other than his
Trinity of Divine Hypostases, the Makers or Creators thereof. And it was before
(as we conceive) rightly guessed, that Cicero also was to be understood of the
same Eternal Gods, as Platonizing, when he affirmed; A Diis omnia a Principio
facta, That all things were at first made by the Gods, and a Providentia
Deorum, Mundum and omnes Mundi parts constitutas esse, That the World and all
its Parts were constituted by the Providence of the Gods.

But that the Second Hypostasis in Plato's Trinity, viz. Mind or Intellect,
though said to have been Generated, or to have Proceeded by way of Emanation
from the First called Tagathon, The Good; was notwithstanding unquestionably
acknowledged, to have been Eternal or without Beginning, might be proved by
many express Testimonies of the most Genuine Platonists; but we shall here
content our selves only with Two, one of Plotinus writing thus concerning it,
Enn. 5. L. 1. c. 6. (...), etc. Let all Temporal Generation here, be quite
banished from our thoughts, whilst we treat of things Eternal, or such as
always are, we attributing Generation to them only in respect of Causality and
Order, but not of Time. And though Plotinus there speak particularly of the
Second Hypostasis or Nous, yet does he afterward extend the same also to the
Third Hypostasis of that Trinity, called Psyche, or the Mundane Soul; which is
there said by him likewise to be the Word of the Second, as that Second was the
Word of the First, (...), That which is Generated from what is better than
Mind, can be no other than Mind, because Mind is the Best of all things, and
every thing else is after it, and Junior to it, as Psyche or Soul, which is in
like manner the Word of Mind, and a certain Energy thereof, as Mind is the Word
and Energy of the First Good. The other Testimony is of Porphyrius, cited by S.
Cyril out of the Fourth Book of his Philosophic History, where he sets down
the Doctrine of Plato after this manner, (...) S. Cyril. C. Jul. L. 1. p. 32.
(...) (...), etc. Wherefore we ought not to entertain any other Principles,
but having placed First, the Simple Good; to set Mind or the Supreme Intellect
next after it, and then the Universal Soul in the third place. For this is the
right order according to Nature, neither to make More Intelligibles (or
Universal Principles) nor yet Fewer than these three. For he that will contract
the number, and make fewer of them, must of necessity either suppose Soul and
Mind to be the same, or else Mind and the First Good. But that all these three
are diverse from one another, has been often demonstrated by us. It remains now
to consider, that if there be more than these three Principles, what Natures
they should be, etc.

Thirdly, as all these three Platonic Hypostases are Eternal and Necessarily
Existent, so are they plainly supposed by them, not to be Particular, but
Universal Beings; that is, such as do (...) contain and comprehend the whole
World under them, and preside over all things, which is all one as to say, that
they are each of them Infinite and Omnipotent. For which reason are they also
called by Platonic Writers, (...) and (...), and (...), Principles and Causes,
and Opificers of the whole World. First, as for (...) Mind or Understanding:
Whereas the Old Philosophers before Plato, as Anaxagoras, Archelaus, etc. and
Aristotle after him, supposed Mind and Understanding, to be the very First and
Highest Principle of all: which also the Magic or Caldee Oracles take notice
of as the most Common opinion of mankind, (...). That, Mind is generally by all
men looked upon, as the First and Highest God; Plato considering, that Unity
was in order of Nature before Number and Multiplicity; and that there must be
(...) before (...), an Intelligible before Intellect; so that Knowledge could
not be the First; and Lastly, that there is a Good transcending that of
Knowledge; made One most Simple Good, the Fountain and Original of all things,
and the First Divine Hypostatis; and Mind or Intellect only the Second next to
it, but Inseparable from it, and most nearly Cognate with it. For which cause
in his Philebus, though he agree thus far with those other Ancient
Philosophers, (...) that Mind always rules over the whole Universe, yet does
he add afterward, Page 30.
(...), that Mind is (not absolutely the First Principle, but) Cognate with the
Cause of all things; and that therefore it rules over all things, with, and in
a kind of subordination to that First Principle, which is Tagathon or the
Highest Good, Where when Plato affirms that Mind or his Second Divine
Hypostasis is (...) with the First, it is all one as if he should have said,
that it is (...), and (...), and (...), with it; all which words are used by
Athanasius, as Synonymous, with (...) Co-Essential or Con-Substantial. So that
Plato here plainly and expressly agrees or Symbolizes, not with the Doctrine of
Arius; but with that of the Nicene Council and Athanasius; that the Second
Hypostasis of the Trinity, whether called Mind, or Word, or Son, is not (...),
but (...) or (...) Co-Essential or Con-Substantial with the First; and
therefore not a Creature.

And then, as for the Third Hypostasis, called Psyche or the Superior Mundane
Soul, Plato in his Cratylus, bestowing the name of Zeus, that is, of the
Supreme God upon it, and etymologizing the same from (...), adds these words
concerning it, (...)^ There is nothing which is more the Cause of Life to us
and all other Animals, than this Prince and King of all things; And that
therefore God was called by the Greeks Zeus; because it is by him that all
Animals live. And yet that all this was properly meant by him, of the Third
Hypostasis of his Trinity, called Psyche, is manifest from those words of his
that follow; where he expounds the Poetic Mythology before mentioned, making
Zeus to be the Son of Chronos; (...), It is agreeable to reason, that Zeus
should be the Progeny or Offspring of a certain great Mind. Now (...) and
(...), are equivalent Terms also; and therefore Plato here makes the Third
Hypostasis of his Trinity likewise to be (...), Co-Essential with the Second;
as he elsewhere made the Second, Co-Essential with the First,

It is true that by the (...), or Opificer in Plato, is commonly meant Nous or
Intellect, his Second Hypostasis; En. 5. L. 1. Procl. in Tim.
(Plotinus affirming as much, (...), The Demiurgus to Plato is Intellect.)
Nevertheless, both Amelius, and Plotinus, and other Platonists, called this
Third Hypostasis also (...), the Artificer or Opificer of the whole World: Some
of them making him to be the Second from Mind or Intellect; others the Third
from the First Good the Supreme Cause of all things; who was by Atticus and
Amelius styled Demiurgus also. Wherefore as was before suggested, according to
the Genuine and most ancient Platonic Doctrine, all these Three Hypostases,
were the Joynt-Creators of the whole World, and of all things besides
themselves; In Plot. En. 1. L. 2.
as Ficinus more than once declares the Tenor thereof, Hi Tres uno quodam
consensu omnia producunt, These Three with one common consent produce all
things; and before him Proclus, (...), All things depend upon the First One, by
Mind and Soul; and accordingly we shall conclude in the words of Porphyrius,
That the True and Real Deity according to Plato, extends to Three Divine
Hypostases, the last whereof is Psyche or Soul.

From all which it appears, that Arius did not so much Platonize, as the Nicene
Fathers and Ath^nasius; who notwithstanding made not Plato, but the Scripture,
together with Reason deducing natural Consequences therefrom, their Foundation.
And that the Platonic Trinity, was a certain Middle thing also, betwixt the
Doctrine of Sabellius and that of Arius; it being neither a Trinity of Words
only, or Logical Notions, or mere Modes; but a Trinity of H^postases; nor yet a
Jumbled Confusion of God and Creature (Things Heterousious) together: neither
the Secon^ nor Thi^d of them being Creatures, or Made in Time, but all Eternal,
Infinite, and Creators.

But that it may yet more fully appear, how far the most Refined Platonic and
Parmenidian or Pythagorick Trinity, does either Agree, or Disagree with the
Scripture-Doctrine, and that of the Christian Church in several Ages; we shall
here further observe Two Things concerning it. The First whereof is this, That
though the Genuine Platonists and Phythagoreans, supposed none of their Three
Archical Hypostases to be indeed Creatures, but all of them Eternal,
Necessarily Existent, and Universal or Infinite, and consequently Creators of
the whole World; yet did they nevertheless, assert an Essential Dependence of
the Second Hypostasis upon the First, as also of the Third both upon the First
and Second; together with a Gradual Subordination in them. Thus Plotinus,
writing of the Generation of the Eternal Intellect, which is the Second in the
Platonic Trinity, and answers to the Son or Word in the Christian: Enn. 5. L.
1. c. 6.
(...). That which is always perfect, Generates what is Eternal, and that which
it Generates, is always Less than it self. What shall we therefore say of the
most Absolutely Perfect Being of all? Does that produce nothing from it self?
or rather does it not produce the Greatest of all things after it? Now the
Greatest of all things after the most Absolutely Perfect Being, is Mind or
Intellect; and this is Second to it. For Mind beholds this as its Father, and
stands in need of nothing else besides it: whereas that First Principle
stands in need of no Mind or Intellect. What is Generated from that which is
Better than Mind, must needs be Mind or Intellect; because Mind is better than
all other things, they being all in order of Nature After it and Juniour to it;
as Psyche it self or the First Soul; for this is also the Word or Energy of
Mind, as that is the Word and Energy of the First Good. Again the same is more
particularly declared by him, concerning that Third Hypostasis called Psyche,
that as it Essentially Depends upon the Second, so is it Gradually
Subordinate or some way Inferior to it. (...)^ P. 489.
Perfect Intellect Generates Soul; and it Being Perfect, must needs Generate,
for so great a Power could not remain Steril. But that which is here Begotten
also, cannot be greater than its Begetter; but must needs be Inferior to it,
as being the Image thereof. Elsewhere the same Philosopher, calling the First
Hypostasis of this Trinity, P. 554.
Vranus, the Second, Chronos, and the Third, Zeus, (as Plato had done before)
and handsomely Allegorizing that Fable, concludes in this manner concerning
Chronos or the Second of these, (...), That he is in a Middle state or degree,
betwixt his Father, who is Greater, and his Son, who is Less and Inferior.
Again, the same thing is by that Philosopher thus asserted in general, P. 513.
(...), (...)^ In the things Generated from Eternity, or Produced by way of
natural Emanation, there is no Progress upwards, but all Downwards, and still a
Gradual Descent into Greater Multiplicity. We shall cite but only one passage
more out of this Philosopher, which contains something of Argumentation in it
also; (...)^ ^n. 5. L. 3. c. ^5
That which is Generated or Emaneth, immediately from the First and Highest
Beings, is not the very same thing with it, as if it were nothing but that
Repeated again and Ingeminated; and as it is not the same, so neither can it be
Better than it. From whence it follows, that it must needs be Gradually
Subordinate and Inferior to it.

Which Gradual Subordination and Essential Dependence, of the Second and ^hird
Hypostases upon the First, is by these Platonicks illustrated several ways.
Ficinus resembles it to the Circulations of Water, when some Heavy Body falling
into it, its Superficies is depressed, and from thence every way Circularly
Wrinkled. Alius (says he) sic ferme prostuit ex alio, sicut in aqua Circulus
dependet a Circulo; One of these Divine Hypostases, does in a manner so depend
upon another, as one Circulation of water depends upon another. Where it is
observable also, that the Wider the Circulating Wave grows, still has it the
more Subsidence and Detumescence, together with an Abatement of Celerity; till
at last all becomes plain and smooth again. But by the Pagan Platonists
themselves, each Following Hypostasis, is many times said to be, (...), a
Print, stamp, or Impression, made by the Former; like the Signature of a Seal
upon Wax. Again it is often called by them, (...), and (...), and (...), an
Image, and Representation, and Imitation; which if considered in Audibles, then
will the Second Hypostasis be looked upon, as the Echo of an Original Voice;
and the Third as the Repeated Echo, or Echo of that Echo; as if both the
Second and Third Hypostases were but certain Replications of the First Original
Deity with Abatement; which though not Accidental or Evanid ones, but
Substantial, yet have a like Dependence one upon another, and a Gradual
Subordination. Or if it be considered in Visibles, then will the Second
Hypostasis, be resembled to the Image of a Face in a Glass, and the Third to
the Image of that Image Reflected in another Glass, which depend upon the
Original Face, and have a Gradual Abatement of the vigor thereof. Or else the
Second and Third, may be conceived as Two Parelii, or as a Second and Third
Sun. For thus does Plotinus call the Universal Psyche or Third Hypostasis,
(...), The Image of Mind (which is the Second) retaining much of the Splendor
thereof. Which Similitudes of theirs notwithstanding, they would not have to be
Squeezed or Pressed hard; because they acknowledge that there is something of
Dissimilitude in them also, which then would be forced out of them. Their
meaning amounts to no more than this, that as an Image in a Glass, is said
(...), Essentially to belong to something else, and to depend upon it; so each
following Hypostasis, does Essentially Depend upon the Former or First, and
has a Subordination to it. But we meet with no expression in any of these
Pagan Platonists, so Unhandsom and Offensive, as that of Philo's, in his Second
Book of Allegories, (...), The World is the Shadow of God, which he made use
of, as an Instrument, in the making of the World. Notwithstanding which, the
same Writer does call him elsewhere, more honorably, a Second God and The Son
of the First God. As in the same place he does declare, that this Shadow and
Image of God, is it self the Archetype of other things, (...)^ This Shadow and
as it were Image (of the First God) is it self the Archetype and Pattern of
other things below it. As God is the Pattern of this Image (which we call his
Shadow;) So is this Image it self another Pattern or Paradigm also. But this
Dependence and Subordination of the Divine Hypostases, is most frequently
illustrated in Platonic Writings, by the (...) or (...), the Effulgency or Out
shining of Light and Splendor from the Sun, and other Luminous Bodies; the
Nous or Second Hypostasis, being resembled to that Radious Essulgency, which
immediately encompassing them, is beheld together with them, and as the
Astronomers tell us, augments their apparent Diameter, and makes it bigger than
the True, when they are beheld through Telescopes, cutting off those luxuriant
and Circumambient Rays. And the Third Hypostasis is resembled to the Remoter
and more Distant Splendor, which circling still Gradually decreaseth. Thus
Plotinus, P. 487.
(...)^ How should we consider this Second Hypostasis otherwise than as the
Circumfused Splendor, which encompasseth the Body of the Sun; and from that
always remaining, is perpetually Generated a new.

But this Essential Dependence, and Gradual Subordination of Hypostases, in the
Platonic Trinity, will yet more fully appear, from those Particular
Distinctive Characters, which are given to each of them. For the First of
these, is often said to be (...), One before all things; a Simple Unity, which
Vertually contains all things. And as Plotinus writes, P. 513.
(...)^ This so contains all things, as not being yet secret and distinct;
whereas in the Second they are discerned and distinguished by Reason; that is,
they are Actually distinguished in their Ideas; whereas the First is the Simple
and Fecund Power of all things. Wherefore the Second was called by Parmenides,
(...), One actually all things; that is, in their Distinct Ideas. And the Third
according to the same Philosopher, as Plotinus tells us, was (...), One and all
things; as having still more Multiplicity and Alterity in it. One Effectively
all things. That which does Actively Display, and Produce into Being, what was
Vertually or Potentially contained in the First; and Ideally or Exemplarily in
the Second. Accordingly the First of these is sometimes said to be (...), All
things Vnitively, The Second (...), All things Intellectually, and the Third
(...), All things Animally; that is, Self-movably, Actively and Productively.
Again the First of these is commonly styled (...), The Good, or Goodness it
self, above Mind and Understanding, and also (...), above Essence, Ineffable
and Incomprehensible. And sometimes also (...), a Simple Light; The Second,
(...), Unity and Goodness only by Participation, or (...), Boniform, but
Essentially and Formally; Mind or Understanding, R^ason and Wisdom,
All-Comprehending or Infinite Knowledge. The Third, (...), Self-movable Soul;
Goodness and Wisdom by Participation, but Essentially and Formally, Infinite
Self-Activity, or Effectiveness; Infinite, Active, Perceptive and Animadversive
Power. Sometimes it is styled also (...) and (...), Venus and Love; but
differently from that of the First Good, which is Love too; but a Love of
Redundancy* or Overflowing Fullness and Fecundity; (...), Plot. 494.
That which being Absolutely Perfect, and seeking or wanting nothing; as it
were Overflowed; and by its Exuberant Redundancy, Produced All things. Whereas
this Latter is a Love of Infinite Activity. Of the First, it is said by
Plotinus, that it is (...), above all manner of Action, for which Cause the
Making of the World, is not properly ascribed to him, though he be the Original
Fountain of all: According to that of Numenius, ^os. P. ^^v. L 11. c. 18
(...)^ Neither is it fit to attribute, the Architecture of the World to the
First God, but rather to account him the Father of that God, who is the
Artificer. Who again speaks further to the same purpose thus; (...)^ It is to
be acknowledged, that the First God is void of all manner of work or Action, he
being the King of all things. Of the Second, to whom the Energy of Intellection
is attributed, it is said notwithstanding, that his (...) is his (...), his
Essence his Operation; and that he is (...), though a Multiform, yet an
Immovable Nature. He therefore is properly called the Demiurgus, as the
Contriving Architect or Artificer, in whom the Archetypal World is contained;
and the First Paradigm or Pattern of the whole Universe. But the Third is a
kind of Movable Deity, (...) (as Plotinus speaks) (...)^ That which moves
about Mind or Intellect, the Light or Effulgency thereof, and its Print or
Signature, which always depends upon it, and acts according to it. This is
that which reduces both the Fecundity of the First Simple Good, and also the
Immovable Wisdom and Architectonick Contrivance of the Second into Act and
Energy. This is the Immediate, and as it were Manuary Opificer of the whole
World, and (...), that which actually Governs, Rules and Presideth over all.
Amelius in that Passage of his before cited out of Proclus, calling these Three
Divine Hypostases Three Minds, and Three Kings; styles the First of them,
(...), Him that is: The Second (...), Him that Has; and the Third (...), Him
that Beholds. In which Expressions, though Peculiar to himself, he denotes an
Essential Dependence, and Gradual Subordination, in them.

Now that which is most liable to exception, in this Platonic Scale or
Grad^tion of the Deity, s^ems to be the Difference betwixt the First and the
Second. For whereas the Essential Character of the Second, is made to be,
Understanding, Reason and Wisdom; it seems to follow from hence, that either
the First and the Second, are really nothing else but two different Names or
Inadequate Conceptions of One and the same thing, or else if they be distinct
Hypostases or Persons, that the First of them, must needs be (...) and (...),
devoid of Mind, Reason and Wisdom; which would be very absurd. To which all the
reply we can make is as follows. First, that this is indeed, one Peculiar
Arcanum of the Platonic and Pythagorick Theology (which yet seems to have been
first derived from Orpheus and the Egyptians, or rather from the Hebrews
themselves) that whereas the Pagan Theologers generally concluded, (...), That
Mind and Understanding properly so called, was the Oldest of all things; the
Highest Principle and First Original of the World; those others placed
something above it, and consequently made it to be not the First but the
Second. Which they did chiefly upon these Three following Grounds. First,
Because Understanding, Reason, Knowledge and Wisdom, cannot be conceived by us
mortals otherwise, than so as to contain something of Multiplicity in them;
whereas it seems most reasonable to make the First Principle of all, not to be
Number or Multitude, P. 518.
but a perfect Monad or Unity. Thus Plotinus, (...), etc. Intellection as well
as Vision, is in its own nature an Indefinite thing, and is determined by the
Intelligible: therefore it is said, that Ideas as Numbers, are begotten from
Infinite Duality, and Unity; And such is Intellect; which consequently is not
Simple, but Many, it contemplating Many Ideas; and being compounded of Two,
That which is Understood, and that which Understands. And again elsewhere,
(...), 514.
etc. The Principle of every thing, is more Simple than the thing it self.
Wherefore the Sensible World was made from Intellect or the Intelligible; and
before this, must there needs be something more Simple still. For Many did not
proceed from Many, but this Multiform thing Intellect, proceeded from that
which is not Multiform, but Simple; as Number from Unity. To this purpose does
he argue also in these words, P. 535.
(...)^ If that which understands be Many, or contein Multitude in it, then
that which conteins no Multitude, does not properly understand; and this is the
First thing; but Intellection and Knowledge properly so called are to be placed
among things which follow after it and are Second. And he often concludes,
(...)^ That Knowledge (properly so called by reason of its Multiplicity)
belongs to the Second Rank of Being, and not the First. Another Ground or
Reason is, Because in order of Nature, there must be (...) before (...),
something Intelligible, before Intellect; and from hence does Plotinus
conclude, P. 536.
(...), etc. That to Understand is not the First; neither in Essence nor in
Dignity; but the Second; a thing in order of Nature, after the First Good, and
springing up from thence, as that which is moved with desire toward it. Their
Third and last Ground or Reason is; Because Intellection and Knowledge, are not
the Highest Good; that therefore there is some Substantial thing in order of
Nature Superior to Intellect. Which Consideration Plato much insisteth upon,
in his sixth Book De Republica. Plot. p. 512.
Now upon these several Accounts do the Platonists confidently conclude, (...)^
That the Supreme Deity is more Excellent and Better than the (...) (Reason or
the Word) Intellect and Sense, he affording these things; but not being these
himself. And (...)^ P. 514.
That which was Generated from the First Principle, was Logos ( Word or Reason)
Manifold; But the First Principle it self was not Word: If you demand
therefore, How Word or Reason, should proceed from that which is not Word or
Reason? we answer, as that which is Boniform, from Goodness it self. With which
Platonic and Pythagorick Doctrine exactly agrees Philo the Jew also, (...)^
That God which is before the Word or Reason; is better and more excellent than
all the Rational Nature; neither is it fit that any thing which is Generated
should be perfectly like, to that which is Originally from it self, and above
all. And indeed, we should not have so much insisted upon this, had it not been
by reason of a Devout Veneration that we have for all the Scripture-mysteries;
which Scripture seems to give no small Countenance to this Doctrine, when it
makes in like manner, an Eternal Word and Wisdom, to be the Second Hypostasis
of the Divine Triad; and the First-begotten Son or Offspring of God the
Father. And Athanasius, as was before observed, very much complieth here also
with the Platonic Notion; when he denies that there was any (...) or (...),
any Reason or Wisdom, before that Word and Son of God, which is the Second
Hypostasis of the Holy Trinity. What then? Shall we say that the First
Hypostasis or Person, in the Platonic Trinity, (if not the Christian also) is
(...) and (...), Senseless and Irrational, and altogether devoid of Mind and
Understanding? Or would not this be to introduce a certain kind of Mysterious
Atheism; and under pretense of Magnifying and Advancing the Supreme Deity,
Monstrously to Degrade the same? For why might not Senseless Matter, as well be
supposed, to be the First Original of all things, as a Senseless Incorporeal
Being? Plotinus therefore, who rigidly and superstitiously adheres to Plato's
Text here, which makes the First and Highest Principle of all, to be such a
Being as by reason of its Absolute and Transcendent Perfection, is not only
above Understanding, Knowledge, and Reason, but also above Essence it self,
(which therefore he can find no other names for, but only Unity and Goodness
Substantial) and consequently, Knowledge and Wisdom, to be but a Second or Post
Nate Thing, though Eternal; but notwithstanding does seem to labor under this
Metaphysical Prosundity; he sometimes endeavors, to solve the difficulty
thereof after this manner* by distinguishing of a Double Light; the One Simple
and Uniform, the other Multiform or Manifold; and attributing the Former of
these, to the Supreme Deity only, (whose Simple Original Light he resembles to
the Luminous Body of the Sun it self;) The latter of them to the Second
Hypostasis, as being the (...) or (...), the Circumambient Fulgor, or
Out-shining Splendor of that Sun. Thus Enn. 5. L. 6. c. 4. (...), That from
which this Multiform Light of (...) or Intellect (the Second Hypostasis) is
derived, is (...), Another most Simple Light. As he elsewhere accordingly
writes of the First Principle, or Supreme Deity, that it is, (...), in
Knowledge or Understanding, but of different kind from that Understanding of
the Second Hypostasis, called Intellect. Sometimes again, this Philosopher
subtly distinguishes, betwixt (...), Intelligence it self, and (...) or
(...), That which does Understand, or which has Intelligence in it; making the
First Principle to be the Former of these Two, and the Second Hypostasis of
their Trinity to be the Latter: P. 537.
(...)^ Intelligence it self does not understand, but that which has
Intelligence. For in that which does understand, there is a kind of Duplicity.
But the First Principle of all, has no Duplicity in it. Now that Duplicity,
which he phancies to be, in that which Has Intelligence, is either the
Duplicity of Him that has this Intelligence and of the Intelligence it self,
as being not the same; or else of Him and the (...), the Intelligible, or
Object of his Intellection: Intellect supposing an Intelligible in order of
nature before it. And from this Subtilty would he infer, that there is a
certain kind of Imperfection and Indigence, in that which Does Understand, or
Has Intelligence, (...), That which Understands is Indigent as that which
Sees. But perhaps this Difficulty might be more easily solved, and that
according to the Tenor of the Platonic Hypothesis too; by supposing the
Abatement of their Second Hypostasis, to consist only in this, that it is not
Essentially (...) Goodness it self, but only (...), Boniform, or Good by
Participation; it being Essentially no higher, than (...) and (...), Mind,
Reason, and Wisdom; for which cause it is called by those Names, as the proper
Characteristick thereof. Not as if the First were devoid of Wisdom, under
Pretense of being Above it; but because this Second is not Essentially any
Thing Higher. As in like manner, the Third Hypostasis, is not Essentially
Wisdom it self, standing or quiescent, and without Motion or Action; but Wisdom
as in Motion, or Wisdom Moving and Acting.

The Chief Ground of this Platonic Doctrine, of an Essential Dependence, and
therefore Gradual Subordination, in their Trinity of Divine Hypostases; is from
that Fundamental Principle of their Theology; That there is but One Original of
all things, and (...), only One Fountain of the Godhead; from whence all other
things whatsoever, whether Temporal or Eternal, Created or Uncreated, were
altogether derived. And therefore this Second Hypostasis of their Trinity,
since it must accordingly Derive its whole Being from the First, as the (...)
from the (...), The Splendor from the Original Light, must of necessity have
also an Essential Dependence, upon the same; and consequently, a Gradual
Subordination to it.

For though they commonly affirm their Second Hypostasis, to have been Begotten
from their First, and their Third from their Second; yet do they by no means
understand thereby, any such Generation, as that of men; where the Father, Son
and Nephew, when Adulti at least, have no Essential Dependence one upon
another, nor Gradual Subordination in their Nature, but are all perfectly
Coequal, and alike Absolute. Because this is bu^ an Imperfect Generation,
where that which is Begotten, does not receive its whole Being Originally from
that which did Beget, but from God and Nature; the Begetter being but either a
Channel or an Instrument, and having been himself before Begotten or Produced
by some other. Whereas the First Divine Hypostasis is altogether Unbegotten
from any other, he being the Sole Principle and Original of all things, and
therefore must the Second needs derive its whole Essence from him, and be
Generated after another manner, namely in a way of Natural Emanation, as Light
is from the Sun; and consequently though Coeternal, have an Essential
Dependence on him, and Gradual Subordination to him.

Moreover, the Platonists would recommend this their Gradation in the Deity, or
Trinity of Hypostases Subordinate, from hence; because by this means, there
will not be so vast a Chasm and Hiatus, betwixt God and the Highest Creatures;
or so Great a Leap and Jump in the Creation, as otherwise there must needs be.
Nor will the whole Deity be skrewed up to such a Disproportionate Height and
Elevation; as would render it altogether Incapable, of having any Intercourse
or Commerce with the lower world; it being according to this Hypothesis of
theirs, brought down by certain Steps and Degrees, nearer and nearer to us. For
if the Whole Deity, were nothing but One Simple Monad, devoid of all manner of
Multiplicity; as God is frequently represented to be, then could it not well be
conceived by us Mortals, how it should contain the Distinct Ideas of all things
within it self, and that Multiform Platform and Paradigm of the Created
Universe, commonly called the Archetypal World. Again, were the Deity only an
Immovable Mind; as Aristotle's God, is (...), an Absolutely Immovable
Substance, whose Essence and Operation are one and the same; and as other
Theologers affirm, that Whatsoever is in God, is God; it would be likewise
utterly unconceivable, not only, How there should be any Liberty of Will at all
in God (whereas the same Theologers, contradicting themselves, zealously
contend notwithstanding, that all the Actions of the Deity are not Necessary,
and but few of them such) but also, How the Deity should have any Commerce or
Intercourse with the Lower world, How it should Quicken and Actuate the whole,
be sensible of all the Motions in it, and act pro re nata accordingly; all
which the Instincts and Common Notions of Mankind urge upon them. Neither can
they be denied, without rasing the very Foundations of all Religion, since it
would be to no more purpose, for men to make their Devotional Addresses, to
such an Immovable, Inflexible, and Vnaffectible Deity; than to a Senseless
Adamantine Rock. But these Difficulties (as the Platonists pretend) are all
removed by that Third Hypostasis in their Trinity; which is a kind of Movable
Deity. And thus are all the Phenomenon of the Deity, or the different Common
Notions, in the Minds of men concerning it, though seemingly repugnant and
clashing with one another, yet (in their opinion) fairly Reconciled and Salved,
by this Trinity of Divine Hypostases Subordinate.

Lastly, they pretend also, that according to this Hypothesis of theirs, there
may be some Reasonable Satisfaction given to the Mind of Man, both why there
are so many Divine Hypostases, and why there could be no more: whereas
according to other ways, it would seem to have been a mere Arbitrary Business;
and that there might have been either but One Solitary Divine Hypostasis; or
but a Duality of them; or else they might have been beyond a Trinity,
Numberless.

The Second Thing which we shall observe concerning the most Genuine Platonical
and Parmenidian Trinity, is this; That though these Philosophers sometimes
called their Three Divine Hypostases, not only (...), Three Natures, and Three
Principles, and Three Causes, and Three Opificers; but also Three Gods; and a
First, and Second, and Third God; yet did they often for all that, suppose all
these Three, to be Really One (...), One Divinity, or Numen. It has been
already proved from Origin and others, that the Platonists most commonly called
the Animated World, the Second God, though some of them, as for example
Numenius, styled it the Third God. Now those of them, who called the World the
Second God, attributed indeed (not more, but) less Divinity to it, than those
who would have it to be the Third God. Because these Latter supposed, that Soul
of the World to be, the Third Hypostasis of their Trinity; but the other taking
all these Three Divine Hypostases together, for One Supreme and First God,
called the World the Second God; they supposing the Soul thereof, to be another
Soul Inferior to that First Psyche, which was properly their Third Hypostasis.
Wherefore this was really all one, as if they should have called the Animated
World the Fourth God: only by that other way of reckoning, when they called it
a Second God, they intimated, that though those Three Divine Hypostases, were
frequently called Three Gods, yet were they notwithstanding Really, all but One
(...), Divinity or Numen; or as Plotinus speaks, (...), the Divinity which is
in the whole World. Thus when God is so often spoken of in Plato Singularly,
the word is not always to be understood of the First Hypostasis only, or the
Tagathon, but many times plainly of the (...), and (...), and (...), the First,
and Second and Third all together; or that whole Divinity which consists or
is made up, of these Three Hypostases. And this will further appear from hence,
because when the whole World is said in Plato to be the Image of the Eternal
Gods, as also by Plotinus, of the First, Second and Third, by whom it is always
produced anew, as the Image in a Glass is; this is not to be understood as if
the World being Tripartite, each Third part thereof, was severally produced or
Created by one of those Three; nor yet can it be conceived, how there could be
Three Really distinct Creations of One and the same thing. Wherefore the World
having but one Creation, and being Created by those Three Divine Hypostases; it
follows, that they are all Three Really but One Creator and One God. Thus when
both in Plato and Plotinus, the Lives and Souls of all Animals, (as Stars,
Demons and Men) are attributed to the Third Hypostasis, the First and great
Psyche, as their Fountain and Cause after a Special Manner; accordingly as in
our Creed, the Holy Ghost is styled, the Lord and Giver of Life; this is not so
to be understood, as if therefore the First and Second Hypastases were to be
excluded from having any Causality therein. For the First is styled by Plato
also, (...), The Cause of all Good things, and therefore doubtless chiefly of
Souls; and the Second is called by him and others too, (...) and (...), The
Cause and Artificer of the whole World. We conclude therefore, that Souls being
Created by the Joint Concurrence and Influence of these Three Hypostases
Subordinate, they are all Really but One and the same God. And thus it is
expressly affirmed by Porphyrius in St. Cyril, (...)^ That the Essence of the
Divinity proceeds or propagates it self (by way of descent downwards) unto
Three Hypostases or Subsistences. The Highest God, is the Tagathon or Supreme
Good; the Second next after him is the Demiurgus so called, the Architect or
Artificer of the World; and the Soul of the World that is the Third: for the
Divinity extends so far as to this Soul. Here we plainly see, that though
Porphyrius calls the Three Divine Hypostases, Three Gods; yet does he at the
very same time declare, that (...) and (...), the Essence of the Godhead and
the Divinity, extends it self to all these Three Hypostases, including the
Third and last also, (which they call the Mundane Soul) within the compass of
it. And therefore that even according to the Porphyrian Theology it self,
(which could not be suspected to affect any compliance with Christianity) the
Three Hypostases in the Platonic Trinity, are (...), Co-Essential, both as
being each of them God, and as being all One God. St Cyril himself also
acknowledging as much; where he writes thus of the Platonists, (...)^ That
supposing Three Hypostases which have the Nature of Principles (in the
Universe) they extend the Essence of God, to all these three Hypostases.

Indeed many conceive, that the Platonists making the Three Hypostases of Their
Trinity to be thus Gradually Subordinate one to another, could not for that
very Reason, acknowledge them to be One Divinity: but the Platonists themselves
do upon this very account and no other, declare, all these Three to be One
Divinity, because they have an Essential Dependence and Gradual Subordination
in them; the Second being but the Image of the First, and the Third the Image
both of the First and Second. Whereas were these Three supposed to be Perfectly
Coequal, and to have no Essential Dependence one upon another, they could not
by these Platonists be concluded to be any other than Three Coordinate Gods,
having only a Generical or Specifical Identity; and so no more One, than Three
men are One man: a thing which the Platonic Theology is utterly abhorrent
from, as that which is inconsistent with the Perfect Monarchy of the Universe,
and highly Derogatory from the honor of the Supreme God, and First Cause. For
example, should Three Suns appear in the Heaven all at once, with Coequal
Splendour, and not only so, but also be concluded, that though at First derived
(or Lighted and Kindled) from one, yet they were now all alike Absolute and
Independent; these Three could not so well be thought to be one Sun; as Three
that should appear Gradually differing in their Splendor, Two of them being
but the Parhelii of the other, and Essentially dependent on it: forasmuch as
the Second would be but the Reflected Image of the First, and the Third but the
Second Refracted. At least those Three Coequal Suns, could not so well be
thought, to be One Thing; as the Sun, and its First and Secondary Splendor
(which can neither be beheld without the Sun, nor the Sun without them) might
be accounted One and the Same Thing.

The Platonists therefore, First of all suppose such a close and near
Conjunction betwixt the Three Hypostases of their Trinity, as is no where else
to be found in the whole World. En. 5. L. 1. c. 6.
To this purpose Plotinus, (...)^ Intellect is said to behold the First Good;
not as if it were Separated from it, but only because it is After it, but so as
that there is nothing between them: as neither is there betwixt Intellect and
Soul. Every thing which is Begotten, Desires and Loves that which Begat it;
especially when these Two (that which Begat and that which is Begotten) are
alone, and nothing besides them. Moreover when that which Begat, is absolutely
the Best thing, that which is Immediately Begotten from it, must needs Cohere
intimately with it, and so as to be separated from it only by Alterity. Which
is all one as if he should have said, that these Three Divine Hypostases, are
so Intimately conjoined together, and united with one another, as that they are
Tantum non, Only Not, the Very self same. Again the Platonists further declare
that these Three Hypostases of their Trinity, are (...), Absolutely Indivisible
and Inseparable, as the (...) is (...) from the (...), the Splendor
Indivisibly conjoined wih the Light or Sun. Which Similitude also Athanasius
often makes use of to the same purpose. Thirdly, these Platonists seem likewise
to attribute to their Three Divine Hypostases, just such an (...),
Circuminsession, or Mutual In-Being, as Christians do. For as their Second and
Third Hypostases, must needs be in the First, they being therein vertually
contained; so must the First likewise, be in the Second and Third; they being
as it were but Two other Editions thereof; or it self Gradually Displayed and
Expanded. But to speak Particularly, the First must needs be in the Second, the
Tagathon in the Nous; and so both of them Really One and the same God; because
the common Notions of all Mankind attribute Understanding and Wisdom to the
Deity; but according to the Principles of Plato, Plotinus, and others, the
Deity does not properly Understand any where but in the Second Hypostasis,
which is the Mind and Wisdom of it. And the Emperichoresis of the Second or
Third Hypostases, was thus intimated by Plato also, (...). Phileb. p. 30.
Where having spoken of that Divine Wisdom and Mind which orders all things in
the World, he adds; But Wisdom and Mind can never be without Soul, (that is,
cannot act without it.) Wherefore in the Nature of Jupiter, is at once
contained, both a Kingly Mind and a Kingly Soul. Here he makes Jupiter to be
both the Second and Third Hypostases of his Trinity, Nous and Psyche; and
consequently those Two, to be but One God. Which Nous is also said to be (...),
i. e. of the same kind, and Co-Essential with the First Cause of all things. To
conclude, as that First Platonic Hypostasis, which is it self said to be above
Mind and Wisdom, is properly Wise and Understanding in the Second; so do both
the First and the Second, Move and Act in the Third. Lastly, all these Three
Hypostases, Tagathon, Nous and Psyche, are said by the Platonists, to be One
(...) or Divinity; Just in the same manner, as the Center, Immovable Distance,
and Movable Circumference, of a Sphere or Globe; are all Essentially one
Sphere. Thus Plotinus expressly, writing of the Third Hypostasis or Psyche,
(...)^ P. 40^.
For this Psyche or Third Hypostasis, is a Venerable and Adorable thing also;
it being the Circle fitted to the Center, an Indistant Distance, (forasmuch as
it is no Corporeal thing.) For these Things are just so as if one should make
the Tagathon or First Good, to be the Center of the Universe; in the next place
Mind or Intellect to be the Immovable Circle or Distance; and Lastly Soul to be
that which turns round, or the whole Movable Circumference; Acted by Love or
Desire. These Three Platonic Hypostases therefore, seem to be Really nothing
else, but Infinite Goodness, Infinite Wisdom, and Infinite Active Love and
Power, not as mere Qualities or Accidents, but as Substantial things; that have
some kind of Subordination one to another; all concurring together to make up
One (...), or Divinity, just as the Center, Immovable Distance, and Movable
Circumference, concurrently make up One Sphere.

We have now given a full account of the True and Genuine Platonic and
Parmenidian or Pythagorick Trinity; from which it may clearly appear, how far
it either Agrees or Disagreeth with the Christian. First therefore, though
some of the Latter Platonists have partly Misunderstood, and partly Adulterated
that ancient Cabala of the Trinity, as was before declared, confounding therein
the Differences between God and the Creature, and thereby laying a foundation
for Infinite Polytheism; yet did Plato himself and some of his Genuine
followers (though living before Christianity) approach so near to the Doctrine
thereof as in some manner to correspond therewith, in those Three Fundamentals
before mentioned; First, in not making a mere Trinity of Names and Words, or of
Logical Notions and Inadequate Conceptions, of One and the Same thing; but a
Trinity of Hypostases or Subsistences, or Persons. Secondly, in making none of
their Three Hypostases, to be Creatures, but all Eternal, Necessarily Existent,
and Universal; Infinite, Omnipotent; and Creators of the whole World; which is
all one in the sense of the ancients, as if they should have affirmed them to
be Homoousian. Lastly, in supposing these Three Divine Hypostases, however
sometimes Paganically called Three Gods, to be Essentially, One Divinity. From
whence it may be concluded, that as Arianism is commonly supposed to approach
nearer to the Truth of Christianity than Photinianism, so is Platonism
undoubtedly more agreeable thereunto than Arianism; it being a certain Middle
thing betwixt That and Sabellianism, which in general was that Mark that the
Nicene Council also aimed at.

Notwithstanding which, there is a manifest Disagreement also, betwixt the
Platonic Trinity as declared, and the Now-received Doctrine in the Christian
Church; consisting in a different Explication of the Two latter Points
mentioned. First, because the Platonists dreamed of no such thing at all, as
One and the Same Numerical Essence or Substance, of the Three Divine
Hypostases. And Secondly, because though they acknowledged none of those
Hypostases to be Creatures, but all God; yet did they assert an Essential
Dependence of the Second and Third upon the First, together with a certain
Gradual Subordination; and therefore no Absolute Co-equality. And this is the
true reason, why so many late Writers, have affirmed Platonism to Symbolize
with Arianism, and the Latter to have been indeed nothing else but the Spawn of
the Former; merely because the Platonists did not acknowledge One and the Same
Numerical Essence or Substance of all their Three Hypostases; and asserted a
Gradual Subordination of them; but chiefly for this Latter Ground. Upon which
account some of the ancients also, have done the like, as Particularly S Cyril
(Contra Jul. Lib. 1.) he writing thus concerning Plato, P. 34.
(...)^ Plato did not thoroughly perceive the whole Truth of the Trinity, but
in like manner with those who follow Arius, divided the Deity, or made a
Gradation in it, and Introduced Subordinate Hypostases. As elsewhere the same
Pious Father, also taxes the Platonists, for not declaring the Three Hypostases
of their Trinity, to be, in his sense, Homo-ousian; that is, Absolutely
Coequal. But though we have already proved, that Platonism can by no means be
confounded with Arianism; because it directly confronted the same in its main
Essentials, which were Erat quando non Erat, or the Second Hypostasis being
made (...), together with its being Mutable and Lapsible; since according to
Platonism, the Nous is Essentially both Eternal and Immutable: yet that the
most Refined Platonism, differed from the Now-received Doctrine of the
Christian Church; in respect of its Gradual Subordination, is a thing so
Unquestionably Evident, as that it can by no means be Dissembled, Palliated, or
Excused.

Over and besides which, it cannot be denied but the best of Plato's Followers,
were sometimes also further extravagant in their Doctrine of the Trinity, and
spoke at random concerning it, and Inconsistently with their own Principles;
especially where they make such a Vast and Disproportionate Distance betwixt
the Second and Third Hypostases thereof; they not Descending Gradually and
Orderly, but as it were Tumbling down, from the Former of them to the Latter.
Thus Plotinus himself, Enn. 5. L. 1. c. 2.
when having spoken magnificently of that Soul of the World, which is his Third
Hypostasis, he subjoyns immediately, (...)^ That this Soul of ours, is also
Uniform (or of the same Species) with that Mundane Soul; For if any one (says
he) will consider it as in it self, Pure and Naked, or stripped from all things
adventitious to it, he shall find it to be in like manner venerable. Agreeably
whereunto does this same Philosopher elsewhere call that Mundane Soul, (...),
that is, but the Elder Sister of our Humane Souls. Which as it rankly savours
of Philosophic Pride and Arrogance, thus to think so magnificently of
themselves, and to equalize in a manner their own Souls, with that Mundane
Soul; so was it a Monstrous Degradation, of that Third Hypostasis of their
Trinity, and little other than an Absolute Creaturizing of the same. For if our
Humane Soul be (...), of the same Kind or Species, with the Third Hypostasis of
the Trinity, then is it not only (...), of like Honor and Dignity, but also in
the Language of the Christian Church, (...), Co-Essential with our Humane
Souls, Tom. 1. p. 557.
(as our Savior Christ according to the Arians in Athanasius, is said to be,
(...), Co-Essential with us men.) From whence it will follow, That either, That
must be a Creature, or else our Humane Souls Divine. Wherefore unless these
Platonists would confine the Deity wholly to their First Hypostasis; which
would be monstrously absurd for them, to suppose that First Eternal Mind and
Wisdom, by which the World was Made, to be a Creature; they must of necessity
make a Vast Leap or Jump, betwixt the Second and Third of their Hypostases; the
Former of them, being that Perfect Wisdom which was the Architect or Demiurgus
of the World, whilst the Latter is only, the Elder Sister of all Human^ Souls.
Moreover these Platonists by their thus bringing down the Third Hypostasis of
their Trinity so low, and Immersing it so deeply into the Corporeal World, as
if it were the Informing Soul thereof, and making it to be but the Elder Sister
of our Created Souls, did doubtless therein designedly lay a foundation for
their Polytheism and Creature-Worship (now Vulgarly called Idolatry) that is,
for their Cosmo-Latry, Astro-Latry, and Demono-Latry. For thus much is plainly
intimated in this following Passage of Plotinus, (...), P. 483.
This whole Corporeal World is made a God by the Soul thereof. And the Sun is
also a God, because Animated; as likewise are all the Stars therefore Gods.
Where he afterward adds, (...)^ That which is to these Gods or Goddesses, the
Cause of their being Gods, must needs it self, be the Elder God or Goddess. So
that this Third Hypostasis of the Platonic Trinity, called the Mundane Soul,
is but a kind of Sister-Goddess, with the Souls of the Sun, Moon and Stars,
though elder indeed than they; they being all made Goddesses by her. Where
there is a confused Jumble of things Contradictious together; That Soul of the
World being at once supposed to be a Sister to other Souls, and yet
notwithstanding to Deifie them; whereas this Sisterly Relation and
Consanguinity betwixt them, would of the Two, rather Degrade and Creaturize
that Mundane Soul, which is their Third God or Divine Hypostasis, than Advance
and Deifie those Particular Created Souls. Here therefore we see the
Inconvenience of these Platonic (...), Stories, Stairs, and Gradations in the
Deity, that it is a thing liable to be much abused to Creature-worship and
Idolatry, when the Distances are made so Wide, and the Lowest of the Deity is
supposed to differ but Gradually only, from the Highest of Created Beings. And
because Porphyrius trod in Plotinus his Footsteps here as elsewhere, this was
in all probability the true reason why the Arians (as Socrates records) were
by Constantine called Porphyrianists, not because their Trinities were exactly
the same, but because Arius and Porphyrius did both of them alike (though upon
different Grounds) make their Trinity a Foundation for Creature-Worship and
Idolatry. But nevertheless, all This (as many other things) was but heedlesly
and inadvertently written by Plotinus; he as it were drousily nodding all the
while, as it was also but supinely taken up by Porphyrius after him; it being
Plainly Inconsistent with the Genuine Tenor of both their Hypotheses, thus to
Level the Third Hypostasis of the Trinity, with Particular Created Souls, and
thereby to make so Disproportionate a Distance, and so Vast a Chasm betwixt It
and the Second. For Plotinus himself, when in a more sober mood, declares, that
Third Hypostasis, not to be the Immediate Informing Soul of the Corporeal
World; but a Higher Separate Soul, or Superior Venus, which also was the
Demiurgus, the Maker both of other Souls and of the whole World. As Plato had
before expressly affirmed him to be the Inspirer of all Life, and Creator of
Souls, or the Lord and Giver of Life. And likewise declared, that amongst all
those things, which are (...), Congenerous and Cognate with our Humane Souls,
there is (...), nothing any where to be found at all like unto it. So that
Plato, though he were also a Star-worshipper and Idolater, upon other grounds;
yet in all probability would he not at all have approved of Plotinus his (...),
our Souls being of the same Species with that Third Hypostasis of the Divine
Triad; but rather have said, in the Language of the Psalmist, It is he that
has made us, and not we our selves, we are his People and the Sheep of his
Pasture.

Notwithstanding all which, a Christian Platonist or Platonic Christian, would
in all probability, Apologize for Plato himself, and the ancient and most
Genuine Platonists and Pythagoreans after this manner. First, That since they
had no Scriptures, Councils, nor Creeds, to direct their steps in the Darkness
of this Mystery, and to confine their Language to a Regular Uniformity; but
Theologized all Freely and Boldly, and without any Scrupulosity, every one
according to his own private apprehensions, it is no wonder at all if they did
not only speak many times unadvisedly, and inconsistently with their own
Principles, but also plainly wander out of the Right Path. And that it ought
much rather to be wondered at, that living so long before Christianity, as some
of them did, they should in so Abstruse a Point, and Dark a Mystery, make so
near an approach to the Christian Truth afterward revealed, than that they
should any where fumble or fall short of the Accuracy thereof. They not only
extending the True and Real Deity to Three Hypostases, but also calling the
Second of them, (...), Reason or Word too, (as well as (...), Mind or
Intellect) and likewise the Son of the First Hypostasis, the Father; and
affirming him to be the (...) and (...), the Artificer and Cause of the whole
World; and Lastly describing him as the Scripture does, to be the Image, the
Figure or Character, and the Splendor or Brightness of the First. This, I say,
our Christian Platonist, supposes to be much more wonderful, that this so Great
and Abstruse a Mystery, of Three Eternal Hypostases in the Deity, should thus
by Pagan Philosophers, so long before Christianity, have been asserted, as the
Principle and Original of the whole World; it being more indeed than was
acknowledged by the Nicene Fathers themselves; they then not so much as
determining, that the Holy Ghost was an Hypostasis, much less that he was God.

But Particularly as to their Gradual Subordination of the Second Hypostasis to
the First, and of the Third to the First and Second; our Platonic Christian,
doubtless would therefore plead them the more excusable, because the Generality
of Christian Doctors, for the First Three Hundred years after the Apostles
times, plainly asserted the same; as Justin Martyr, Athenagoras, Tatianus,
Irenaeus, the Author of the Recognitions, Tertullian, Clemens Alexandrinus,
Origin, Gregorius Thaumaturgus, Dionysius of Alexandria, Lactantius, and many
others. All whose Testimonies, because it would be too tedious to set down
here, we shall content our selves only with one of the last mentioned; Justit.
L. ^. c. 29.
Et Pater and Filius Deus est: Sed Ille quasi exuberans Fons, Hic tanquam
defluens ex eo Rivus: Ille tanquam Sol, Hic tanquam Radius a Sole porrectus:
Both the Father and the Son is God: But he as it were an Exuberant Fountain,
this as a Stream derived from him: He like to the Sun, This like to a Ray
extended from the Sun. And though it be true, that Athanasius writing against
the Arians, does appeal to the Tradition of the Ancient Church, and amongst
others cites Origen's Testimony too; yet was this only for the Eternity and
Divinity of the Son of God, but not at all for such an Absolute Co-equality of
him with the Father, as would exclude all Dependence, Subordination and
Inferiority; those Ancients so Unanimously agreeing therein, that they are by
Petavius therefore taxed for Platonism, and having by that means corrupted the
Purity of the Christian Faith, in this Article of the Trinity. Which how it can
be reconciled with those other Opinions, of Ecclesiastic Tradition being a
Rule of Faith, and the Impossibility of the Visible Churches Erring in any
Fundamental Point, cannot easily be understood. However this General Tradition
or Consent of the Christian Church, for Three Hundred years together after the
Apostles Times, though it cannot Justify the Platonists, in any thing
discrepant from the Scripture, yet may it in some measure doubtless plead their
excuse, who had no Scripture Revelation at all, to guide them herein; and so at
least make their Error more Tolerable or Pardonable.

Moreover the Platonic Christian would further Apologize for these Pagan
Platonists after this manner. That their Intention in thus Subordinating the
Hypostases of their Trinity, was plainly no other, than to exclude thereby a
Plurality of Coordinate and Independent Gods, which they supposed an absolute
Co-equality of them would infer. And that they made only so much Subordination
of them, as was both necessary to this purpose, and unavoidable; the Juncture
of them being in their Opinion so close, that there was, (...), Nothing
Intermedious, or that could possibly be Thrust in between them. But now again
on the otherhand, whereas the only ground of the Co-Equality of the Persons in
the Holy Trinity, is because it cannot well be conceived, how they should
otherwise all be God; since the Essence of the Godhead, being Absolute
Perfection, can admit of no degrees; these Platonists do on the contrary
contend, that notwithstanding that Dependence and Subordination which they
commonly suppose in these Hypostases, there is none of them for all that, to be
accounted Creatures, but that the General Essence of the Godhead, or the
Uncreated Nature, truly and properly belongs to them all: according to that
of Porphyrius before cited, (...), The Essence of the Godhead, proceeds to
Three Hypostases. Now these Platonists conceive, that the Essence of the
Godhead, as common to all the Three Hypostases of their Trinity, consists
(besides Perfect Intellectuality) in these Following things. First, In Being
Eternal, which as we have already showed, was Plato's Distinctive Character,
betwixt God and the Creature. That whatsoever was Eternal, is therefore
Uncreated; and whatsoever was not Eternal, is a Creature. He by Eternity
meaning, the having not only no Beginning, but also a Permanent Duration.
Again, In having not a Contingent but Necessary Existence, and therefore being
Absolutely Vndestroyable; which perhaps is included also in the Former. Lastly,
In being not Particular but Universal, (...), One and all things, or that which
Comprehends the whole; which is all one as to say, in being Infinite and
Omnipotent, and the Creator of the whole World. Now say these Platonists, if
any thing more were to be added to the General Essence of the Godhead besides
this, then must it be Self-existence, or to be Vnderived from any other, and
the First Original, Principle, and Cause of all; but if this be made so
Essential to the Godhead, or Uncreated Nature, as that whatsoever is not thus
Originally of it Self, is therefore ipso facto to be detruded and thrust down
into the rank of Creatures; then must both the Second and Third Hypostases, as
well in the Christian as the Platonic Trinity, upon this Supposition, needs be
Creatures and not God; the Second deriving its whole Being and Godship from the
First, and the Third, both from the First and Second, and so neither First nor
Second being the Cause of all things. But it is unquestionable to these
Platonists, that whatsoever is Eternal; Necessarily Existent; Infinite, and
Omnipotent, and the Creator of All things; ought therefore to be Religiously
Worshipped and Adored as God, by all Created Beings. Wherefore this Essence of
the Godhead, that belongs alike to all the Three Hypostases, being, as all
other Essences, Perfectly Indivisible, it might well be affirmed, according to
Platonic Grounds, that all the Three Divine Hypostases (though having some
Subordination in them) yet in this sense are Coequal, they being all truly and
alike God or Uncreated. And the Platonists thus distinguishing, betwixt (...)
and (...), the Essence of the Godhead, and the Distinct Hypostases or
Personalities thereof, and making the First of them to be Common, General and
Universal; are not without the consent and approbation of the Orthodox Fathers
herein; they determining likewise, that in the Deity, Essence or Substance
differs from Hypostasis, as (...) from (...), that which is Common and General,
differs from that which is Singular and Individual. Thus, besides many others,
St. Cyril, (...)^ The Essence or Substance of the Deity, differs from the
Hypostasis, after the same manner as a Genus or Species differs from an
Individuum. So that as well according to these Fathers as the Platonists, that
Essence or Substance of the Godhead, which all the Three Persons agree in, is
not Singular, but Generical or Universal; they both supposing, each of the
Persons also, to have their own Numerical Essence. Wherefore according to this
Distinction, betwixt the Essence or Substance of the Godhead, and the
Particular Hypostases, (approved by the Orthodox Fathers) neither Plato, nor
any Intelligent Platonist, would scruple to subscribe, that Form of the Nicene
Council, that the Son or Word, is (...), Co-Essential or Con-Substantial, and
Coequal with the Father. And we think it will be proved afterward, that this
was the very Meaning of the Nicene Council it self, that the Son was therefore
Co-Essential or Con-Substantial with the Father; merely because he was God and
not a Creature.

Besides which the Genuine Platonists would doubtless acknowledge also, all the
Three Hypostases of their Trinity to be Homoousian, Co-Essential or
Con-Substantial yet in a further sense than this, namely as being all of them
One (...) or Divinity. For thus, besides that passage of Porphyrius before
cited, may these words also of St. Cyril be understood concerning them, (...)^
That according to them the Essence of God, extends to Three Hypostases, or
comprehends Three Hypostases in it; that is, not only so as that each of
these Three is God; but also that they are not, so many Separate and Divided
Gods, but all of them together One God or Divinity. For though the Platonists
as Pagans, being not so Scrupulous in their Language as we Christians are; do
often call them Three Gods, and a First, Second, and Third God; yet
notwithstanding as Philosophers, did they declare them to be, One (...) or
Divinity; and that as it seems upon these several accounts following. First,
Because they are Indivisibly conjoined together, as the Splendor is
Indivisible from the Sun. And then, Because they are Mutually Inexistent in
each other, the First being in the Second, and both First and Second in the
Third. And Lastly, Because the Entireness of the whole Divinity, is made up of
all these Three together, which have all (...) One and the same Energy, or
Action ad extra. And therefore as the Center, Radious Distance, and Movable
Circumference, may be all said to be Co-Essential to a Sphere; and the Root,
Stock, and Bows or Branches, Co-Essential to an entire Tree; so, but in much a
more perfect sense, are the Platonic Tagathon, Nous and Psyche, Co-Essential
to that, (...), that Divinity in the whole Universe. Neither was Athanasius a
stranger to this Notion of the word (...) also, De Sent. Dionys. p. 556.
he affirming (...), That the Branches are Co-Essential with, and Indivisible
from the Vine; and Illustrating the Trinity by that Similitude. Neither must it
be thought, that the Whole Trinity is One, after the very same manner, that
each Single Person thereof is in it self One, for then should there be a
Trinity also in each Person. Not that it is so called Undivided, as if Three
were not Three in it; (which were to make the Mystery Contemptible) but because
all the Three Hypostases or Persons, are Indivisibly and Inseparably united to
each other, as the Sun and the Splendor; and really but One God. Wherefore
though there be some Subordination of Hypostases or Persons in Plato's Trinity,
(as it is commonly represented) yet is this only ad intra, within the Deity it
self, in their Relation to one another, and as compared amongst themselves; but
ad extra Outwardly, and to Us, are they all One and the same God, concurring in
all the same Actions; and in that respect without any Inequality, because in
Identity there can be no Inequality.

Furthermore the Platonic Christian, would in favor of these Platonists, urge
also, that according to the Principles of Christianity it self, there must of
necessity, be some Dependence and Subordination of the Persons of the Trinity,
in their Relation to one another; a Priority and Posteriority, not only (...),
but also (...), of Dignity as well as Order amongst them. First, because that
which is Originally of it self, and Underived from any other, must needs have
some Superiority and Pre-eminence, over that which derives its whole Being and
Godship from it; as the Second does from the First alone, and the Third from
the First with the Second. Again though all those Three Hypostases or Persons
be alike Omnipotent ad Extra, or Outward, yet ad Intra, Inwards, or within the
Deity it self, are they not so: the Son being not able to beget the Father, nor
the Holy Ghost to Produce either Father or Son; and therefore neither of these
two Latter, is absolutely the Cause of all things, but only the First. And upon
this account was that First of these Three Hypostases (who is the Original
Fountain of all) by Macrobius styled, Omnipotentissimus Deus, the Most
Omnipotent God: he therein implying the Second and Third Hypostases, Nous and
Psyche, to be Omnipotent too, but not in a perfect Equality with him, as within
the Deity they are compared together; however ad Extra, or Outwardly, and to
Us, they being all One, are Equally Omnipotent. And Plotinus writes also to
the same purpose, (...), P. 517.
etc. If the First be absolutely Perfect, and the First Power, then must it
needs be the Most Powerful of all Beings; other Powers only imitating and
partaking thereof. And accordingly hereunto would the Platonic Christian
further pretend, that there are sundry places in the Scripture which do not a
little favor, some Subordination and Priority both of Order and Dignity, in
the Persons of the Holy Trinity; of which none is more obvious, than that of
our Savior Christ, My Father is greater than I: which to understand of his
Humanity only, seems to be less reasonable; because this was no news at all,
that the Eternal God, the Creator of the whole World, should be Greater than a
Mortal Man, born of a woman. And thus do diverse of the Orthodox Fathers; as
Athanasius himself, St. Basil, St. Gregory Nazianzen and St. Chrysostom, with
several others of the Latins, interpret the same to have been spoken, not of
the Humanity, but the Divinity of our Savior Christ. Insomuch that Petavius
himself, De Trin. p. 363
expounding the Athanasian Creed, writes in this manner, Pater Major Filio,
rite and catholice pronuntiatus est a plerisque Veterum; and Origin Prior sine
reprehensione dici solet; The Father is in a right Catholic manner, affirmed
by most of the ancients, to be Greater than the Son: and he is commonly said
also, without reprehension, to be Before him in respect of Original. Whereupon
he concludes the true meaning of that Creed to be this, that no Person of the
Trinity, is Greater or Less than other in respect of the Essence of the Godhead
common to them all, Quia Vera Deitas in nullo esse aut Minor aut Major potest,
because the true Godhead can be no where Greater or Less; but that
notwithstanding, there may be some Inequality in them, as they are Hic Deus,
and Haec Persona, This God and That Person. It is true indeed that many of
those ancient Fathers do restrain and limit this Inequality, only to the
Relation of the Persons one to another, as the Father's Begetting, and the
Son's being Begotten by the Father, and the Holy Ghost Proceeding from both;
they seeming to affirm, that there is otherwise a perfect Equality amongst
them. Nevertheless several of them do extend this Difference further also, as
for example, St. Hilary a zealous Opposer of the Arians; he in his Book of
Synods writing thus; Siquis Vnum dicens Deum, Christum autem Deum, ante secula
Filium Dei, Obsecutum Patri in Creatione omnium, non consitetur, Anathema sit.
And again, Non exaequamus vel conformamus Filium Patri, sed Subjectum
intelligimus. And Athanasius himself, who is commonly accounted the very Rule
of Orthodoxality in this Point, when he does so often resemble the Father to
the (...), or to the (...), the Sun, or the Original Light; and the Son to the
(...), the Splendor or Brightness of it; (as likewise does the Nicene Council
and the Scripture it self) he seems hereby to imply some Dependence of the
Second upon the First, and Subordination to it. Especially when he declares,
that the Three Persons of the Trinity, are not to be looked upon as Three
Principles, nor to be resembled to Three Suns, but to the Sun, and its
Splendor, and its Derivative Light, Cont. Ar. Or* 4. p. 467.
(...)^ For it appears from the similitude used by us, that we do not introduce
Three Principles (as the Marcionists and Manicheans did) we not comparing the
Trinity to Three Suns, but only to the Sun and its Splendor: So that we
acknowledge only one Principle. As also where he approves, of this of Dionysius
of Alexandria, (...)^ P. 565.
God is an Eternal Light, which never began, and shall never cease to be;
wherefore th^re is an Eternal Splendor also coexistent with him, which had no
beginning neither, but was Always Generated by him, shining out before him.
For if the Son of God, be as the Splendor of the Sun (...), Always Generated,
then must he needs have an Essential Dependence upon the Father and
Subordination to him. And this same thing further appears from those other
resemblances, which the same Dionysius makes, of the Father and the Son;
approved in like manner also by Athanasius; viz. to the Fountain and the River;
to the Root and the Branch; to the Water and the Vapor; for so it ought to be
read (...), and not (...), P. 275.
as appears from his Book of the Nicene Synod, where he affirms the Son to
have been begotten of the Essence or Substance of the Father, (...), as the
Splendor of the Light, and as the Vapor of the Water; adding, (...)^ For
neither the Splendor nor the Vapor, is the very Sun, and the very Water; nor
yet is it Aliene from it, or a stranger to its nature; but they are both
Effluxes from the Essence or Substance of them; as the Son is an Efflux from
the Substance of the Father, yet so as that he is no way diminished or lessened
thereby. Now all these similitudes of the Fountain and the River, the Root and
the Branch, the Water and the Vapor, (as well as that of the Sun and the
Splendor) seem plainly to imply some Dependence and Subordination. And
Dionysius doubtless intended them to that purpose, he asserting as Photius
informs us, an Inferiority of Power and Glory in the Second, as likewise did
Origin before him: both whose Testimonies notwithstanding, Athanasius makes
use of, without any censure or reprehension of them. Wherefore when Athanasius
and the other Orthodox Fathers, writing against Arius, do so frequently assert
the Equality of all the Three Persons, this is to be understood in way of
opposition to Arius only, who made the Son to be Unequal to the Father as
(...), of a different Essence from him, One being God and the other a Creature;
they affirming on the contrary, that he was Equal to the Father, as (...), of
the same Essence with him; that is, as God and not a Creature. Notwithstanding
which Equality, there might be some Subordination in them, as Hic Deus and Haec
Persona (to use Petavius his Language) This God and that Person.

And thus does there seem not to be so great a Difference, betwixt the more
Genuine Platonists, and the ancient Orthodox Fathers, in their Doctrine
concerning the Trinity, as is by many conceived. However our Platonic
Christian would further add; that there is no necessity at all from the
Principles of Platonism it self, why the Platonists should make any other or
more Subordination in their Trinity, than the most severely Orthodox Fathers
themselves. For according to the Common Hypothesis of the Platonists, when the
Character of the First Hypostasis is supposed by them, to be Infinite Goodness;
of the Second, Infinite Wisdom; and of the Third, Infinite Active Love and
Power, (these not as Accidents and Qualities, but as all Substantial) it is
more easy to conceive, that all these are really but One and the same God,
than how there should be any considerable Inferiority in them. But besides
this, D. Civ. D. L. 10. c. 23. Cum dicit Medium, non Postponit, sed Interponit.
there is another Platonic Hypothesis (which St. Austin hinteth from
Porphyrius, though he professes he did not well understand it) wherein the
Third Hypostasis is made to be, a certain Middle betwixt the First and Second.
And this does Proclus also sometimes follow, calling the Third in like manner,
(...), a Middle Power, and (...), the Relation of both the First and Second to
one another. Which agrees exactly with that apprehension of some Christians,
that the Third Hypostasis is as it were the Nexus betwixt the First and the
Second, and that Love whereby the Father and Son Love each other. Now according
to this Latter Platonic Hypothesis, there would seem to be not so much a
Gradation or Descent, as a kind of Circulation in the Trinity. Upon all which
Considerations, the Platonic Christian will conclude, That though some Junior
Platonists have adulterated the Notion of the Trinity, yet either there is no
such great difference betwixt the Genuine Platonic Trinity, righty understood,
and the Christian; or else that as the same might be modeled and rectified,
there need not to be.

But though the Genuine Platonists, do thus suppose the Three Hypostases of
their Trinity, to be all of them, not only God, but also One God, or (...), One
Entire Divinity; upon which Latter account the Whole may be said also by them,
to have One Singular or Numerical Essence; yet notwithstanding must it be
acknowledged, that they no where suppose, each of these Three Hypostases, to be
Numerically the very same, or to have no Distinct Singular Essences of their
own: this being in their apprehensions, directly contradictious to their very
Hypothesis it self, and all one as if they should affirm them, indeed not to be
Three Hypostases, but only One. Nevertheless, the Christian Platonist would
here also apologize for them after this manner; That the ancient Orthodox
Fathers of the Christian Church, were Generally of no other persuasion than
this, that that Essence or Substance of the Godhead, which all the Three
Persons or Hypostases agree in, as each of them is God, was not One Singular
and Individual, but only One Common and Universal Essence or Substance: that
word Substance, being used by them as Synonymous with Essence, and applied to
Universals likewise, as it is by the Peripateticks, when they call A Man, or
Animal in General, Substantiam Secundam, A Second Substance. Now this is
Evident from hence, because these Orthodox Fathers, did commonly distinguish in
this Controversy of the Trinity, betwixt (...), and (...), the Essence or
Substance of the Godhead, and the Hypostases or Persons themselves, after this
manner; namely, that the Hypostasis or Person was Singular and Individual; but
the Essence or Substance Common and Universal. Thus does Theodoret pronounce of
these Fathers in general, Dial. 1. adv. Haer.
(...)^ According to the Doctrine of the Fathers; as that which is Common
differs from that which is Proper, and the Genus from the Species or Inviduum,
so does Essence or Substance, differ from Hypostases, that is to say, that
Essence or Substance of the Godhead, which is Common to all the Three
Hypostases, or whereby each of them is God, was concluded by the Fathers, not
to be One Singular or Individual, but One General or Universal Essence and
Substance. Theodoret notwithstanding there acknowledging, that no such
Distinction was observed by other Greek Writers, betwixt those two words (...)
and (...), Essence or Substance and Hypostasis; as that the Former of them
should be restrained to Vniversals only, Generical or Specifical Essences or
Substances; but that this was peculiar to the Christian Fathers, in their
doctrine concerning the Trinity. They in the mean time not denying, but that
each Hypostasis, Prosopon, or Person, in the Trinity, might be said in another
sense, and in way of Opposition to Sabellius, to have its own Singular,
Individual or Existent Essence also; and that there are thus, (...), Three
Singular Existent Essences in the Deity, as well as (...), Greg. Nyssen. Adv.
Eunom. L. 12.
Three Hypostases; an Hypostasis, being nothing else to them, but an Existent
Essence: however for distinctions sake, they here thought fit thus to limit and
appropriate the signification of these Two words; that a Singular and Existent
Essence, should not be called Essence, but Hypostasis; and by (...) Essence or
Substance, should be meant, that General or Universal Nature of the Godhead
only, which is Common to all those Three Singular Hypostases or Persons, or in
which they all agree. ^p. 369.
We might here heap up many more Testimonies for a further Confirmation of
this; as that of St. Basil; (...), What Common is to Proper, the same is
Essence or Substance (in the Trinity) to the Hypostases. De Trin. L. 4. c. 7.
But we shall content our selves only, with this full acknowledgment of D.
Petavius, In hoc Vno Graecorum praesertim omnium judicia concordant, (...), id
est, Essentiam sive Substantiam, aut Naturam (quam (...) vocant) Generale esse
aliquid and Commune, ac minime desinitum, (...) vero Proprium, Singular, and
Circumscriptum, quod ex illo Communi, and Peculiaribus quibusdam Notis ac
Proprietatibus veluti componitur. In this One Thing, do the Judgments and
Opinions of all the Greeks especially agree, that Usia Essence or Substance,
and Nature, which they call Physis ( in the Trinity) is something General,
Common and Undetermined; but Hypostasis is that which is Proper, Singular and
Circumscribed; and which is as it were compounded and made up of that Common
Essence or Substance, and certain Peculiar Notes and Properties, or
Individuating Circumstances.

But besides this, it is further certain, that not a few of those Ancient
Fathers, who were therefore reputed Orthodox, because they zealously opposed
Arianism, did entertain this opinion also, That the Three Hypostases or Persons
of the Trinity, had not only one General and Universal Essence of the Godhead,
belonging to them all, they being all God; but were also Three Individuals,
under One and the same Vltimate Species, or Specific Essence and Substance of
the Godhead; Just as Three Individual men, (Thomas, Peter and John) under that
Vltimate Species of Man; or that Specific Essence of Humanity, which have only
a Numerical Difference from one another. Wherefore an Hypostasis or Person (in
the Trinity) was accordingly thus defined, by some of these Fathers, ( viz.
Anastasius and Cyril) to be, Essentia cum suis quibusdam Proprietatibus, ab iis
quae sunt ejusdem Speciei, Numero differens; an Essence or Substance, with its
Certain Properties (or Individuating Circumstances) differing only Numerically
from those of the same Species with it. This Doctrine was plainly asserted and
Industriously pursued (besides several others both of the Greeks and Latins)
especially by Gregory Nyssen, Cyril of Alexandria, Maximus the Martyr, and
Damascen; whose words because Petavius has set them down at large, we shall
not here insert. Now these were they who principally insisted, upon the
Absolute Co-Equality and Independent Co-Ordination, of the Three Hypostases or
Persons in the Trinity, as compared with one another. Because, as Three Men,
though one of them were a Father, Another a Son, and the Third a Nephew; yet
have no Essential Dependence one upon another, but are Naturally Coequal and
Vnsubordinate, there being only a Numerical Difference betwixt them: so did
they in like manner conclude, that the Three Hypostases or Persons of the Deity
(the Father, Son and Holy Ghost) being likewise but Three Individuals, under
the same Vltimate Species or Specific Essence of the Godhead, and differing
only Numerically from one another, were Absolutely Coequal, Vnsubordinate and
Independent; and this was that which was Commonly called by them, their (...),
their Co-Essentiality or Con-Substantiality. Wherefore it is observable, that
St. Cyril one of these Theologers, finds no other fault at all with the
Platonic Trinity, but only this, that such an Homoousiotes, such a
Co-Essentiality or Consubstantiality as this, was not acknowledged therein,
Cont. Jul. L. 8. p. 270.
(...)^ There would have been nothing at all wanting to the Platonic Trinity,
for an Absolute agreement of it with the Christian, had they but accommodated
the right Notion of Co-Essentiality or Con-Substantiality to their Three
Hypostases; so that their might have been but one Specific Nature or Essence
of the Godhead, not further distinguishable by any Natural Diversity, but
Numerically only, and so no one Hypostasis any way Inferior or Subordinate to
another. That is, had these Platonists complied with that Hypothesis of St.
Cyril and others, that the Three Persons of the Trinity, were but Three
Independent and Coordinate Individuals, under the same Ultimate Species or
Specific Essence of the Godhead, as Peter, Paul and John, under that Species
or Common Nature of Humanity, and so taken in this Co-Essentiality or
Con-Substantiality of theirs, then had they been completely Orthodox. Though we
have already showed, that this Platonic Trinity, was in another sense
Homoousian, and perhaps it will appear afterward, that it was so also in the
very sense of the Nicene Fathers and of Athanasius. Again these Theologers
supposed, the Three Persons of their Trinity, to have really no other than a
Specific Unity or Identity; and because it seems plainly to follow from hence,
that therefore they must needs be as much Three Gods as Three Men are Three
Men; these learned Fathers endeavored with their Logic to prove, That Three
Men, are but Abusively and Improperly so called Three; they being really and
truly but One, because there is but One and the same Specific Essence or
Substance of Humane Nature in them all; and seriously persuaded men to lay
aside that kind of Language. By which same Logic of theirs, they might as well
prove also, that all the men in the world are but One Man, and that all
Epicurus his Gods were but one God neither. But not to urge here, that
according to this Hypothesis, there cannot possibly be any reason given, why
there should be so many as Three such Individuals in the Species of God, which
differ only Numerically from one another, they being but the very same thing
thrice repeated; and yet that there should be no more than Three such neither,
and not Three Hundred, or Three Thousand, or as many as there are individuals
in the Species of Man; we say, not to urge this, it seems plain that this
Trinity, is no other than a kind of Tritheism, and that of Gods Independent and
Coordinate too. And therefore some would think, that the Ancient and Genuine
Platonic Trinity, taken with all its faults, is to be preferred before this
Trinity of St. Cyril and St. Gregory Nyssen, and several other reputed Orthodox
Fathers; and more agreeable to the Principles both of Christianity and of
Reason. However it is evident from hence, that these Reputed Orthodox Fathers,
who were not a few, were far from thinking the Three Hypostases, of the
Trinity, to have the same Singular Existent Essence; they supposing them to
have no otherwise, one and the same Essence of the Godhead in them, nor to be
One God, than Three Individual Men, have one Common Specifical Essence of
Manhood in them, and are all One Man. But as this Trinity came afterward to be
decried, for Tritheistick; so in the room thereof, started there up, that other
Trinity of Persons Numerically the Same, or having all One and the same
Singular Existent Essence; a Doctrine which seems not to have been owned by
any public Authority in the Christian Church, save that of the Lateran Council
only.

And that no such thing was ever entertained by the Nicene Fathers and those
First opposers of Arianism, might be rendered probable in the First place from
the free Confession and Acknowledgment of D. Petavius, (a Person, well
acquainted with Ecclesiastic Antiquity;) and for this reason especially,
because many are much led, De Trin. L. 4. c. 13.
by such new Names and Authorities; In eo praecipuam vim collocasse Patres, ut
Aequalem Patri Natura, Excellentiaque Filium esse defenderent, citra expressam
SINGVLARITATIS mentionem, licet ex eo conjicere. Etenim Nicaeni isti Praesules,
quibus nemo melius Arianae Sectae arcana cognovit, nemo qua re opprimenda
maxim foret, acrius dijudicare potuit, nihil in Professionis suae formula
spectarunt aliud, nisi ut Aequalitatem illam Essentiae, Dignitatis,
Aeternitatis astruerent. Testatur hoc (...), vox ipsa, quae arx quaedam fuit
Catholici Dogmatis. Haec enim Aequalitatem potius Essentiae, quam
SINGVLARITATEM significat, ut Capite Quinto docui. Deinde caetera ejusdem modi
sunt in illo Decreto, ut, etc. The chief force which the Ancient Fathers
opposed against the Arian Heretics, was in asserting only the Equality of the
Son with the Father as to Nature or Essence, without any express mention of the
SINGVLARITY of the same. For those Nicene Bishops, themselves, who did
understand best of any, the secrets of the Arian Faction, and which way it
should especially be oppugned, aimed at nothing else in their Confession of
Faith, but only to establish that Equality of Essence, Dignity and Eternity
between them. This does the word Homoousios it self declare, it signifying
rather Equality, than, SINGVLARITY of Essence, as we have before showed. And
the like do those other Passages in the same Decree; as, That there was no time
when the Son was not, and That he was not made of nothing, Nor of a different
Hypostasis or Essence. Thus does Petavius clearly confess, that this Same
Singularity of Numerical Essence was not asserted by the Nicene Council nor the
most Ancient Fathers, but only an Equality or Sameness of Generical Essence; or
else that the Father and Son, agreed only in One Common Essence or Substance of
the Godhead, that is, the Eternal and Uncreated Nature.

But the truth of this, will more fully appear, from these following
Particulars. First because these Orthodox. Anti-Arian Fathers, did all of
zealously condemn Sabellianism; the Doctrine whereof is no other than this,
that there was but one Hypostasis or Singular Individual Essence, of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; and consequently that they were indeed but Three
several Names, or Notions, or Modes, of one and the self same thing. From
whence such Absurdities as these would follow; That the Father's Begetting the
Son, was nothing but one Name, Notion, or Mode of the Deities Begetting
another; or else the same Deity under one Notion, Begetting it self under
another Notion. And when again the Son or Word, and not the Father, is said to
have been Incarnated, and to have suffered death for us upon the Cross; that it
was nothing but a mere Logical Notion or Mode of the Deity, that was Incarnate
and Suffered, or else the whole Deity under one particular Notion or Mode only.
But should it be averred notwithanding, that this Trinity which we now speak
of, was not a Trinity of mere Names and Notions, as that of the Sabellians, but
of distinct Hypostases or Persons; then must it needs follow (since every
Singular Essence is an Hypostasis, according to the sense of the Ancient
Fathers) that there was not a Trinity only, but a Quaternity of Hypostases, in
the Deity. Which is a thing that none of those Fathers ever dreamed of.

Again the word Homoousios, as was before intimated by Petavius, was never used
by Greek writers otherwise, than to signify the Agreement of things,
Numerically differing from one another, in some Common Nature, or Universal
Essence; or their having a Generical Unity or Identity, of which sundry
Instances might be given. Nor indeed is it likely, that the Greek Tongue should
have any name for that, which neither is a thing in Nature, nor falls under
Humane Conception, viz. Several Things having one and the same Singular
Essence. And accordingly St. Basil interprets the force of this word thus, In.
Epist.
(...)^ That it plainly takes away the Sameness of Hypostasis, that is, of
Singular Numerical Essence (this being that which the ancient Fathers meant by
the word Hypostasis:) For the same thing, is not Homoousios, Co-Essential or
Con-Substantial with it self, but always One thing with Another. Wherefore as
(...) and (...), En. 4: L. 7. c. 10.
are used by Plotinus as Synonymous, in these words concerning the Soul, (...),
That it is full of Divine things, by reason of its being Cognate or
Congenerous, and Homoousious with them: so does Athanasius in like manner use
them, when he affirms, Epist. de Sent. Dion. p. 556.
(...), That the Branches are Homoousious [Co-essential or Con-substantial] and
Con-generous with the Vine, or with the Root thereof. Besides which, the same
Father uses, (...) and (...), and (...), indifferently for (...), in sundry
places. None of which words can be thought to signify an Identity of Singular
Essence, but only of Generical or Specifical. And thus was the word Homoousios,
plainly used by the Council of Chalcedon, they affirming that our Savior
Christ was, (...), Co-Essential or Con-Substantial with the Father, as to his
Divinity; but Co-Essential or Con-Substantial with us Men, as to his Humanity.
Where it cannot reasonably be suspected, that one and the same word should be
taken in two different senses in the same Sentence, so as in the first place to
signify a Numerical Identity, but in the second, a Generical or Specifical
only. But Lastly, which is yet more, Athanasius himself speaks in like manner
of our Savior Christ's being Homoousious with us men; Tom. 1. p. 556.
(...)^ If the Son be Coessential or Consubstantial (or of the same Essence or
Substance) with us Men, he having the very same Nature with us, then let him be
in this respect a stranger to the Essence or Substance of the Father, even as
the Vine is to the Essence of the Husbandman. And again a little after, in the
same Epistle, (...)^ Or did Dionysius, think you when he affirmed the Word not
to be Proper to the Essence of the Father, Thus also in his 1. Epist. to Serap.
(...)^ We Men b^ing alike and having the Sameness of the Nature, are
Con-Substantial with one another. And P. 170. (...)^ It were madness to say,
that a House is Coessential or Con-substantial with the Builder, or a
Ship-wright; but it is proper to say, that every Son is Coessential or
Consubstantial with his Father.
suppose him therefore to be Coessential or Consubstantial with us Men? From
all which it is unquestionably evident, that Athanasius did not by the word
Homoousios understand, That which has the Same Singular and Numerical Essence
with another, but the same Common Generical or Specifical only; and
consequently, that he conceived the Son to be Coessential or Consubstantial
with the Father after that manner.

Furthermore the true meaning of the Nicene Fathers, may more fully and
thoroughly be perceived, by considering what that Doctrine of Arius was, which
they Opposed and Condemned. Now Arius maintained, the Son or Word, to be (...)
a Creature, Made in Time, and Mutable or Defectible, and for that reason as
Athanasius tells us, (...) and (...), of a different Essence or Substance from
the Father (That which is Created, being supposed to differ Essentially or
Substantially, from that which is Uncreated.) Wherefore the Nicene Fathers, in
way of Opposition to this Doctrine of Arius determined, that the Son or Word,
was not thus (...), nor (...), but (...), Coessential or Consubstantial with
the Father; that is, not a Creature, but God; or agreeing with the Father in
that Common Nature or Essence of the Godhead. So that this is that (...),
Essence or Substance of the ancient Fathers, which is said to be the Same in
all the Three Hypostases of the Trinity as they are called God; not a Singular
Existent Essence, but the Common, General, or Universal Essence of the Godhead,
or of the Uncreated Nature, called by S. Hilary, Natura Vna, De Synodi^.
non Vnitate Personae, sed Generis; One Nature, not by Unity of Person, but of
Kind. Which Unity of the Common or General Essence of the Godhead, is the same
thing also with that Equality, which some of the Ancient Fathers so much insist
upon against Arius, namely An Equality of Nature, as the Son and Father are
both of them alike God, that Essence of the Godhead (which is Common to all the
Three Persons) being as all other Essences, supposed to be Indivisible. From
which Equality it self also does it appear, that they acknowledged no Identity
of Singular Essence, it being absurd to say, that One and the self same thing,
is Equal to it self. And with this Equality of Essence, did some of these
Orthodox Fathers themselves imply, that a certain Inequality of the Hypostases
or Persons also, in their mutual Relation to one another, might be consistent.
As for example, Cont. Sermon. Arian. c. 18.
St. Austin writing thus against the Arians,, Patris, ergo and Filii, and
Spiritus Sancti, etiamsi disparem cogitant Potestatem, Naturam saltem
confiteantur Aequalem; Though they conceive the Power of the Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, to be Unequal, yet let them for all that, confess their Nature at
least to be Equal. And St. Basil likewise, 3. Cont. Eunom.
Though the Son be in Order Second to the Father, because produced by him, and
in Dignity also, (forasmuch as the Father is the Cause and Principle of his
being) yet is he not for all that, Second in Nature, because there is One
Divinity in them both. And that this was indeed the meaning, both of the Nicene
Pathers, and of Athanasius, in their Homoousiotes, their Coessentiality or
Con-substantiality, and Coequality of the Son with the Father; namely, their
having both the same Common Essence of the Godhead; or that the Son was No
Creature, as Arius contended, but truly God or Uncreated likewise, will appear
undeniably, from many passages in Athanasius, of which we shall here mention
only some few. P. 251.
In his Epistle concerning the Nicene Council, he tells us, how the Eusebian
Faction subscribed the Form of that Council, though afterward they recanted it,
(...)^ All the rest subscribing, the Eusebianists themselves subscribed also to
these very words, which they now find fault with; I mean Of the Essence or
Substance, and Coessential or Consubstantial, and that the Son is no Creature
or Facture or any of the Things Made, but the Genuine Offspring of the Essence
or Substance of the Father. Afterward he declares, how the Nicene Council at
first, intended to have made use only of Scripture Words and Phrases, against
the Arians, (...) P. 267.
(...)^ As that Christ was the Son of God, and not from nothing, but from God.
the Word and Wisdom of God, and consequently no Creature or thing Made. But
when they perceived that the Eusebian Faction would evade all those Expressions
by Equivocation, (...)^ They conceived themselves necessitated, more plainly to
declare what they meant by being From God, or Out of him; and therefore added,
that the Son was Out of the Substance of God, thereby to distinguish him from
all Created Beings. Again a little after in the same Epistle he adds, (...)^
The Synod perceiving this, rightly declared, that the Son was Homoousious with
the Father; both to cut off the Subterfuges of Heretics, and to show him to be
different from the Creatures. For after they had decreed this, they added
immediately, They who say that the Son of God, was from things that are not, or
Made, or Mutable, or a Creature, or of another Substance or Essence; all such
does the Holy and Catholic Church Anathematize. Whereby they made it Evident,
that these Words, Of the Father, and Coessential or Consubstantial with the
Father, were opposed to the Impiety of those expressions of the Arians, that
the Son was a Creature, or thing Made, and Mutable, and that he was not before
he was Made, which he that affirms contradicts the Synod, but whosoever
dissents from Arius, must needs consent to these Forms of the Synod. In this
same Epistle, to cite but one passage more out of it, (...), P. 272.
etc. (...)^ Brass and Gold, Silver and Tin are alike in their shining and
color, nevertheless in their Essence and Nature, are they very different from
one another. If therefore the Son be such, then let him be a Creature as we
are, and not Coessential (or Consubstantial) but if he be a Son, the Word,
Wisdom, Image of the Father, and his Splendor, then of right should he be
accounted Coessential and Consubstantial. Thus in his Epistle concerning
Dionysius, P. 561.
we have (...), and (...), The Son's being one of the Creatures, and his not
being Coessential or Consubstantial with the Father put for Synonymous
expressions, which signify one and the samething.

Wherefore it semeeth to be unquestionably evident, that when the Ancient
Orthodox Fathers of the Christian Church, maintained against Arius, the Son to
be Homoousion, Coessential or Consubstantial with the Father, though that word
be thus interpreted, Of the same Essence or Substance, yet they Universally
understood thereby, not a Sameness of Singular and Numerical, but of Common or
Universal Essence only; that is, the Generical or Specifical Essence of the
Godhead; that the Son was no Creature, but truly and properly God. But if it
were needful, there might be yet more Testimonies cited out of Athanasius to
this purpose. P. 929.
As from his Epistle De Synodis Arimini and Seleuciae, where he writes thus,
concerning the Difference betwixt those Two words (...), of Like Substance, and
(...), Of the Same Substance. (...) -- (...)^ For even your selves know that
Similitudes is not Predicated of Essences or Substances, but of Figures and
Qualities only. But of Essences or Substances, Identity or Sameness is affirmed
and not Similitude. For a man is not said to be Like to a man, in respect of
the Essence or Substance of Humanity, but only as to Figure or Form: they being
said as to their Essence to be Congenerous, of the same Nature or Kind with one
another. Nor is a man properly said, to be Unlike to a Dog, but of a Different
Nature or Kind from him. Wherefore that which is Congenerous, of the same
Nature, Kind, or Species, is also Homoousion, Coessential or Consubstantial (of
the same Essence or Substance) and that which is of a different Nature, Kind,
or Species, is Heterousion, ( of a different Essence or Substance.) Again
Athanasius in that Fragment of his Against the Hypocrisy of Meletius, etc.
concerning Consubstantiality writes in this manner; (...), etc. He that denies
the Son to be Homoousion, Consubstantial with the Father, affirming him only to
be like to him, denies him to be God. In like manner, he who reteining the word
Homousion or Consubstantial, interprets it notwithstanding only of Similitude
or Likeness in Substance, affirms the Son to be of Another Different
Substance from the Father, and therefore not God; but like to God only. Neither
does such a one rightly understand those words, Of the Substance of the Father,
he not thinking the Son to be so Consubstantial, or of the Essence and
Substance of the Father, as one man is Consubstantial, or Of the Essence or
Substance of another who begat him. For he who affirms that the Son is not so
Of God, as a man is Of a man, according to Essence or Substance; but that he is
Like him only, as a Statue is like a Man or as a Man may be Like to God, it is
manifest that such a one, though he use the word Homoousios,, yet he does not
really mean it. For he will not understand it according to the customary
signification thereof, for that which has One and the Same Essence or
Substance; this word being used by Greeks and Pagans in no other sense, than to
signify that which has the Same Nature; as we ought to believe concerning the
Father Son and Holy Ghost. Where we see plainly, that though the word
Homoousios; be interpreted, That which has One and the Same Essence or
Substance, yet is this understood of the Same Common Nature, and as one man is
of the same Essence or Substance with another. We might here also add to this,
the concurrent testimonies of the other Orthodox Fathers, but to avoid
tediousness we shall omit them, and only insert some passages out of St. Austin
to the same purpose. For he in his First Book Contra Maxim. Chap. the 15.
writes thus, Duo very Homines, etsi nullus eorum Filius sit Alterius, Unius
tamen and Ejusdem sunt Substantiae. Homo autem alterius Hominis Verus filius
nullo modo potest nisi Ejusdem cum Patre esse Substantiae, etiamsi non sit per
omnia Similis Patri. Quocirca Verus Dei Filius, and Unius cum Patre Substantiae
est, quia Verus Filius est; and per omnia est Patri similis, quia est Dei
Filius. Two True men, though neither of them be Son to the other, yet are they
both of One and the Same Substance. But a man who is the true Son of another
man, can by no means be of a Different Substance from his Father, although he
be not in all respects like unto him. Wherefore the true Son of God, is both of
one Substance with the Father, because he is a true Son, and he is also in all
respects like to him, because he is the Son of God. Where Christ or the Son of
God, is said to be no otherwise, of One Substance with God the Father, than
here amongst men, the Son is of the same Substance with his Father, To the same
purpose is that in his Second Book chapter 6. Diversa quidem Substantia est Deus
Pater, and Homo Matter: non tamen diversa Substantia est Deus Pater and Deus
Filius: sicut non est diversa Substantia, Homo Matter, and Homo Filius.
or any one man with another. Again the same S. Austin in his Respons. ad
Sermonem Arianorum, expresses himself thus: Ariani nos vocitant Homoousianos,
quia contra eorum errorem, Graeco vocabulo (...) defendimus, Patrem, Filium;
and Spiritum Sanctum; id est, Unius Ejusdemque Substantiae, vel ut expressius
dicamus Essentiae (quae (...) Graece appellatur) quod planius dicitur Unius
Ejusdemque Naturae. Et tamen siquis istorum qui nos Homoousianos vocant, Filium
suum non cujus ipse esset, sed Diversae diceret esse Naturae, Exhaeredari ab
ipso mallet Filius, quam hoc putari. Quanta igitur impietate isti caecantur,
qui cum confiteantur Vnicum Dei Filium, nolunt Ejusdem Naturae cujus Pater est
confiteri; sed diversae atque imparis, and multis modis rebusque dissimilis,
tanquam non de Deo Natus, sed ab illo de Nihilo sit Creatus; Gratia Filius, non
Natura. The Arians call us Homoousians, because in opposition to their Error
we defend the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, to be in the Language of the Greeks
Homoousious, that is of One and the Same-Substance; or to speak more clearly
Essence, this being in Greek called Usiah, which is yet more plainly thus
expressed, of One and the Same Nature. And yet there is none of their own Sons,
who thus call us Homoousians, who would not as willingly be disinherited, as be
accounted of a Different Nature from his Father. How great impiety therefore
are they blinded with, who though they acknowledge that there is One only Son
of God; yet will not confess him, to be of the same Nature with his Father, but
different and unequal and many ways unlike him, as if he were not Born of God,
but Created out of Nothing by him, himself being a Creature; and so a Son, not
by Nature but Grace only. Lastly (to name no more places) in his First Book De
Trinitate, he has these words. Si Filius Creatura non est, ejusdem cum Patre
Substantiae est. Omnis enim Substantia quae Deus non est Creatura est: and quae
Creatura non est, Deus est. Et si non est Filius ejusdem Substantiae cujus est
Pater, ergo Facta Substantia est. If the Son be not a Creature, then is he of
the same Substance with the Father; for whatever Substance is not God, is
Creature, and whatever is not Creature is God. And therefore if the Son be not
of the Same Substance with the Father, he must needs be a Made and Created
Substance, and not truly God.

Lastly, that the ancient Orthodox Fathers, who used the word Homoousios
against Arius, intended not therein to assert the Son to have One and the same
Singular or Individual Essence with the Father, appears plainly from their
disclaiming and disowning those two words (...) and (...)^ Concerning the
Former of which, Epiphanius thus; (...)^ Haer. 76. N. 7.
We affirm not the Son to be Tautoousion ( One and the same Substance with the
Father) lest this should be taken in way of compliance with Sabellius;
nevertheless do we assert him to be, the Same, in Godhead, and in Essence, and
in Power. Where it is plain, that when Epiphanius affirmed the Son to be the
same with the Father in Godhead and Essence, he understood this only, of a
Generical or Specifical, and not of a Singular or Individual Sameness; namely,
that the Son is no Creature, but God also as the Father is; and this he
intimates to be the true and genuine sense of the word Homoousios: he therefore
rejecting that other word Tautoousios, because it would be liable to
misinterpretation, and to be taken in the Sabellian sense, for that which has
One and the Same Singular and Individual Essence, which the word Homoousios
could not be obnoxious to. And as concerning that other word Monoousios,
Athanasius himself, P. 241.
in his Exposition of Faith, thus expressly condemns it, (...), We do not think
the Son to be really One and the Same with the Father, as the Sabellians do,
and to be Monoousios and not Homoousios; they thereby destroying the very being
of the Son. Where Vsia, Essence or Substance, in that Fictitious word
Monoousios, is taken for Singular or Existent Essence, the whole Deity being
thus said by Sabellius, to have only One Singular Essence or Hypostasis in it:
whereas in the word Homoousios, is understood a Common or Universal, Generical
or Specifical Essence; the Son being thus said to agree with the Father, in the
Common Essence of the Godhead, as not being a Creature. Wherefore Athanasius
here disclaimeth a Monoousian Trinity, as Epiphanius did before, a Tautoousian;
both of them a Trinity of mere Names, and Notions, or Inadequate Conceptions of
One and the Same Singular Essence or Hypostasis; they alike distinguishing
them, from the Homoousian Trinity, as a Trinity of Real Hypostates or Persons,
that have severally their Own Singular Essence, but agree in one Common and
Universal Essence of the Godhead, they being none of them Creatures but all
Uncreated or Creators. From whence it is plain, that the ancient Orthodox
Fathers, asserted no such thing, as One and the Same Singular or Numerical
Essence, of the several Persons of the Trinity; this according to them, being
not a Real Trinity, but a Trinity of mere Names, Notions, and Inadequate
Conceptions only; which is thus disclaimed and declared against by Athanasius,
(...), The Trinity, is not a Trinity of mere Names and Words only, but of
Hypostases, truly and really Existing. But the Homoousian Trinity, of the
Orthodox, went exactly in the Middle, betwixt that Monoousian Trinity of
Sabellius, which was a Trinity of different Notions or Conceptions only of One
and the Self-Same Thing, and that other Heteroousian Trinity of Arius, which
was a Trinity of Separate and Heterogeneous Substances (one of which only was
God, and the other Creatures) this being a Trinity, of Hypostases or Persons,
Numerically differing from one another, but all of them agreeing, in one Common
or General Essence of the Godhead or the Uncreated Nature, which is Eternal,
and Infinite. Which was also thus particularly declared by Athanasius, Ad
Serap. Ep. p. 202.
(...)^ The Catholic Church does neither believe less than this Homoousian
Trinity, lest it should comply with Judaism, or sink into Sabellianism; nor yet
more than this, left on the other hand, it should tumble down into Arianism,
which is the same with Pagan Polytheism and Idolatry; it introducing in like
manner, the worshipping of Creatures, together with the Creator.

And now upon all these Considerations, our Platonic Christian would conclude,
that the Orthodox Trinity of the ancient Christian Church, did herein agree
with the Genuinely Platonic Trinity, that it was not Monoousian; One Sole
Singular Essence, under Three Notions, Conceptions, or Modes only; but Three
Hypostases or Persons. As likewise the right Platonic Trinity, does agree with
the Trinity of the ancient Orthodox Christians in this, that it is not
Heteroousian but Homoousian, Coessential or Consubstantial; none of their Three
Hypostases being Creatures or Particular Beings, made in Time; but all of them
Uncreated, Eternal, and Infinite.

Notwithstanding all which, it must be granted, that though this Homoousiotes,
or Coessentiality of the Three Persons in the Trinity, does imply them to be
all God, yet does it not follow from thence of necessity, that they are
therefore One God. What then? shall we conclude that Athanasius himself also
entertained that opinion before mentioned and exploded; Of the Three Persons in
the Trinity, being but Three Individuals under the same Species, (as Peter,
Paul and Timothy,) and having no other Natural Unity or Identity, than
Specifical only? Indeed some have confidently fastened this upon Athanasius,
because in those Dialogues Of the Trinity, published amongst his works, and
there entitled to him, the same is grossly owned, and in defense thereof, this
Absurd Paradox maintained; that Peter Paul and Timothy, though they be Three
Hypostases, yet are not to be accounted Three men, but only then, when they
dissent from one another, or disagree in Will or Opinion. But it is certain,
from several Passages in those Dialogues themselves, that they could not be
wri^ten by Athanasius; and there has been also another Father found for them,
to wit, Maximus the Martyr. Notwithstanding which, thus much must not be denied
by us, that Athanasius in those others his reputedly Genuine Writings, does
sometime approach so near hereunto, that he lays no small stress upon this
Homoousiotes, this Coessentiality, and Common Nature of the Godhead, to all the
Three Persons, in order to their being One God. For thus, in that Book
entitled, Concerning the Common Essence of the Three Persons, and the Chapter
inscribed, (...), That there are not Three Gods; does Athanasius lay his
Foundation here. When to that question proposed, How it can be said, that the
Father is God, the Son God, and the Holy Ghost God, and yet that there are not
Three Gods; the First Reply which he makes is this, (...)^ Where there is a
Communion of Nature, there is also one Common Name of Dignity bestowed. And
thus does God himself, call things divided into Multitudes from one Common
Nature, by One Singular Name. For both when he is angry with men, does he call
all those who are the objects of his anger, by the name of One Man: and when he
is reconciled to the world, is he reconciled thereto as to One Man. The first
Instances which he gives hereof, are in Genesis the 6. the 3. and 7. Verses; My
Spirit shall not always strive with Man, and I will destroy Man whom I have
Created; Upon which Athanasius makes this Reflection; (...), Though there was
not then only one man, but Infinite Myriads of men, nevertheless by the name of
One Nature, does the Scripture call all those men, One Man, by reason of their
Community of Essence or Substance. P. 213, 214*
Again he commenteth in like manner upon that other Scripture-passage, Exodus
the 15.1. The Horse and his Rider has he thrown into the Sea, (...)^ When
Pharaoh went out to the Red Sea, and fell with Infinite Chariots in the same;
and there were many men that were drowned together with him, and many Horses;
yet Moses knowing that there was but One Common Nature of all those that were
drowned, speaks thus both of the Men and Horses; The Lord has thrown both
the Horse and the Rider into the Sea; he calling such a Multitude of Men, but
One Singular Man, and such a Multitude of Horses but One Horse. Whereupon
Athanasius thus concludes, (...)^ P. 214.
If therefore amongst men, where the things of Nature are confounded, and where
there are differences of Form, Power and Will (all men not having the same
disposition of Mind, nor Form, nor Strength) as also different Languages, (from
whence men are called by the Poets Meropes) nevertheless by reason of the
Community of Nature, the whole world is called One Man; might not that Trinity
of Persons, where there is an Undivided Dignity, One Kingdom, One Power, One
Will, and One Energy be much rather called One God? But though it be true, that
Athanasius in this place (if at least this were a Genuine Foetus of Athanasius)
may Justly be thought to attribute too much to this (...), This Common Nature,
Essence, or Substance, of all the Three Persons, as to the making of them to be
truly and properly One God; and that those Scripture-passages are but weakly
urged to this purpose; yet is it plain, that he did not acquiesce in this only,
but adds other things to it also, as their having not only One Will, but also
One Energy or Action, of which more afterward. Moreover Athanasius, elsewhere
plainly implies, that this Common Essence or Nature of the Godhead, is not
sufficient alone, to make all the Three Hypostases, P. 467.
One God. As in his Fourth Oration against the Arians, where he tells us, that
his Trinity of Divine Hypostases cannot therefore be accounted Three Gods nor
Three Principles, because they are not resembled by him, to Three Original
Suns, but only to the Sun, and its Splendor, and the Light from both. Now
Three Suns, according to the Language of Athanasius, have (...), a Common
Nature, Essence, and Substance, and therefore are Coessential or
Consubstantial; and since they cannot be accounted one Sun, it is manifest,
that according to Athanasius, this Specific Identity or Unity, is not
sufficient to make the Three Divine Hypostases One God. Again the same
Athanasius, in his Exposition of Faith, writes thus, (...), Neither do we
acknowledge Three Hypostases, Divided or Separate by themselves (as is to be
seen corporeally in men) that we may not comply with the Pagan Polytheism. From
whence it is Evident, that neither Three Separate Men, though Coessential to
Athanasius, were accounted by him to be One Man, nor yet the Community of the
Specific Nature and Essence of the Godhead, can alone by it self, exclude
Polytheism from the Trinity. Wherefore the true reason, why Athanasius laid so
great a stress upon this Homoousiotes, or Coessentially of the Trinity, in
order to the Unity of the Godhead in them, was not because this alone was
sufficient to make them One God, but because, they could not be so without it.
This Athanasius often urges against the Arians, as in his Fourth Oration, where
he tells them, (...), That they must needs introduce a Plurality of Gods,
because of the Heterogeneity of their Trinity. And again afterward
determining, that there is (...), one Species of the Godhead, in Father, Son
and Spirit, he adds; (...) -- (...)^ And thus do we acknowledge one only God in
the Trinity; and maintain it more Religiously than those Heretics do, who
introduce a Multiform Deity, consisting of diverse Species; we supposing only
One Universal Godhead in the whole. For if it be not thus, but the Son be a
Creature, made out of nothing, however called God by these Arians, then must He
and his Father, of necessity be Two Gods; one of them a Creator, the other a
Creature. In like manner in his Books, P. 275.
Of the Nicene Council, he affirms, concerning the Arians, (...), That they
make in a manner Three Gods, dividing the Holy Monad into Three Heterogeneous
Substances, Separate from one another. Whereas the right Orthodox Trinity, Ep.
ad Serap. p. 20^.
on the contrary, is elsewhere thus described by him, (...)^ The Holy and
perfect Trinity Theologized, in the Father, Son, and Spirit, has nothing
Aliene, Foreign or Extraneous intermingled with it; nor is it compounded of
Heterogeneous things, the Creator and Creature joined together. And whereas the
Arians interpreted that of our Savior Christ, I and my Father are One, only in
respect of Consent or Agreement of Will, Athanasius showing the insufficiency
hereof, concludes thus, (...), Wherefore besides this Consent of Will, there
must of necessity be another Unity of Essence or Substance also, acknowledged
in the Father and the Son. Where by Unity of Essence or Substance, that
Athanasius did not mean, a Unity of Singular and Individual, but of General or
Universal Essence only, appears plainly from these following words, Ep. de Syn
Arim. and Sell. p. 923.
(...)^ For those things which are Made or Created, though they may have an
Agreement of Will with their Creator, yet have they this by Participation only,
and in a way of Motion; as he who retaining not the same, was cast out of
Heaven. But the Son being begotten from the Essence or Substance of the Father,
is Essentially or Substantially One with him. So that the Opposition here, is
betwixt Unity of Consent with God in Created Beings, which are Mutable; and
Unity of Essence in that which is Uncreated, and Immutably of the same Will
with the Father. There are also many other places in Athanasius, which though
some may understand of the Unity of Singular Essence, yet were they not so by
him intended, but either of Generick or Specific Essence only, or else in such
other sense as shall be afterward declared. As for Example, in his Fourth
Oration, (...), P. 468.
We acknowledge only One Godhead in the Trinity; where the following words
plainly imply this to be understood in part at least, of One Common or General
Essence of the Godhead, (...), etc. Because if it be not so, but the Word be a
Creature, made out of Nothing, he is either not truly God, or if he be called
by that name, then must they be two Gods, one a Creator, P. 456.
the other a Creature. Again when in the same Book it is said, (...)^ That the
Son and the Father are One thing in the Propriety of Nature, and in the
Sameness of one Godhead; it is evident from the Context, that this is not to be
understood of a Sameness of Singular Essence, but partly of a Common and
Generical One, and partly of such another Sameness or Unity, as will be
hereafter expressed. Lastly, when the Three Hypostases, are somewhere said by
him, to be (...), One Essence or Substance, this is not to be understood
neither in that place, as if they had all Three the same Singular Essence, but
in some of those other Senses before mentioned.

But though Athanasius no where declare, the Three Hypostases of the Trinity,
to have only One and the same Singular Essence, but on the contrary, denies
them to be Monoousian; and though he lay a great stress upon their (...), their
Specific or Generick Unity, and Coessentiality, in order to their being One
God; for as much as without this, they could not be God at all; yet does he not
rely wholly upon this, as alone sufficient to that purpose, but adds certain
other considerations thereunto, to make it out; in manner as follows. First,
that this Trinity, is not a Trinity of Principles; but that there is only One
Principle or Fountain of the Godhead in it, from which the other are derived.
Thus does he write in his Fifth Oration, (...), There is but One Principle, and
accordingly but One God. Again in his Book against the Sabellianists, (...)^ P.
656.
There are not Two Gods, both because there are not Two Fathers, and because
that which is Begotten is not of a different Essence from that which Begat. For
he that introduces Two Principles, Preaches Two Gods; which was the Impiety
of Marcion. Accordingly the same Athanasius declares, De Syn. A. and Sell. p.
920.
(...), That the Essence or Substance of the Father, is the Principle and Root
and Fountain of the Son. And in like manner does he approve of this Doctrine of
Dionysius, (...)^ That God (the Father) is the First Fountain of all Good
things, but the Son a River poured out from him. To the same purpose is it
also, when he compares the Father and the Son, to the Water and the Vapor
arising from it; to the Light and the Splendor; to the Prototype and the
Image. And he concludes the Unity of the Godhead from hence, in this manner;
De Syn. Nic. p. 275.
(...)^ The Divine Trinity must needs be collected and gathered up together,
under that omnipotent God of the whole World, as under One Head. But the chief
force of this Consideration, is only to exclude the Doctrine of the
Marcionists, who made More Independent and Self-existent Principles and Gods.
Notwithstanding which, it might still be objected, that the Christian Trinity,
is a Trinity of Distinct Subordinate Gods, in opposition whereunto, this
argument seems only to prepare the way to what follows; namely of the close
Conjuction of these Three Hypostases into One God; forasmuch, as were they
Three Independent Principles, there could not be any Coalescence of them into
One.

In the next place therefore, Athanasius further adds, that these Three
Divine Hypostases, are not (...) and (...), Separate and Disjoined Beings, but
(...), Indivisibly United to one another. Thus in his Fifth Oration; (...)^ The
Father and the Son are both one thing in the Godhead, and in that the Word,
being begotten from Him, is Indivisibly and Inseparably conjoined with him.
Where when he affirms, the Father and the Son, to be One in the Godhead, it
is plain that he does not mean them to have One and the same Singular Essence,
but only Generical and Universal; because in the following words, he supposes
them to be Two, but Indivisibly and Inseparably United together. Again in his
Book De Sent. Dionys. (...), The Son is Indivisible from the Father, as the
Splendor is from the Light. And afterward in the same Book he insisteth
further upon this Point, according to the sense of Dionysius, after this
manner, (...), etc. Dionysius teaches, that the Son is Cognate with the
Father, and Indivisible from him, as Reason is from the Mind, and the River
from the Fountain. Who is there therefore, that would go about to alienate
Reason from the Mind? and to separate the River from the Fountain, making up a
wall between them? or to cut off the Splendor from the Light? Thus also in his
Epistle to Serapion, that the Holy Ghost is not a Creature, P. ^94.
(...)^ Let these men first divide the Splendor from the Light, or Wisdom from
him that is Wise, or else let them wonder no more how these things can be.
Elsewhere Athanasius calls the whole Trinity, (...), A Trinity Undivided and
United to it self. Which Athanasian Indivisibility of the Trinity, is not so to
be understood as if Three were not Three in it, but first of all that neither
of these could be without the other, as the Original Light or Sun could not be
without the Splendor, nor the Splendor without the Original Light, and
neither one nor the other of them without a Diffused Derivative Light. Wherefore
God the Father being an Eternal Sun, must needs have also an Eternal Splendor,
and an Eternal Light. And Secondly, that these are so Nearly and Intimately
Conjoined together, that there is a kind of (...) Continuity betwixt them;
which yet is not to be understood in the way of Corporeal Things, but so as is
agreeable to the Nature of things Incorporeal.

Thirdly, Athanasius ascends yet higher, affirming the Hypostases of the
Trinity, not only to be Indivisibly Conjoined with one another, but also to
have a Mutual Inexistence in each other, which Latter Greek Fathers have called
(...), their Circuminsession. To this purpose does he cite the Words of
Dionysius, P. 66^.
(...)^ For Reason is the Efflux of the Mind, which in men is derived from the
Heart into the Tongue; where it is become another Reason or Word, differing
from that in the Heart: and yet do these both, Mutually Exist in each other,
they belonging to one another; and so though being Two, are One Thing. Thus are
the Father and the Son, One thing, they being said to Exist in each other. And
Athanasius further illustrates this also by certain Similitudes; as that again
of the Original Light and the Splendor, he affirming (...), That the Original
Light is in the Splendour, and again the Splendour in the Sun; and also that of
the Prototype and the Image, or the King and his Picture; which he thus
insisteth upon, Orat. 4. p. 457.
(...)^ In the Picture is contained the Form and Figure of the King, and in the
King the Form and Figure of the Picture. And therefore if any one, when he had
seen the Picture, should afterward desire to see the King; the Picture would by
a Prosopopoeia bespeak him after this manner; Ibid.
(...), I and the King am One, for I am in him and he is in me; and what you
take notice of in me, the same may you observe in him also, and what you see in
him, you may see likewise in me; he therefore that worshippeth the Image,
therein worshippeth the King, the Image being nothing but the Form of the King.
Elsewhere in the Fourth Oration he thus insisteth upon this Particular; (...)^
P. 456.
The Son is in the Father, as may be conceived from hence; because the whole
Being of the Son is proper to the Essence of the Father, he being derived from
it as the Splendor from the Light, and the River from the Fountain: so that he
who sees the Son, sees that which is the Fathers own and proper. Again the
Father is in the Sun, because that which is the Fathers own and proper, that is
the Son: accordingly as the Sun is also in the Splendor, the Mind in Reason
and the Fountain in the River. What Cavils the Arrians had against this
Doctrine, Athanasius also enforms us; Orat. 4.
(...)^ Here the Arians begin to quarrel with that of our Lord, I am in the
Father, and the Father in me; objecting, How is it possible, that both the
Former should be in the Latter and the Latter in the Former? Or how can the
Father being Greater, be received in the Son, who is Lesser? And yet what
wonder is it, if the Son should be in the Father; since it is written of us men
also, That in him we Live and Move and have our Being In way of reply
whereunto, Athanasius first observes, that the Ground of this Arian
Cavillation, was, the Grossness of their Apprehensions, and that they did
(...), Conceive of Incorporeal things after a Corporeal manner. And then does
he add, (...)^ For the Father and Son are not, as they suppose, Transvasated
and Poured out, one into another, as into an Empty Vessel: as if the Son filled
up the Concavity of the Father, and again the Father that of the Son; and
neither of them were full or perfect in themselves. For all this is proper to
Bodies; wherefore though the Father be in some sense, Greater than the Son, yet
notwithstanding may he be in him after an Incorporeal manner. And he replieth
to their Last Cavil thus, That the Son is not so in the Father, as we our
selves are said to Live and Move and Be in God; (...), etc. For he himself from
the Fountain of the Father, is that Life in whom all things are quickened and
consist: neither does he who is the Life live in another Life, which were to
suppose him not to be the Life it self. Nor (says he) must it be conceived,
that the Father is no otherwise in the Son, than he is in holy men
Corroborating of them; for the Son himself is the Power and Wisdom of God, and
all Creat^d Beings are sanctified by a Participation of him in the Spirit.
Wherefore this Perichoresis or Mutual In-being of the Father and the Son, is to
be understood after a Peculiar manner, so as that they are Really thereby One;
and what the Son and Holy Ghost does the Father does in them, accordig to that
of Athanasius, (...), The Godhead of the Son is the Godhead of the Father, and
so the Father exercises a Providence over all things in the Son.

Lastly, the same Athanasius in sundry places still further supposes those
Three Divine Hypostases, to make up one Entire Divinity aft^r the same manner*
as the Fountain and the Stream make up one Entire River; or the Root and the
Stock and the Branches, one Entire Tree. And in this sense also, is the whole
Trinity said by him, to be (...), and (...), and (...), and (...), One
Divinity, and One Nature, and One Essence, and One God. And accordingly the
word Homousios seems here to be taken by Athanasius, in a further sense,
besides that before mentioned; not only for things Agreeing in one Common and
General Essence, as Three Individual men are Coessential with one another; but
also for such as concurrently together, make up One Entire Thing; and are
therefore Jointly Essential thereunto. For when he affirms, (...), and (...),
That the Tree is Congenerous or Homogenial with the Root, and the Branches
Coessential with the Vine; his meaning is, that the Root, Stock, and Branches,
are not only of One Kind, but also all together make up, the Entire Essence of
One Plant or Tree. In like manner, those Three Hypostases, the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost, are not only Congenerous and Coessential, as having all the Essence
of the Godhead alike in them, but also as Concurrently Making up one Entire
Divinity. Accordingly whereunto, Athanasius further concludes, that these Three
Divine Hypostases have not a Consent of Will only, but Essentially one and the
Self Same Will, and that they do also jointly produce ad extra, (...), One and
the Self-same Energy, Ep. ad Serap. p. 202.
Operation or Action; nothing being Peculiar to the Son as such, but only the
Economy of the Incarnation: (...)^ The Trinity is like it self, and by Nature
Indivisible, and there is One Energy or Action of it; for the Father By the
Word, In the Holy Ghost, does all things. And thus is the Unity of the Holy
Trinity conserved, and One God preached in the Church: Namely, such as is Above
all, and By or Through all, and In all. Above all, as the Father, the
Principle, and Fountain; Through all, by the Word; and In all, by the Holy
Spirit. And elsewhere he writes often to the same purpose. Thus have we given
a true and full account, how according to Athanasius, the Three Divine
Hypostases, though not Monoousious but Homoousious only, are Really but One God
or Divinity. In all which doctrine of his, there is nothing but what a True and
Genuine Platonist would readily su^scribe to. From whence it may be concluded,
that the right Platonic Trinity, differs not so much from the Doctrine of the
Ancient Church, as some late Writers have supposed.

Hitherto has the Platonic Christian endeavored partly to Rectify and
Reform the True and Genuine Platonic Trinity, and partly to Reconcile it, with
the Doctrine of the Ancient Church. Nevertheless, to prevent all mistakes, we
shall here declare, that wheresoever this most Genuine Platonic Trinity, may
be found to differ, not only from the Scripture it self (which yet
notwithstanding is the sole Rule of Faith) but also from the Form of the Nicene
and Constantinopolitane Councils; and further from the Doctrine of Athanasius
too, in his Genuine writings, (whether it be in their Inequality, or in any
thing else) is there utterly disclaimed and rejected by us. For as for that
Creed commonly called Athanasian, which was written a long time after, by some
other hand; since at first it derived all its authority, either from the Name
of Athanasius to whom it was Entitled, or else because it was supposed to be
an Epitome and Abridgement of his Doctrine; this (as we conceive) is therefore
to be interpreted according to the Tenor of that Doctrine, contained in the
Genuine Writings of Athanasius. Of whom we can think no otherwise, than as a
person highly Instrumental and Serviceable to Divine Providence for the
preserving of the Christian Church, from lapsing by Arianism, into a kind of
Paganick and Idolatrous Christianity; in Religiously Worshipping of those,
which themselves concluded to be Creatures; and by means of whom especially,
the Doctrine of the Trinity, (which before fluctuated in some loose
Uncertainty) came to be more punctually Stated and Settled.

Now the Reason why we introduced the Platonic Christian here thus
Apologizing, was First; because we conceived it not to be the Interest of
Christianity, that the ancient Platonic Trinity, should be made more
discrepant from the Christian, than indeed it is. And Secondly, because, as we
have already proved, the Ancient and Genuine Platonic Trinity, was doubtless
Anti-Arian, or else the Arian Trinity Anti-Platonick; the Second and Third
Hypostases in the Platonic Trinity, being both Eternal, Infinite and
Immutable. And as for those Platonic (...), or Gradations, so much spoken of,
these (by St. Cyril's leave) were of a different Kind from the Arian, there
being not the Inequality of Creatures in them to the Creator. Wherefore
Socrates the Ecclesiastic Historian, not without Cause wonders, how those Two
Presbyters Georgius and Timotheus, L. 7. c. ^*
should adhere to the Arian Faction, since they were accounted such great
Readers of Plato and Origin; (...)^ It seems to me wonderful, how those Two
Persons should persist in the Arian Persuasion; one of them having always Plato
in his hands; and the other continually breathing Origin. Since Plato no where
affirms his First and Second Cause (as he was wont to call them) to have had
any beginning of their Existence; and Origin every where confesses, the Son to
be Coeternal with the Father.

Besides which, Another Reason for this Apology of the Christian Platonist was,
because as the Platonic Pagans after Christianity, did approve of the
Christian Doctrine concerning the Logos, as that which was exactly agreeable
with their own; so did the Generality of the Christian Fathers, before and
after the Nicene Council, represent the Genuine, Platonic Trinity, as really
the same thing with the Christian, or as approaching so near to it, that they
differed chiefly in Circumstances, or the manner of Expression. The Former of
these is Evident from that famous Passage of Amelius Contemporary with
Plotinus, recorded by Eusebius, St. Cyril and Theodoret; P^. Ev. L. 11. c. 9.
(...)^ And this was the Logos or Word, by whom Existing from Eternity
according to Heraclitus, all things were made: and whom that Barbarian also
places in the rank and dignity of a Principle, affirming him to have been with
God, and to be God; and that all things were made by him, and that whatsoever
was made, was Life and Being in him. As also that he descended into a Body, and
being clothed in Flesh, appeared as a Man, though not without demonstration of
the Divinity of his Nature. But that afterward being Loosed or Separated from
the same, he was Deified, and became God again, such as he was before he came
down into a Mortal Body. In which words Amelius speaks favorably also of the
Incarnation of that Eternal Logos. And the same is further manifest from what
St. Austin writes concerning a Platonist in his time, Initium Sancti
Evangelii, cui nomen est secundum Johannem, C.D.L. 10^* 29.
quidam Platonicus, sicut a sancto Seen Simpliciano, qui postea Mediolanensi
Ecclesiae praesedit Episcopus, solebamus audire, aureis Literis conscribendum,
and per omnes Ecclesias in locis eminentissimis proponendum esse dicebat: We
have often heard, from that holy man Simplicianus, afterward Bishop of Millain;
that a certain Platonist affirmed, the beginning of St. John 's Gospel,
deserved to be writ in Letters of Gold, and to be set up in all the most
Eminent places throughout the Christian Churches. And the latter will
sufficiently appear from these following Testimonies; P. ^^*
Justin Martyr in his Apology affirms of Plato, (...), etc. That he gave the
Second place to the Word of God, and the Third to that Spirit, which is said to
have moved upon the waters. Clemens Alexandrinus speaking of that Passage in
Plato's Second Epistle to Dionysius, concerning the First, Second and Third,
writes thus; S^rom. L. 5. p. 598.
(...)^ I understand this no otherwise, than that the Holy Trinity is signified
thereby, the Third being the Holy Ghost, and the Second the Son by whom all
things were made, according to the Will of the Father. Origin also affirms
the Son of God to have been plainly spoken of by Plato in his Epistle to
Hermias and Coriscus, L. 6. c. Cells.
(...)^ Celsus who pretends to know all things, and who cites so many other
passages out of Plato, does purposely (as I suppose) dissemble and conceal,
that which he wrote concerning the Son of God, in his Epistle to Hermias and
Coriscus; where he calls him, the God of the whole Universe, and the Prince of
all things both present and future; afterward speaking of the Father of this
Prince and Cause. And again elsewhere in that Book, he writes to the same
purpose, Cont. Cells. L. 6. p. 308.
(...)^ Neither would Celsus (here speaking of Chistians making Christ the Son
of God) take any notice of that passage in Plato 's Epistle before mentioned,
concerning the Framer and Governor of the whole world, as being the Son of
God; lest he should be compelled by the Authority of Plato, whom he so often
magnifieth, to agree with this Doctrine of ours, that the Demiurgus of the
whole World is the Son of God; but the First and Supreme Deity, his Father.
Moreover St. Cyprian, or who ever were the Author of the Book inscribed De
Spiritu Sancto, affirms, the Platonists First and Universal Psyche, to be the
same with the Holy Ghost in the Christian Theology; in these words, Hujus
Sempiterna Virtus and Divinitas, cum in propria natura, ab Inquisitoribus Mundi
antiquis Philosophis proprie investigari non posset; Subtilissimis tamen
intuiti conjecturis Compositionem Mundi, and distinctis Elementorum affectibus,
praesentem omnibus Animam adfuisse dixerunt; quibus, secundum genus and ordinem
singulorum, vitam praeberet and motum, and intransgressibiles figeret Metas,
and Stabilitatem assignaret; and Vniversam hanc Vitam, hunc motum, hanc rerum
Essentiam, Animam Mundi vocaverunt. P^. Ev. L. ^1, c. 20.
In the next place Eusebius Caesariensis gives a full and clear Testimony, of
the Concordance and Agreement of the Platonic, at least as to the main, with
the Christian Trinity, which he will have to have been the Cabala of the
ancient Hebrews, thus; (...), etc. The Oracles of the Hebrews, placing the Holy
Ghost, after the Father and the Son, in the Third Rank; and acknowledging a
Holy and Blessed Trinity after this manner; so as that this Third Power does
also transcend all Created Nature; and is the First of those Intellectual
Substances, which proceed from the Son, and the Third from the First Cause; see
how Plato Enigmatically declares the same things in his Epistle to Dionysius,
in these words, etc. These things the Interpreters of Plato refer to a First
God, and to a Second Cause, and to a Third the Soul of the World, which they
call also The Third God. And the Divine Scriptures in like manner rank the Holy
Trinity of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; in the place or degree of a Principle.
But it is most observable what Athanasius himself affirms of the Platonists;
that though they derived the Second Hypostasis of their Trinity from the First,
and the Third from the Second, yet they supposed both their Second and Third
Hypostases, to be Uncreated; and therefore does he send the Arians to School
thither, who because there is but one (...), One Self-Originated Being, would
unskilfully conclude, that the Word or Son of God, must therefore needs be a
Creature. P. 278*
Thus in his Book concerning the Decrees of the Nicene Council; (...)^ The
Arians borrowing the word Agennetos from the Pagans (who acknowledge only One
such) make that a pretense to rank the Word or Son of God, who is the Creator
of all, amongst Creatures or things Made. Whereas they ought to have learned
the right signification of that word Agennetos, from those very Platonists who
gave it them. Who, though acknowledging their Second Hypostasis of Nous or
Intellect, to be derived from the first called Tagathon, and their Third
Hypostasis or Psyche from the Second, nevertheless doubt not to affirm them
both to be Ageneta or Uncreated, knowing well, that hereby they detract nothing
from the Majesty of the First, from whom these Two are derived. Wherefore the
Arians either ought so to speak as the Platonists do, or else to say nothing at
all concerning these things which they are ignorant of. In which words of
Athanasius, there is a plain distinction made, betwixt (...) and (...), that
is, Unbegotten and Uncreated; and the Second Person of the Trinity, the Son or
Word of God, though acknowledged by him, not to be (...) Unbegotten (he being
Begotten of the Father, who is the only Agennetos) yet is he here said to be
(...) Uncreated; he declaring the Platonists, thus to have affirmed the Second
and Third Hypostases of their Trinity, not to be Creatures, but Uncreated.
Which Signal Testimony of Athanasius, De C. D.
concerning the Platonic Trinity is a great Vindication of the same. We might
here further add, St. Austin's Confession also, that God the Father, and God
the Son, were by the Platonists acknowledged in like manner, as by the
Christians; though concerning the Holy Ghost, he observes some difference,
betwixt Plotinus and Porphyrius, in that the Former did Postponere Animae
Naturam Paterno Intellectui, the Latter, Interponere; Plotinus did Postpone his
Psyche or Soul after the Paternal Intellect, but Porphyrius Interponed it,
betwixt the Father and the Son, as a Middle between both. It was before
observed, that St. Cyril of Alexandria, affirms nothing to be wanting to the
Platonic Trinity, but only that Homoousiotes of his and some other Fathers in
that Age, that they should not only all be God or Uncreated, but also Three
Coequal Individuals, under the same Ultimate Species, as Three Individual Men;
he conceiving that Gradual Subordination that is in the Platonic Trinity, to
be a certain tang of Arianism. Nevertheless he thus concludes, (...), That
Plato notwithstanding was not altogether ignorant of the Truth, but that he had
the knowledge of the Only begotten Son of God, as likewise of the Holy Ghost,
called by him Psyche; and that he would have every way expressed himself
rightly, had he not been afraid of Anitus and Melitus, and that Poison which
Socrates drunk. Now whether this were a Fault or no, in the Platonists, that
they did not suppose their Hypostases to be Three Individuals under the same
Ultimate Species, we leave to others to judge. We might here add the Testimony
of Chalcidius, because he is unquestionably concluded to have been a Christian,
though his Language indeed be too much Paganical, when he calls the Three
Divine Hypostases, a Chief, P. 277.
a Second, and a Third God; Istius rei dispositio talis mente concipienda est;
Originem quidem rerum esse Summum and Ineffabilem Deum; post Providentiam ejus
Secundum Deum, Latorem Legis utriusque Vitae tam Aeternae quam Temporariae;
Tertium esse porro Substantiam que Secunda Men's, Intellectusque dicitur, quasi
quaedam Custos Legis Aeternae. His Subjectas esse Rationabiles Animas, Legi
Obsequentes, Ministras vero Potestates, etc. Ergo Summus Deus jubet, Secundus
ordinat, Tertius intimat. Animae vero Legem ag^nt. This thing is to be
conceived after this manner; That the First Original of Things is the Supreme
and Ineffable God; after his Providence a Second God, the Establisher of the
Law of Life both Eternal and Temporary; And the Third (which is also a
Substance, and called a Second Mind or Intellect) is a certain Keeper of this
Eternal Law. Under these Three, are Rational Souls, Subject to that Law,
together with the Ministerial Powers, etc. So that the Sovereign or Supreme God
Commands, the Second Orders, and the Third executes. But Souls are Subject to
the Law. Where Chalcidius though seeming indeed rather more a Platonist, than a
Christian; yet acknowledges no such Beings as Henades and Noes; but only Three
Divine Hypostases, and under them Rational Souls. But we shall conclude with
the Testimony of Theodoret in his Book De Principio, (...)^ Plotinus and
Numenius explaining Plato 's Sense, declare him to have asserted, Three
Super-Temporals or Eternals, Good, Mind or Intellect, and the Soul of the
Universe; he calling that Tagathon which to us is Father, that Mind or
Intellect, which to us is Son or Word, and that Psyche or a Power Animating and
Enlivening all things, which our Scriptures call the Holy Ghost. And these
things (says he) were by Plato purloined, from the Philosophy and Theology of
the Hebrews.

Wherefore we cannot but take notice here of a Wonderful Providence of Almighty
God, that this Doctrine of a Trinity of Divine Hypostases, should find such
Admittance and Entertainment in the Pagan World, and be received by the wisest
of all their Philosophers, before the times of Christianity; thereby to prepare
a more easy way for the Reception of Christianity amongst the Learned Pagans.
Which that it proved successful accordingly, is undeniably evident from the
Monuments of Antiquity. And the Juniour Platonists, who were most opposite and
adverse to Christianity, became at length so sensible hereof, that besides
their other Adulterations of the Trinity before mentioned, for the
countenancing of their Polytheism and Idolatry, they did in all probability for
this very reason, quite innovate, change and pervert the whole Cabala, and no
longer acknowledge a Trinity, but either a Quaternity or a Quinary, or more of
Divine Hypostases. They first of all contending, that before the Trinity, there
was another Supreme and Highest Hypostasis, not to be reckoned with the others,
but standing alone by himself. And we conceive, the first Innovator in this
kind, to have been Jamblichus, who in his Egyptian Mysteries, where he seems to
make the Egyptian Theology to agree with his own Hypotheses, writes in this
manner; (...)^ Before those things which truly are, and the Principles of all,
there is One God Superior to the First God, and King, Immovable; and always
remaining in the Solitude of his own Unity: there being nothing Intelligible
nor any thing else mingled with him; but he being the Paradigm of that God
truly Good, which is Self-begotten and his own Parent. For this is greater, and
before him, and the Fountain of all things; the foundation of all the first
Intelligible Ideas. Wherefore from this one, did that Self sufficient God, who
is Autopator or his own Parent, cause himself to shine forth, for this is also
a Principle, and the God of Gods, a Monad from the first One, before all
Essence. Where so far as we can understand, Jamblichus his meaning is, that
there is a Simple Unity in order of Nature before that Tagathon, or Monad,
which is the First of the Three Divine Hypostases. And this Doctrine was
afterward taken up by Proclus, he declaring it in this manner, In Timae. L^b.
2. p. 93.
(...)^ Plato every where ascends from multitude to Unity, from whence also the
order of the Many proceeds; but before Plato and according to the Natural order
of things, One is before Multitude and every Divine order begins from a Monad.
Wherefore though the Divine Number proceed in a Trinity, yet before this
Trinity must there be a Monad. Let there be Three Demiurgical Hypostases;
nevertheless before these must there be One; because none of the Divine orders,
begins from Multitude. We conclude, that the Demiurgical Number, does not begin
from a Trinity, but from a Monad, standing alone by it self before that
Trinity. Here Proclus, though endeavoring to gain some countenance for this
doctrine out of Plato, yet as fearing lest that should fail him, does he fly to
the order of Nature, and from thence would infer, that before the Trinity of
Demiurgick Hypostases, there must be a Single Monad or Henad standing alone by
it self, as the Head thereof. And St. Cyril of Alexandria, who was Juniour to
Jamblichus but Senior to Proclus, seems to take notice of this Innovation in
the Platonic Theology, as a thing then newly crept up, C Jul. L. 8. p. ^71.
and after the time of ^orphyry; (...)^ But those before mentioned, contradict
this Doctrine (of Porphyrius and the ancient Platonists) affirming that the
Tagathon ought not to be connumerated or reckoned together, with those which
proceed from it, but to be exempted from all Communion, because it is
altogether Simple and incapable of any Commixture or Consociation with any
other. Wherefore these begin their Trinity with Nous or Intellect, making that
the First. The only difference here is, that Jamblichus seems to make the first
Hypostasis of the Trinity after a Monad, to be Tagathon, but St. Cyril, Nous.
However they both meant the same thing, as also did Proclus after them.
Wherefore it is evident, that when from the time of the Nicene Council and
Athanasius, the Christian Doctrine of the Trinity came to be punctually stated
and settled, and much to be insisted upon by Christians, Jamblichus and other
Platonists, who were great Antagonists of the same, perceiving what advantage
the Christians had from the Platonic Trinity, then first of all Innovated this
Doctrine, introducing a Quaternity of Divine Hypostases, instead of a Trinity,
the First of them being not Coordinate with the other Three, nor Consociated or
Reckoned with them: But All of them, though Subordinate, yet Universal, and
such as Comprehend the whole; that is, Infinite and Omnipotent; and therefore
none of them Creatures. For it is certain, that before this time, or the Age
that Iamblichus lived in, there was no such thing at all dreamed of by any
Platonist, as an Unity before and above the Trinity, and so a Quaternity of
Divine Hypostases: Plotinus positively determining, that there could neither be
More nor Fewer than Three; and Proclus himself acknowledging the Ancient
Tradition or Cabala, to have run only of Three Gods; and Numenius who was
Senior to them both, writing thus of Socrates, Eusebius. P.E.L. 14. c. 5.
(...), That he also (before Plato) Asserted Three Gods; that is, Three Divine
Hypostases, and no more, as Principles; therein following the Pythagoreans.

Moreover the same Proclus, besides his Henades and Noes before mentioned,
added certain other Fantastic Trinities of his own also, as this for example,
of the First Essence, the First Life, and the First Intellect; (to omit others)
whereby that Ancient Cabala and (...), Theology of Divine Tradition, of Three
Archical Hypostases, and no more, was disguised, perverted, and adulterated.

But besides this Advantage from the ancient Pagan Platonists and Pythagoreans,
admitting a Trinity into their Theology, in like manner as Christianity does
(whereby Christianity was the more recommended to the Philosophic Pagans)
there is another Advantage of the Same extending even to this present time,
probably not Unintended also by Divine Providence; That whereas Bold and
Conceited Wits precipitantly condemning the Doctrine of the Trinity for
Nonsense, absolute R. pugnancy to Humane Faculties, and Impossibility, have
thereupon some of them quite shaken off Christianity and all Revealed Religion,
professing only Theism; others have frustrated the Design thereof by Pagmizing
it into Creature-Worship or Idolatry; this Ignorant and Conceited Confidence of
both, may be retunded and confuted from hence, because the most ingenious and
acute of all the Pagan Philosophers, the Platonists and Pythagoreans, who had
no bias at all upon them, nor any Scripture Revelation, that might seem to
impose upon their Faculties, but followed the free Sentiments and Dictates of
their own Minds, did notwithstanding not only entertain this Trinity of Divine
Hypostases Eternal and Uncreated, but were also fond of the Hypothesis, and
made it a main Fundamental of their Theology.

It now appears from what we have declared, that as to the Ancient and Genuine
Platonists and Pythagoreans, none of their Trinity of Gods, or Divine
Hypostases, were Independent, so neither were they (...) Creature-Gods. but
Uncreated; they being all of them not only Eternal, and Necessarily Existent,
and Immutable, but also Universal, that is Infinite and Omnipotent; Causes,
Principles, and Creators of the whole World. From whence it follows that these
Platonists could no^ justly be taxed for Idolatry, in giving Religious Worship
to each Hypost^sis of this their Trinity. And we have the rather insisted so
long upon this Platonic Trinity, because we shall make use of this Doctrine
afterward, in our Defense of Christianity, where we are to show; That one
Grand Design of Christianity, being to abolish the Pagan Idolatry, or
Creature-Worship, it self cannot justly be charged with the same, from that
Religious Worship given to our Savior Christ, and the Trinity, (the Son and
Holy Ghost) they being none of them, according to the true and Orthodox
Christianity, Creatures; however the Arian Hypothesis made them such. And this
was indeed, the Grand Reason, why the Ancient Fathers, so zealously opposed
Arianism, because That Christianity, which was intended by God Almighty, for a
means to extirpate Pagan Idolatry, was thereby it self Paganized and
Idolatrized; and made highly guilty of that very thing, which it so much
condemned in the Pagans, that is Creature-Worship. This might be proved by
sundry testimonies, of Athanasius, Basil, Gregory Nyssen, Gregory Nazianzen,
Epiphanius, Chrysostom, Hilary, Ambrose, Austine, Faustinus, and Cyril of
Alexandria; all of them charging the Arians, as guilty of the very same
Idolatry with the Gentiles or Pagans, in giving Religious Worship even to the
Word and Son of God himself (and consequently to our Savior Christ) as he was
supposed them to be but a Creature. But we shall content our selves here, only
to cite one remarkable passage out of Athanasius in his Fourth Oration against
the Arians, P. 468, 469.
(...) -- (...). Why therefore do not these Arians, holding this, reckon
themselves amongst the Pagans or Gentiles, sense they do in like manner worship
the Creature, besides the Creator? For though the Pagans worship one Uncreated
and many Created Gods, but these Arians only one Uncreated, and one Created; to
wit the Son or Word of God; yet will not this make any real difference betwixt
them; because the Arians One Created is one of those many Pagan Gods; and those
many Gods of the Pagans or Gentiles, have the same nature with this One; they
being alike Creatures. Wherefore these wretched Arians are Apostates from the
truth of Christianity, they betraying Christ more than the Jews did, and
wallowing or tumbling in the Filth of Pagan Idolatry: worshipping Creatures and
different kinds of Gods? Where by the way we may take notice, that when
Athanasius affirms of the Arians, what St Paul does of the Pagans, that they
did (...), his meaning could not well be, that they worshipped the Creature
More than the Creator; forasmuch as the Arians constantly declared, that they
gave less worship to Christ the Son or Word of God, he being by them accounted
but a Creature, than they did to the Father the Creator: but either that they
worshipped, the Creature Besides the Creator, or the Creature Instead of the
Creator, or in the Room of him, who was alone of right to be Religiously
Worshipped. Again, when the same Athanasius declares, that the Greeks,
Gentiles, or Pagans, did Universally worship (...), Only One Uncreated, he
seems to imply, that the Platonic Trinity of Hypostases, affirmed by him to be
all Uncreated, were by them looked upon, only as One entire Divinity.

But the Principal Things, which we shall observe from this Passage of
Athanasius, and those many other places of the Fathers, where they Parallel the
Arians with the Pagans, making the Former guilty of the very same Idolatry with
the Latter, even then when they worshipped our Savior Christ himself, or the
Word and Son of God, as he was by them supposed to be nothing but a Creature,
are these following; First, That it is here plainly declared by them, that the
generality of the Pagans, did not worship a Multitude of Independent Gods, but
that only One of their Gods was Uncreated or Self-Existent, and all their other
Many Gods, looked upon by them as his Creatures. This as it is expressly
affirmed by Athanasius here, that the Greeks or Pagans, did (...), Worship only
One Uncreated, and Many Created Gods, so is it plainly implied, by all those
other forementioned Fathers, who charge the Arians with the Guilt of Pagan
Idolatry; because had the Pagans worshipped Many Uncreated and Independent
Gods, it would not therefore follow, that the Arians were Idolaters, if the
Pagans were. But that this was indeed the sense of the Fathers, both before and
after the Nicene Council, concerning the Pagan Polytheism and Idolatry, that it
consisted not in worshipping Many Uncreated and Independent Gods, but only One
Uncreated and Many Created; has been already otherwise manifested; and it
might be further confirmed by sundry Testimonies of them; as this of Saint
Gregory Nazianzen in his 37. Oration; (...); What then would some say, is there
not One Divinity also amongst the Pagans, as they who Philosophize more fully
and perfectly amongst them do declare? And that full and remarkable One of
Irenaeus, where he plainly affirms of the Gentiles; Ita Creaturae potius quam
Creatori serviebant, and his qui non sunt Dii, L. 2. c. 9.
ut Primum Deitatis Locum attribuerent, Vni alicui and Summo Fabricatori hujus
Vniversitatis Deo; That they so served the Creature, and those who are not
Gods, rather than the Creator; that notwithstanding they attributed the First
place of the Deity, to One certain Supreme God, the Maker of this Universe. The
second thing is, that Athanasius and all those other Orthodox Fathers, who
charged the Arians with Pagan Idolatry* did thereby plainly imply, Those not to
be Incapable of Idolatry, who worship One Sovereign Numen, or acknowledge One
Supreme Deity, the Maker of the whole World; since not only the Arians
unquestionably did so, but also according to these Fathers, the very Pagans
themselves. The Third Thing is, that in the Judgment of Athanasius, and all
the Orthodox Anti-Arian Fathers, to give Religious Worship to any Created Being
whatsoever, though Inferior to that worship, which is given to the Supreme
God, and therefore according to the Modern Distinction, not (...), but (...),
is absolutely, Idolatry. Because it is certain, that the Arians gave much an
Inferior worship, to Christ the Son or Word of God, whom they contended to be
a mere Creature, Made in Time, Mutable and Defectible, than they did to that
Eternal God, who was the Creator of him. As those Fathers imply, the Pagans
themselves to have given much an Inferior Worship, to their (...), their Many
Gods, whom themselves looked upon, as Creatures, than they did (...), To that
One Uncreated God.

Now if the Arians, who zealously contended for the Unity of the Godhead, were
nevertheless, by the Fathers condemned, as guilty of Idolatry, for bestowing
but an Inferior kind of Religious Worship, upon Christ the Son or Word of God
himself, as he was supposed by them to be a Creature; then certainly cannot
they be excused from that Guilt, who bestow Religious Worship, upon these other
Creatures, Angels and Souls of men, though Inferior to what they give to the
Supreme Omnipotent God, the Creator of all. Because the Son or Word of God,
however conceived by these Arians to be a Creature, yet was looked upon by them
as the First, the most Glorious, and most Excellent of all Creatures, and that
by which as an Instrument, all other Creatures, as Angels and Souls, were made:
and therefore if it were Idolatry in them, to give an Inferior kind of
Religious Worship, to this Son and Word of God himself, according to their
Hypoth^sis, then can it not possibly be accounted less, to bestow the same upon
those other Creatures, Made by him, as Angels and Men deceased. Besides which,
the Word and Son of God, howsoever supposed by these Arians to be a Creature,
yet was not Really such; and is in Scripture unquestionably declared to be a
True Object of Religious Worship (Worship him all ye Gods) so that the Arians
though Formally Idolaters, according to their own false Hypothesis; yet were
not Materially and Really so: whereas these Religious Angel- and
Saint-Worshippers, must be as well Materially as Formally such. And here it is
observable, that these Ancient Fathers made no such Distinction of Religious
Worship, into Latria, as peculiar to the Supreme God, it being that whereby he
is adored as Self-Existent and Omnipotent, or the Creator of all; and Dulia,
such an Inferior Religious Worship, as is communicable to Creatures; but
concluded of Religious Worship Universally, and without Distinction, that the
due Object of it all was the Creator only, and not any Creature. Thus
Athanasius plainly in his Third Oration, (...)^ If the Son or Word of God were
to be Worshipped, (though a Creature) because transcending us in glory and
dignity, then ought every Inferior Being to Worship what is Superior to it:
Whereas the case is otherwise; For a Creature does not Religiously worship a
Creature, but only God the Creator. Now they who distinguish Religious Worship,
into Latria and Dulia, must needs suppose the Object of it in general, to be
that which is Superior to us, and not the Creator only; which is here
contradicted by Athanasius. But because it was objected against these Orthodox
Fathers by the Arians, that the Humanity of our Savior Christ, which is
unquestionably a Creature, did share in their Religious Worship also; it is
worth the while to see what account Athanasius gives of this; Ad Adelph. p. 157.
(...) (...). We give no Religious Worship to any Creature, far be it from us:
For this is the Error of the Pagans and of the Arians; But We Worship the Word
of God the Lord of the Creation Incarnated. For though the Flesh of Christ,
considered alone by it self, were but a part of the Creatures, nevertheless was
it made the Body of God. And we neither Worship this Body by it self alone,
divided from the Word; nor yet intending to worship the Word, do we remove it,
at a great distance from this flesh; but knowing that of the Scripture, The
Word was made Flesh, we look upon this Word even in the Flesh as God. And again
to the same purpose, P. 160.
(...). Let these Arians Know, at length, that we who Worship the Lord in
Flesh, Worship no Creature, but only the Creator clothed with a Creaturely
Body. And for the same cause was it that Nestorius afterward, dividing the
Word from the Flesh, the Divinity of Christ from the Humanity, and not
acknowledging such an Hypostatick Union betwixt them as he ought, but
nevertheless Religiously Worshipping our Savior Christ, was therefore branded
by the Christian Church, with the Name of (...), A Man-Worshipper, or Idolater.
To conclude, they who excuse themselves from being Idolaters no otherwise, than
because they do not give that very same Religious Worship, to Saints and
Angels, which is pecular to God Almighty, and consists in honoring him as
Self-Existent, and the Creator of all things, but acknowledge those others to
be Creatures; Suppose that to be Necessary to Idolatry, which is Absolutely
Impossible, viz. to acknowledge more Omnipotents as Creators of all than One,
or to account Creatures as such Creators; as they imply all those to be
Incapable of Idolatry, who acknowledge One Supreme God the Creator of the whole
World; which is directly contradictious to the Doctrine of the Ancient Church.

Hitherto in way of Answer to an Atheistick Objection, against the Naturality
of the Idea of God, as including Oneliness in it, from the Pagan Polytheism,
have we largely proved, that at least the Civilized and Intelligent Pagans,
generally acknowledged One Sovereign Numen, and that their Polytheism was
partly but Fantastical, nothing but the Polyonymy of one Supreme God, or the
Worshipping him under different Names and Notions according to his several
Virtues and Manifestations. And that though besides this they had another
Natural and Real Polytheism also; yet this was only of Many Inferior or
Created Gods, Subordinate to One Supreme (...), or Uncreated.

Which notwithstanding, is not so to be understood, as if we did confidently
affirm, that Opinion of Many Independent Deities, never to have so much as
entered into the Mind of any Mortal. For since Humane Nature is so Mutable and
Depravable, as that notwithstanding the Connate Idea and Prolepsis of God in
the Minds of Men, some unquestionably do degenerate and lapse into Atheism;
there can be no reason why it should be thought absolutely impossible, for any
ever to entertain that false Conceit of More Independent Deities. But as for
Independent Gods Invisible, we cannot trace the footsteps of such a Polytheism
as this, any where, nor find any more than a Ditheism, of a Good and Evil
Principle: Only Philo and others seem to have conceived, That amongst the
ancient Pagans, some were so grossly sottish, as to suppose a Plurality of
Independent Gods Visible, and to take the Sun, and Moon, and all the Stars for
Such. However, if there were any such, and these Writers were not mistaken, as
it frequently happened, it is certain that they were but very few, because
amongst the most Barbarian Pagans at this day, there is hardly any Nation to be
found, without an acknowledgment of a Sovereign Deity, as appears from all
those Discoveries which have been made of them, since the improvement of
Navigation.

Wherefore what has been hitherto declared by us, might well be thought a
sufficient Answer to the forementioned Atheistick Objection, against the Idea
of God. Notwithstanding which, when we wrote the Contents of this Chapter, we
intended a further Account, of the Natural and Real Polytheism of the Pagans,
and their Multifarious Idolatry, chiefly in order to the Vindication of the
Truth of Christianity against Atheists: forasmuch as one grand Design hereof,
was unquestionably, to destroy the Pagan Polytheism and Idolatry, which
consisted in Worshipping the Creature besides the Creator.

But we are very Sensible, that we have been surprised in the Length of this
Chapter, which is already swelled into a Disproportionate Bigness; by means
whereof we cannot comprehend within the compass of this Volume, all that
belongs to the Remaining Contents, together with such a Full and Copious
Confutation of the Atheistick Grounds, as was intended. Wherefore we shall here
Divide the Chapter, and reserve those Remaining Contents together, with a
further Confutation of Atheism, for another Volume, which God affording Life,
Health, and Leisure, we intend shall follow. Only subjoyning in the mean time,
a Short and Compendious Confutation, of all the Atheistick Arguments proposed.

A CONFUTATION OF ATHEISM. CHAP. V.
HAving in the Second Chapter revealed all the Dark Mysteries of Atheism, and
produc^d the utmost strength of that Cause; and in the T^ird, made an
Introduction to the Co^^utation of those Atheistick Grounds, by representing
all the several Forms and Schemes of Atheism, and showing both their
Disagreements amongst themselves, and wherein they all agree together against
Theists; We have been hi^herto prevented, of that full and Copious Confutation
of them, intended by us, by reason of that large Account given, of the P^gan
Polyth^ism; which yet was no Impertinent Digression neither, it removing the
Grand Obj^ction against the Naturality of the Idea of God, as including
Onelin^ss in it, as also preparing a way for that Defense of Christianity,
designed by us against Atheists. Wherefore that we may not here be quite
excluded, of what was principally intended, we shall subjoyn a Contracted and
Compendious Confutation, of all the Premised Atheistick Principles. The FIRST
whereof was this, That either men have no Idea of God at all, or else none but
such as is Compounded and Made up of Impossible and Contradictious Notions;
from whence these Atheists would infer Him, to be an Inconceivable Nothing. In
Answer whereunto, there has been something done already, it being declared in
the Beginning of the Fourth Chapter, what the Idea of God is, viz. A Perfect
Understanding Nature, Necessarily Self-Existent, and the Cause of all other
things. And as there is Nothing either Inconceivable, or Contradictious in this
Idea, so have we showed, that these Confounded Atheists, do not only at the
same time, when they verbally deny an Idea of God, implicitly acknowledge and
confess it, for as much as otherwise, denying his Existence, they should deny
the Existence of Nothing; but also that they agree with Theists in this very
Idea; it being the only thing which Atheists Contend for, That the First
Originl and Head of all things, is no Perfect Understanding Nature, but that
all sprung from Tohu and Bohu, or Dark and Sensl^ss Matter Fortuito^sly moved.
Moreover we have not only thus declared the Idea of God, but also largely
proved, and made it clearly evident, that the Generality of Mankind in all
Ages, have had a Prolepsis or Anticipation in their Minds, concerning the Real
and Actual Existence of such a Being: the Pagans themselves, besides their
other Many Gods (which were Understanding Beings Superior to men,)
acknowledging One Chief and Sovereign Numen, the Maker of them all, and of the
Whole World. From whence it plainly appears, that those few Atheists, that
formerly have been, and still are, here and there up and down in the World, are
no other than the Monsters and Anomalies of Humane Kind. And this alone might
be sufficient, to repel the First Atheistick Assault, made against the Idea of
God.

Nevertheless, that we may not seem to dissemble any of the Atheists Strength,
we shall here Particularly declare, all their most Colorable Pretenses,
against the Idea of God, and then show the Folly and Invalidity of them. Which
Pretenses are as follow; First, That we have no Idea nor Thought of any thing
not Subject to Corporeal Sense; nor the least Evidence of the Existence of any
thing, but from the same. Secondly, That Theists themselves acknowledging God
to be Incomprehensible, he may be from thence inferred to be a Nonentity.
Thirdly, That the Theists Idea of God including Infinity in it, is therefore
absolutely Inconceivable and Impossible. Fourthly, That Theology is an
Arbitrarious Compilement of Inconsistent and Contradictious Notions; And
Lastly, That the Idea and Existence of God ows all its being, either to the
Confounded Nonsense of Astonished Minds; or else to the Fiction and Imposture
of Politicians.

We begin with the First. That we can have no Idea, Conception, or Thought of
any thing, not Subject to Sense; nor the least Evidence of the Existence of any
thing, but from the same. Thus a Modern Atheistick Writer; Whatsoever we can
conceive, has been Perceived first by Sense, either at once or in parts; and a
man can have no Thought representing any thing not Subject to Sense. From
whence it f^llows, that whatsoever is not Sensible and Imaginable, is utterly
unconceivable and to us Nothing. Moreover the same Writer adds, That the only
Evidence which we have of the Existence of any thing, is from Sense; the
Consequence whereof is this, That there being no Corporeal Sense of a Deity,
there can be no Evidence at all of his Existence. Wherefore according to the
Tenor of the Atheistick Philosophy, all is Resolved into Sense; as the only
Criterion of Truth, accordingly as Protagoras in Plato's Theaetetus concludes,
Knowledge to be Sense; and a late Writer of our own determins, Sense to be
Original Knowledge. Here have we a wide Ocean before us, but we must Contract
our Sayls, Were Sense, Knowledge and Understanding; then he that sees Light and
Colors, and feels Heat and Cold, would understand Light and Colors, Heat and
Cold, and the like of all other Sensible Things: neither would there be any
Philosophy at all concerning them. Whereas the Mind of man remains altogether
unsatisfied, concerning the Nature of these Corporeal Things, even after the
Strongest Sensations of them, and is but thereby awakened, to a further
Philosophic Enquiry and Search about them, what this Light and Colors, this
Heat and Cold, etc. Really should be; and whether they be indeed Qualities in
the Objects without us, or only Phantasms and Sensations in our selves. Now it
is certain, that there could be no Suspicion of any such thing as this, were
Sense the Highest Faculty in us; neither can Sense it self ever decide this
Controversy; since once Sense cannot judge of another, or correct the Error of
it; all Sense as such, (that is, as Fancy and Apparition) being alike True.
And had not these Atheists been Notorious Dunces, in that Atomick Philosophy
which they so much pretend to, they would clearly have learned from thence,
That Sense is not Knowledge and Understanding, nor the Criterion of Truth as to
Sensible things themselves; it reaching not to the Essence or Absolute Nature
of them, but only taking notice of their Outside, and perceiving its own
Passions from them, rather than the Things themselves: and That there is a
Higher Faculty in the Soul, of Reason and Understanding, which judges of Sense,
detects the Phantastry and Imposture of it; discovers to us that there is
nothing in the Objects themselves like to those forementioned Sensible Ideas;
and resolves all Sensible Things into Intelligible Principles; the Ideas
whereof are not Foraign and Adventitious, and mere Passive Impressions upon the
Soul from without; but Native and Domestic to it, or Actively Exerted from the
Soul it self: no Passion being able to make a Judgment either of it self or
other things. This is a thing so Evident, that Democritus himself could not but
take notice of it, and acknowledge it, though he made not a right use thereof;
he in all Probability, continuing notwithstanding a Confounded and Besotted
Atheist: Sextus Empiricus having recorded this of him. (...)^ Democritus in his
Canons affirms, that there are Two kinds of Knowledges, One by the Senses,
and another by the Mind. Of which that by the Mind is only accounted Knowledge,
he bearing witness to the Faithfulness and Firmness thereof, for the judgment
of Truth. The other by the Senses, he calls Dark, denying it to be a Rule and
Measure of Truth. His own words are these. There are Two Species of Knowledge,
the One Genuine the other Dark or Obscure. The Dark and Obscure Knowledge is
Seeing, Hearing Smelling, Tasting, Touching. But the Genuine Knowledge, is
another more Hidden and Recondit. To which purpose there is another Fragment
also of this Democritus preserved by the same Sextus; (...)^ Bitter and Sweet,
Hot and Cold, are only in Opinion or Fancy. Color is only in opinion. Atoms
and Vacuum alone in Truth and Reality. That which is thought to be, are
Sensibles; but these are not according to Truth, but Atoms and Vacuum only. Now
the chief Ground of this Rational Discovery of the ancient Atomists, that
Sensible things, as Heat and Cold, Bitter and Sweet, Red and Green, are no Real
Qualities in the Objects without, but only our own Phancies, was because in
Body, there are no such things Intelligible; but only Magnitude, Figure, Site,
Motion and Rest. Of which we have not only Sensible Ideas, Passively impressed
upon us from without, but also, Intelligible Notions, Actively Exerted from the
Mind it self. Which Latter notwithstanding, because they are not unaccompanied
with Sensible Phantasms, are by many unskilfully confounded with them. But
besides these, we have other Intelligible Notions or Ideas also, which have no
Genuine Phantasms at all belonging to them. Of which whosoever doubts, may
easily be satisfied and convinced, by reading but a Sentence or two, that he
understands, in any Book almost that shall come next to his hand; and
reflexively examining himself, whether he have a Phantasm or Sensible Idea,
belonging to every Word, or no. For whoever is modest and ingenuous, will
quickly be forced to confess, that he meets with many Words, which though they
have a Sense or Intelligible Notion, yet have no Genuine Phantasm belonging to
them. And we have known some, who were confidently engaged in the other
Opininon; being put to read the beginning of Tully's Offices, presently
non-plust and confounded, in that first word Quanquam; they being neither able
to deny but that there was a Sense belonging to it, nor yet to affirm, that
they had any Phantasm thereof, save only of the Sound or Letters. But to prove
that there are Cogitations not subject to Corporeal Sense, we need go no
further than this very Idea or Description of God; A Substance, Absolutely
Perfect, Infinitely Good, Wise and Powerful, Necessarily Self-existent, and the
Cause of all other things. Where there is not One Word unintelligible, to him
that has any Uunderstanding in him, and yet no Considerative and Ingenuous
Person can pretend, that he has a Genuine Phantasm or Sensible Idea, answering
to any one of those words; either to Substance, or to Absolutely Perfect, or to
Infinitely, or to Good, or to Wise, or to Powerful, or to Necessity, or to
Self-existence, or to Cause; or indeed to All, or Other, or Things. Wherefore
it is nothing but want of Meditation, together with a Fond and Sottish Dotage
upon Corporeal Sense, which has so far imposed upon some, as to make them
believe, that they have not the least Cogitation of any thing, not subject to
Corporeal Sense, or that there is nothing in Humane Understanding or
Conception, which was not First in Bodily Sense; a Doctrine highly favorable
to Atheism. But since it is certain on the contrary, that we have many Thoughts
not Subject to Sense, it is manifes^ that whatsoever falls not under External
Sense, is not therefore Inconceivable, and Nothing. Which whosoever asserts,
must needs affirm, Life and Cogitation it self, Knowledge or Understanding,
Reason and Memory, Volition and Appetite, things of the greatest Moment and
Reality, to be Nothing but mere Words without any Significaetion. Nay Fancy
and Sense it self, upon this Hypothesis, could hardly escape from becoming
Non-Entities too, forasmuch as neither Fancy nor Sense falls under Sense, but
only the Objects of them; we neither seeing Vision, nor feeling Taction, nor
hearing Audition, much less, hearing Sight, or seeing Taste, or the like.
Wherefore though God should be never so much Corporeal, as some Theists have
conceived him to be, yet since the Chief of his Essence, and as it were his
Inside, must by these be acknowledged to consist in Mind, Wisdom, and
Understanding, he could not possibly as to this, fall under Corporeal Sense
(Sight or Touch) any more than Thought can. But that there is Substance
Incorporeal also, and therefore in it self altogether Insensible; and that the
Deity is such; is demonstrated elsewhere.

We grant indeed that the Evidence of Particular Bodies, existing Hic and Nunc,
without us, does necessarily depend upon the Information of Sense: but yet
nevertheless the Certainty of this very Evidence, is not from Sense alone, but
from a Complication of Reason and Understanding together with it. Where Sense
the only Evidence of things, there could be no Absolute Truth and Falsehood, nor
Certainty at all of any thing; Sense as such being only Relative to Particular
Persons, Seeming and Fantastical, and obnoxious to much Delusion. For if our
Nerves and Brain be inwardly so moved, and affected, as they would be by such
an Object present, when indeed it is absent, and no other Motion or Sensation,
in the mean time prevail against it and obliterate it; then must that Object of
necessity seem to us present. Moreover those Imaginations, that spring and
bubble from the Soul it self, are commonly taken for Sensations by us when
asleep, and sometimes in Melancholic and Phanciful Persons also, when awake.
That Atheistick Principle, that there is no Evidence at all of any thing as
Existing, but only from Corporeal Sense, is plainly contradicted by the Atomick
Atheists themselves, When they assert Atoms and Vacuum to be the Principles of
all things, and the Exuvious Images of Bodies to be the Causes both of Sight
and Cogitation: for Single Atoms, and those Exuvious Images, were never Seen
nor Felt; and Vacuum or Empty Space, is so far from being Sensible, that these
Atheists themselves allow it to be the One Only Incorporeal. Wherefore they
must here go beyond the Ken of Sense, and appeal to Reason only for the
Existence of these Principles: Thaect. P. 155 Steph.
as Protagoras one of them in Plato professedly does; (...)^ Have a Care that
none of the Profane and Vninitiated in the Mysteries, over-hear you. By the
Profane, I mean (says he) those who think nothing to Exist, but what they can
feel with their Fingers, and exclude all that is Invisible, out of the Rank of
Being. Were Existence to be allowed to nothing, that does not fall under
Corporeal Sense, then must we deny the Existence of Soul and Mind, in our
selves, and others, because we can neither Feel nor See any such thing. Whereas
we are certain of the Existence of our own Souls, partly from an inward
Consciousness of our own Cogitations, and partly from that Principle of Reason,
That, Nothing can not Act. And the Existence of other Individual Souls, is
manifest to us, from their Effects, upon their Respeivcte Bodies, their
Motions, Actions, and Discourse. Wherefore since the Atheists cannot deny the
Existence of Soul or Mind in men, though no such thing fall under External
Sense; they have as little Reason to deny, the Existence of a Perfect Mind,
presiding over the Universe, without which it cannot be conceived whence our
Imperfect ones should be derived. The Existence of that God, whom no Eye has
seen nor can see, is plainly proved by Reason from his Effects, in the Visible
Phenomenon of the Universe, and from what we are Conscious of within our selves.

The Second Pretense of Atheists against the Idea of God, and consequently his
Existence, is because Theists themselves acknowledging God to be
Incomprehensible, it may be from thence Inferred, that he is a Nonentity.
Which Argumentation of the Atheists, supposes these Two Things, First, That
what is Incomprehensible, is altogether Inconceivable; and then, that what is
Inconceivable, is Nothing. The Latter of which Two, perhaps may be granted to
them, That what is so Utterly Inconceivable, as that no man can frame any
manner of Idea or Conception of it, is therefore either in it self, or at least
to us, Plato Theaet.
Nothing. Because though that of Protagoras be not true, in his sense, (...)^
That Man is the measure of all things, either as Existing or not Existing. He
meaning indeed nothing else thereby, but that there was no Absolute Truth or
Falsehood of any thing, but all was Relative to particular persons, and
Fantastical or Seeming only. And though it must not be granted, that
whatsoever any man's shallow Understanding, cannot easily and fully comprehend,
is therefore presently to be expunged out of the Catalogue of Beings; which is
the Reason, or rather Infidelity of the Anti-Trinitarians; yet is there
notwithstanding some Truth in that of Aristotle, that (...), the Rational Soul
or Mind, is in a manner All things; it being able to frame some Idea and
Conception or other, of whatsoever is in the Nature of things, and has either
an Actual or Possible Existence, from the very Highest to the Lowest. Mind and
Understanding is as it were a Diaphanous and Crystalline Globe, or a kind of
Notional World, which has some Reflex Image, and correspondent Ray, or
Representation in it, to whatsoever is in the True and Real World of Being And
upon this account may it be said, that whatsoever is in its own Nature
Absolutely Inconceivable, is indeed a Nonentity.

But the Former is absolutely denied by us, That Whatsoever is Incomprehensible
is Inconceivable; and therefore when we affirm that God is Incomprehensible,
our meaning is only this, that our Imperfect Minds cannot have such a
Conception of his Nature, as does perfectly Master, Conquer, and Subdue that
Vast Object under it; or at least is so fully Adequate and Commensurate to the
same, as that it does every way Match and Equalize it. Now it does not at all
follow from hence, because God is thus Incomprehensible to our Finite and
Narrow Understandings, that he is utterly Inconceivable by them, so that they
cannot frame any Idea at all of him, and he may therefore be concluded to be a
Nonentity. For it is certain, that we cannot fully Comprehend our Selves, and
that we have not such an Adequate and Comprehensive Knowledge of the Essence of
any Substantial thing, as that we can perfectly Master and Conquer it. It was a
Truth, though abused by the Scepticks, that there is (...), something
Incomprehensible in the Essence of the Lowest Substances. For even Body it
self, which the Atheists think themselves so well acquainted with, because they
can feel it with their fingers, and which is the only Substance that they
acknowledge either in themselves or the Universe, has such puzzling
Difficulties and Entanglements in the Speculation of it, that they can never be
able to extricate themselves from. We might instance also in some Accidental
things, as Time and Motion. Truth is Bigger than our Minds, and we are not the
Same with it, but have a lower Participation only of the Intellectual Nature,
and are rather Apprehenders than Comprehenders thereof. This is indeed One
Badge of our Creaturely State, that we have not a perfectly Comprehensive
Knowledge, or such as is Adequate and Commensurate to the Essences of things;
from whence we ought to be led to this acknowledgment, that there is another
Perfect Mind or Understanding Being above us in the Universe, from which our
Imperfect Minds were derived, and upon which they do depend. Wherefore if we
can have no Idea or Conception of any thing whereof we have not a Full and
Perfect Comprehension, then can we not have an Idea or Conception of the Nature
of any Substance. But though we do not Comprehend all Truth, as if our Mind
were Above it, or Master of it; and cannot Penetrate into, and look quite
thorough the Nature of every thing; yet may Rational Souls frame certain Ideas
and Conceptions, of whatsoever is in the Orb of Being,, proportionate to their
own Nature, and sufficient for their purpose. And though we cannot fully
Comprehend the Deity, nor Exhaust the Infiniteness of its Perfection, yet may
we have an Idea or Conception of a Being Absolutely Perfect, such a one as is,
Nostro modulo conformis, agreeable and proportionate to our Measure and
Scantling; as we may approach near to a Mountain, and touch it with our hands,
though we cannot encompass it all round, and enclasp it within our arms.
Whatsoever is in its own Nature Absolutely Inconceivable, is Nothing; but not
whatsoever is not fully Comprehensible by our Imperfect Understandings.

It is true indeed, that the Deity is more Incomprehensible to us than any
thing else whatsoever, which proceeds from the Fullness of its Being and
Perfection, and from the Transcendency of its Brightness, but for the very same
reason, may it be said also, in some sense, that it is more Knowable and
Conceivable than any thing. As the Sun, though by reason of its Excessive
Splendor, it dazzle our weak sight, yet is it notwithstanding far more Visible
also, than any of the Nebulosae Stellae, the Small Misty Stars. Where there is
more of Light, there is more of Visibility, so where there is more Entity,
Reality, and Perfection, there is there more of Conceptibility and
Cognoscibility; such an Object Filling up the Mind more, and Acting more
strongly upon it. Nevertheless because our Weak and Imperfect Minds are lost in
the Vast Immensity and Redundancy of the Deity, and overcome with its
transcendent Light, and dazeling Brightness, therefore has it to us an
Appearance of Darkness and Incomprehensibility. (...) As the unbounded
Expansion of Light, in the clear transparent Either, has to us the Apparition
of an Azure Obscurity; which yet is not any Absolute thing in it self, but only
Relative to our Sense, and a mere Fancy in us.

The Incomprehensibility of the Deity, is so far from being an Argument against
the Reality of its Existence, as that it is most certain on the contrary, that
were there nothing Incomprehensible to us, who are but contemptible Pieces, and
small Atoms of the Universe; were there no other Being in the world, but what
our Finite and Imperfect Understandings could span or fathom, and encompass
round about, look thorough and thorough, have a commanding view of, and
perfectly Conquer and Subdue under them; then could there be nothing Absolutely
and Infinitely Perfect, that is, no God. For though that of Empedocles be not
true in a Literal Sense, as it seems to have been taken by Aristotle, (...),
etc. That by Earth we see Earth, by Water Water, and by Fire Fire; and
understand every thing by something of the same within our selves; yet is it
certain, that every thing is apprehended by some Internal Congruity in that
which apprehends, which perhaps was the sense intended by that Noble
Philosophic Poet. Wherefore it cannot possibly otherwise be, but that the
Finiteness, Scantness, and Imperfection of our narrow Understandings, must make
them Asymmetral or Incommensurate, to that which is Absolutely and Infinitely
Perfect.

And Nature it self plainly intimates to us, that there is some such Absolutely
Perfect Being, which though not Inconceivable, yet is Incomprehensible to our
Finite Understandings; by certain Passions which it has implanted in us, that
otherwise would want an Object to display themselves upon; namely those, of
Devout Veneration, Adoration, and Admiration, together with a kind of Ecstasie,
and Pleasing Horror; which in the silent Language of Nature, seem to speak
thus much to us, that there is some Object in the World, so much Bigger and
Vaster than our Mind and Thoughts, that it is the very same to them, that the
Ocean is to narrow Vessels, so that when they have taken into themselves as
much as they can thereof by Contemplation, and filled up all their Capacity,
there is still an Immensity of it left without, which cannot enter in for want
of room to receive it, and therefore must be apprehended after some other
strange and more mysterious manner, viz. by their being as it were Plunged into
it, and Swallowed up or Lost in it. To conclude, the Deity is indeed
Incomprehensible to our Finite and Imperfect Understandings, but not
Inconceivable, and therefore there is no Ground at all for this Atheistick
Pretense, to make it a Nonentity.

We come to the Third Atheistick Argumentation; That because Infinity (which
according to Theology is included in the Idea of God, and pervadeth all his
Attributes) is utterly Inconceivable, the Deity it self is therefore an
Impossibility, and Nonentity. To this Sense sound sundry Passages of a Modern
Writer; as, Whatsoever we know, we learn from our Phantasms, but there is no
Phantasm of Infinite, and therefore no Knowledge or Conception of it. Again,
Whatsoever we Imagine is Finite, and therefore there is no Conception or Idea,
of that which we call Infinite. No man can have in his Mind an Image of
Infinite Time, or of Infinite Power. Wherefore the Name of God is used, not to
make us conceive him, but only that we may Honor him. The true Meaning whereof
(as may be plainly gathered from other Passages of the same Writer) is thus to
be Interpreted; That there is nothing of Philosophic Truth and Reality, in the
Idea or Attributes of God; not any other Sense in those Words, but only to
signify, the Veneration and Astonishment of men's own Confounded Minds. And
accordingly the Word Infinite, is declared, to signify nothing at all in that
which is so called, (there being no such thing really existing) but only the
Inability of men's own Minds, together with their Rustic Astonishment and
Admiration. Wherefore when the same Writer determins, that God must not be said
to be Finite; this being no good Courtship nor Complement; and yet the Word
Infinite, signifies nothing in the thing it self, nor has any Conception at
all answering to it; he either does plainly abuse his Reader, or else he leaves
him to make up this Conclusion; That since God is neither Finite nor Infinite,
he is an Inconceivable Nothing. In like manner, another Learned Well-willer to
Atheism, declares, That he who calls any thing Infinite, does but Rei quam
non capit, attribuere nomen quod non intelligit, Attribute an Unintelligible
Name, to a thing Inconceivable; because all Conception is Finite, and it is
impossible to conceive any thing that has no Bounds or Limits. But that which
is mistaken for Infinite, is nothing but a Confused Chaos of the Mind, or an
unshapen Embryo of Thought; when men going on further and further, and making a
Continual Progress, without seeing any End before them, being at length quite
weary and tired out with this their endless Journey, they sit down, and call
the thing by this Hard and Unintelligible Name, Infinite. And from hence does
he also infer; That because we can have no Idea of Infinite, as to signify any
thing in that which is so called; we therefore cannot possibly have, Germanam
Ideam Dei, Any True and Genuine Idea or Notion of God. Of which, they who
understand the Language of Atheists, know very well the meaning to be this;
That there is indeed No such thing; or, That he is a Nonentity.

Now since this Exception against the Idea of God, and consequently his
Existence, is made by our Modern and Neoterick Atheists; we shall in the first
place show, how Contradictious they are herein to their Predecessors, the Old
Philosophic Atheists; and consequently how inconsistent and disagreeing,
Atheists in several Ages have been with one another. For whereas these Modern
Atheists, would have this thought a sufficient Confutation of a Deity, That
there can be Nothing Infinite; it is certain that the Ancient Philosophic
Atheists were so far from being of this Persuasion, that some of them, as
Anaximander expressly, made (...), or Infinite, the Principle of all things;
that is, Infinitely Extended and Eternal Matter, devoid of all Life and
Understanding. For though Melissus his (...) or Infinite, which he made the The
First Principle, was a Most Perfect Being, Eminently containing all things (as
has been already showed) and therefore the True Deity: yet Anaximander's (...)
or Infinite, however called (...) or Divine by him, (it being the only Divinity
which he acknowledged) was nothing but Senseless Matter; an Atheistick Infinite.
Wherefore both Theists and Atheists in those former times, did very well agree
together in this One Point, that there was Something or other Infinite, as the
First Principle of all things; either Infinite Mind, or Infinite Matter; though
this latter Atheistick Infinity of Extended Matter, be indeed repugnant to
Conception, (as shall be proved afterward) there being no True Infinite, but a
Perfect Being, or the Holy Trinity. Furthermore, not only Anaximander, but also
after him, Democritus, and Epicurus, and many others of that Atheistick Gang,
heretofore asserted likewise, a Numerical Infinity of Worlds, and therefore
much more than an Infinity of Atoms, or Particles of Matter. And though this
Numerical Infinity of theirs were also Inconceivable and Impossible; yet does
it sufficiently appear from hence, that these Ancient Philosophic Atheists
were so far from being abhorrent from Infinity, as a Thing Impossible, and a
Nonentity, that they were on the contrary very fond thereof; and therefore
never went about to disprove a Deity, after this manner, Because there can be
Nothing Infinite.

But in the next place, we shall make it manifest, that these Modern Atheists,
do no less contradict plain Reason and their very Selves also, than they do
their Predecessors in that Impiety, when they thus go about to disprove the
Existence of a God; Because there can be Nothing Infinite, neither in Duration,
nor in Power, nor in any other regard. For First, though it should be doubted,
whether there be a God or no, yet must it needs be acknowledged to be as
Indubitable, as any thing in all Geometry, that there was something or other
Infinite in Duration, or Eternal, without Beginning: because, if there had been
once Nothing at all, there could never have been Any thing; that Common Notion
or Principle of Reason, having here an Irresistible Force, That Nothing could
ever come from Nothing. Now if there were never Nothing, but always Something,
then must there of necessity be something Infinite in Duration, and Eternal
without Beginning. Wherefore it cannot be accounted less than Extreme
Sottishness and Stupidity of Mind, in these Modern Atheists, thus to impugn a
Deity, from the Impossibility of Infinite Duration without beginning. But in
the next place, we must confess it seems to us hardly conceivable, that any
Atheist whatsoever, could possibly be so prodigiously Sottish, or so
monstrously infatuated, as really to think; that once there was Nothing at all,
but that afterward Senseless Matter happened, (no body knows how) to come into
Being, from whence all other things were derived. According to which
Hypothesis, it would follow also, that Matter might as well some time or other
happen again, to cease to be, and so all things vanish into Nothing. To
conclude therefore, these Atheists must of necessity be Guilty, of One or Other
of these Two Things; either of Extreme Sottishness and Stupidity, in
acknowledging neither God, nor Matter, nor Any Thing, to have Existed
Infinitely from Eternity without Beginning; or else if they do acknowledge the
Pre-Eternity of Matter, or its Infinite Past-duration without Beginning; then,
of the most Notorious Impudence, in making that an Argument against the
Existence of a God, which themselves acknowledge to Matter.

Nevertheless we shall here readily comply, with these Modern Atheists thus
far, as to grant them these Two following Things; First, that we can have no
Proper and Genuine Phantasm of any Infinite whatsoever, because we never had
Corporeal Sense of any, neither of Infinite Number, nor of Infinite Magnitude,
and therefore much less of Infinite Time or Duration, and of Infinite Power;
these two Latter things, Time and Power, themselves not falling under Corporeal
Sense. Secondly, That as we have no Phantasm of any Infinite, so neither is
Infinity Fully Comprehensible by our humane Understandings, that are but
Finite. But since it is certain even to Mathematical Evidence, That there was
Something Infinite in Duration, or without Beginning, insomuch that no
Intelligent Atheist, upon Mature Consideration will ever venture to contradict
it, we shall from hence extort from th^se Atheists an acknowledgment, of the
Falsness of these Two Theorems of theirs, That whatsoever we have no Phantasm
or Sensible Idea of, as also whatsoever is not Fully Comprehensible by us, is
therefore a pure Nonentity or Nothing: and enforce them to confess, That there
is something Really Existing in Nature, which we have neither any Phantasm of,
nor yet can Fully Comprehend with our Imperfect Understandings.

Nay, we will yet go further in compliance with them and acknowledge likewise,
That as for those Infinities, of Number, of Corporeal Magnitude, and of Time or
Successive Duration, we have not only no Phantasm, nor Full Intellectual
Comprehension of them, but also no manner of Intelligible Idea, Notion or
Conception. For though it be true, that Number be somewhere said by Aristotle
to be Infinite, yet was his meaning there only in such a negative Sense as
this, that we can never possibly come to an End thereof by Addition, but may in
our minds still add Number to Number Infinitely; which is all one as if he
should indeed have affirmed, that there can be no Number Actually and
Positively Infinite, according to Aristotle's own Definition of Infinite
elsewhere given, namely, That to which nothing can be added: no Number being
ever so Great, but that One or More may still be added to it. And as there can
be no Infinite Number, so neither can there be any Infinity of Corporeal
Magnitude; not only because if there were, the parts thereof must needs be
Infinite in Number; but also because, as no Number can be so great, but that
More man be added to it; so neither can any Body or Magnitude be ever so Vast,
but that more Body or Magnitude may be supposed still further and further; this
Addition of Finites, never making up Infinite. Indeed Infinite Space, beyond
the Finite World, is a thing which has been much talked of; and it is by some
supposed to be Infinite Body, but by others to be an Incorporeal Infinite;
through whose Actual Distance notwithstanding (Mensurable by Poles and Miles)
this Finite World might roll and tumble Infinitely. But as we conceive, all
that can be demonstrated here, is no more than this, That how vast soever the
Finite World should be, yet is there a Possibility of more and more Magnitude
and Body, still to be added to it, further and further, by Divine Power,
Infinitely; or that the World could never be made so Great, no not by God
himself, as that his own Omnipotence could not make it yet Greater. Which
Potential Infinity or Indefinite Encreasableness of Corporeal Magnitude, seems
to have been mistaken for an Actual Infinity of Space. Whereas for this very
Reason, because more could be added to the Magnitude of the Corporeal World
Infinitely, or without End; therefore is it Impossible that it should ever be
Positively and Actually Infinite; That is, such as to which nothing more can
Possibly be added. Wherefore we conclude concerning Corporeal Magnitude, as we
did before of Number, that there can be no Absolute and Actual Infinity
thereof; and that how much Vaster soever, the World may be, than according to
the Supposition of Vulgar Astronomers, who make the Starry Sphere the Utmost
Wall thereof, yet is it not Absolutely Infinite, such as Really has No Bounds
or Limits at all; nor to which Nothing more could by Divine Power be added.
Lastly, we affirm likewise concerning Time or Successive Duration, that there
can be no Infinity of that neither, no Temporal Eternity without Beginning: and
that not only because there would then be an Actual Infinity and more than an
Infinity of Number; but also because upon this Supposition, there would always
have been an Infinity of Time Past, and consequently an Infinity of Time Past,
which was never Present. Whereas all the Moments of Past Time, must needs have
been once Present; and if so, then all of them, at least save One, Future too;
from whence it will follow, that there was a First Moment or Beginning of Time.
And thus does Reason conclude, neither the World nor Time it self, to have been
Infinite in their Past Duration, or Eternal without Beginning.

Here will the Atheist think presently, he has got a great advantage to
disprove the Existence of a God, Nonne qui Aeternitatem Mundi sic tollunt,
eadem opera etiam Mundi Conditori Aeternitatem tollunt? Do not they, who thus
destroy the Eternity of the World, at the same time destroy also the Eternity
of the Creator? For if Time it self were not Eternal, then how could the Deity
or any thing be so? The Atheist securely taking it for granted, that God
himself could not be otherwise Eternal, than by a Successive Flux of Infinite
Time. But we say, that this will on the contrary afford us a plain
Demonstration of the Existence of a Deity. For since the World and Time it
self, were not Infinite in their Past-Duration, but had a Beginning, therefore
were they both certainly made together by some other Being, who is in order of
Nature Senior to Time, and so without Time, before Time; he being above that
Successive Flux, and compehending in the Stability and Immutable Perfection of
his own Being, his Yesterday and To day and For ever. Or thus; Something was of
necessity Infinite in Duration, and without Beginning; But neither the World,
nor Motion, nor Time, that is, no Successive Being, was such; therefore is
there something else whose Being and Duration is not Successive and Flowing,
but Permanent; to whom this Infinity belongs. The Atheists here, can only
smile, or make faces; and show their little wit, in quibbling upon Nunc-stans,
or a Standing Now of Eternity; as if that Standing Eternity of the Deity (which
with so much Reason has been contended for, by the Ancient Genuine Theists)
were nothing but a Pitiful Small Moment of Time Standing still; and as if the
Duration of all Beings whatsoever must needs be like our own. Whereas the
Duration of every thing, must of necessity be agreeable to its Nature; and
therefore, As that whose Imperfect Nature is ever Flowing like a River, and
consists in Continual Motion and Changes one after another, must needs have
accordingly a Successive and Flowing Duration, sliding perpetually from Present
into Past, and always posting on toward the Future, expecting Something of it
self, which is not yet in being, but to come: So must that, whose Perfect
Nature, is Essentially Immutable, and always the Same, and Necessarily
Existent, have a Permanent Duration; never losing any thing of it self once
Present, as sliding away from it; nor yet running forwards to meet something of
it self before, which is not yet in being: and it is as Contradictious for it,
ever to have begun, as ever to Cease to be.

Now whereas the Modern Atheists pretend to have proved, that there is Nothing
Infinite, neither in Duration nor otherwise, and consequently No Deity; merely
because we have no Sense nor Phantasm of Infinite, nor can Fully Comprehend the
same; and therefore will needs conclude that the Words, Infinite and Eternal,
signify nothing in the thing it self, but either men's own Ignorance and
Inability to conceive When, or Whether, that which is called Eternal, began;
together with the Confounded Nonsense of their Astonished Minds, and their
Stupid Veneration, of that which their own Fear and Fancy, has raised up as a
Bugbear to themselves; or else the Progress of their Thoughts further and
further backward Indefinitely; (though they plainly confute themselves in all
this, by sometimes acknowledging Matter and Motion Infinite and Eternal, which
argues either their Extreme Sottishness or Impudence.) We have showed with
Mathematical Evidence and Certainty, that there is really something Infinite in
Duration or Eternal, by which therefore cannot be meant, Men's own Ignorance, or
the Confounded Nonsense of their Devotion, nor yet the Idle Progress of their
Minds further and further Indefinitely, which never reaches Infinite; but a
Reality in the thing it self, namely this, that it Never was Not; nor had any
Beginning. Moreover having Demonstrated concerning this Infinity and Eternity,
without Beginning, that it cannot possibly belong to any Successive Being, we
confidently conclude against these Atheists also, that it was not Matter and
Motion, or this Mundane System, but a Perfect Immutable Nature of a Permanent
Duration, (that is, a God) to whom it belonged. To sum up all therefore, we
say that Infinite, and Eternal, are not Words that signify nothing in the
thing it self, nor mere Attributes of Honor, Complement and Flattery, that is,
of Devout and Religious Nonsense, Error and Falsehood, but Attributes belonging
to the Deity, and to that alone, of the most Philosophic Truth and Reality.
And though we being Finite, have no Full Comprehension and Adequate
Understanding of this Infinity and Eternity (as not of the Deity) yet can we
not be without some Notion, Conception and Apprehension thereof, so long as we
can thus demonstrate concerning it, that it belongs to something, and yet to
nothing neither but a Perfect Immutable Nature. But the Notion of this Infinite
Eternity will be yet further cleared in the following Explanation and
Vindication of Infinite Power.

For the Atheists principally quarrel with Infinite Power, or Omnipotence, and
pretend in like manner this to be Utterly Inconceivable, and Impossible, and
Subjected in Nothing. Thus a Modern Atheistick Writer concludes, that since No
man can conceive Infinite Power, this is also but an Attribute of Honor which
the Confounded Nonsense of Astonished Minds, bestows upon the Object of their
Devotion, without any Philosophic Truth and Reality. And here have our Modern
Atheists indeed the Suffrage and Agreement of the ancient Philosophic Atheists
also with them, who as appears from the Verses before cited out of Lucretius,
concerned themselves in nothing more, than asserting All Power to be Finite,
and Omnipotence or Infinite Power to belong to Nothing.

First therefore it is here observable, that this Omnipotence or Infinite Power
asserted by Theists, has been commonly either ignorantly mistaken, or wilfully
misrepresented by these Atheists, out of design to make it seem Impossible and
Ridiculous; as if by it were meant, a Power of Producing and Doing any thing
whatsoever without Exception, though never so Contradictious. As a late
Atheistick Person, seeming to assert this Divine Omnipotence and Infinite
Power, really and designedly notwithstanding abused the same, with this
Scoptick Irony, That God by his Omnipotence, or Infinite Power, could turn this
Tree into a Syllogism. Children indeed have sometimes such childish
apprehensions of the Divine Omnipotence; and Ren. Cartesius, (though otherwise
an Acute Philosopher) was here no less Childish, in affirming, that all things
whatsoever, even the Natures of Good and Evil, and all Truth and Falsehood, do
so depend upon the Arbitrary Will and Power of God, as that if he had pleased,
Twice Two should not have been Four, nor the Three Angles of a Plain Triangle,
Equal to Two Right ones, and the like: he only adding, that all these things
notwithstanding, when they were once settled by the Divine Decree, became
Immutable; that is, I suppose, not in themselves or to God, but unto us. Than
which, no Paradox of any old Philosopher, was ever more Absurd and Irrational:
and certainly if any one did desire, to persuade the World, that Cartesius,
notwithstanding all his pretenses to Demonstrate a Deity, was indeed but an
Hypocritical Theist, or Personated and Disguised Atheist, he could not have a
fairer pretense for it out of all his Writings, than from hence. This being
plainly to destroy the Deity, by making one Attribute thereof, to Devour and
Swallow up another; Infinite Will and Power, Infinite Understanding and Wisdom.
For to suppose God to Understand and to be Wise only by his Will, is all one as
to suppose him, to have Really no Understanding at all. Wherefore we do not
affirm, God to be so Omnipotent or Infinitely Powerful, as that he is able to
Destroy or Change the Intelligible Natures of things at Pleasure; this being
all one, as to say, that God is so Omnipotent and Infinitely Powerful that he
is able to Destroy, or to Baffle and Befool his own Wisdom and Understanding;
which is the very Rule and Measure of his Power. We say not therefore, that God
by his Omnipotence or Infinite Power, could make Twice Two not to be Four, or
turn a Tree into a Syllogism; but we say, that Omnipotence or Infinite Power,
is that which can Produce and Do, all whatsoever is Possible, that is,
whatsoever is Conceivable, and Implies no manner of Contradiction: the very
Essence of Possibility being no other than Conceptibility. And thus has the
Point been stated all along, not only by Christian Theists, but even the
Ancient Pagan Theologers themselves; that Omnipotence or Infinite Power, is
that which can do all things, that do not imply a Contradiction; or which are
not Inconceivable. This appearing from that of Agatho, cited before out of
Aristotle, That nothing is exempted from the Divine Power, but only to make
(...), what has been done, to be Undone; or the like hereunto. Now Infinite
Power, being nothing else, but a Power of Doing whatsoever is Conceivable, it
is plainly Absurd to say; That a Power of doing nothing but what is
Conceivable, is Inconceivable.

But because the Atheists look upon Infinity, as such a Desperate and
Affrightful thing; we shall here render it something more easy, and take off
that Frightful Vizard from it, which makes it seem such a Mormo or Bugbear to
them; by declaring in the next place, that Infinity, is Really nothing else but
Perfection. For Infinite Understanding and Knowledge, is nothing else but
Perfect Knowledge, that which has no Defect or Mixture of Ignorance with it;
or the Knowledge of whatsoever is Knowable. So in like manner, Infinite Power
is nothing else but Perfect Power, that which has no Defect or Mixture of
Impotency in it; a Power of Producing and Doing all whatsoever is Possible;
that is, whatsoever is Conceivable. Infinite Power can Do, whatsoever Infinite
Understanding can Conceive, and nothing else: Conception being the Measure of
Power and its Extent, and whatsoever is in it self Inconceivable, being
therefore Impossible. Lastly Infinity of Duration or Eternity, is Really
nothing else, but Perfection, as including Necessary Existence and Immutability
in it. So that it is not only Contradictious to such a Being, to Cease to Be,
or Exist; but also to have had a Newness or Beginning of Being; or to have any
Flux or Change therein, by Dying to the Present, and acquiring something New to
it self which was not before. Notwithstanding which, this Being comprehends the
differences of Past, Present, and Future, or the Successive Priority and
Posteriority of all Temporary Things. And because Infinity is Perfection,
therefore can nothing which includes any thing of Imperfection, in the very
Idea and Essence of it, be ever Truly and Properly Infinite; as Number,
Corporeal Magnitude, and Successive Duration. All which can only, Mentiri
Infinitatem, Counterfeit and Imitate Infinity, in their having more and more
added to them Infinitely, whereby notwithstanding they never reach it or
overtake it. There is nothing truly Infinite, neither in Knowledge, nor in
Power, nor in Duration, but only One Absolutely Perfect Being or The Holy
Trinity.

Now, that we have an Idea or Conception of Perfection, or a Perfect Being; is
Evident, from the Notion that we have, of Imperfection so familiar to us:
Perfection being the Rule and Measure of Imperfection, and not Imperfection of
Perfection; as a Straight Line, is the Rule and Measure of a Crooked, and not a
Crooked Line of a Straight. So that Perfection is First Conceiveable, in order
of nature, before Imperfection, as Light before Darkness, a Positive before the
Privative or Defect. For Perfection is not properly the want of Imperfection,
but Imperfection of Perfection. Moreover, we perceive diverse Degrees of
Perfection, in the Essences of things, and consequently a Scale or Ladder of
Perfections, in Nature, one above another, as of Living and Animate Things,
above Senseless and Inanimate; of Rational things above Sensitive. And this by
Reason of that Notion or Idea, which we first have, of that which is Absolutely
Perfect; as the Standard; by comparing of things with which, and measuring of
them, we take notice of their approaching more or less near thereunto. Nor
indeed, could these Gradual Ascents, be Infinite, or Without End; but they must
come at last, to that which is Absolutely Perfect, as the Top of them all.
Lastly, we could not perceive Imperfection, in the most Perfect of all those
things which we ever had Sense or Experience of in our lives, had we not a
Notion or Idea of That which is Absolutely Perfect, which secretly comparing
the same with, we perceive it to come short thereof. And we might add here,
that it is not Conceiveable neither, how there should be any Lesser Perfection,
Existent in any Kind, were there not First something Perfect in that Kind, from
whence it was derived. This of Boethius, being the very Sense and Language of
Nature in Rational Beings; Omne quod Imperfectum esse dicitur, id deminutione
Perfecti Imperfectum esse perhibetur. Quo fit, ut si in quolibet genere
Imperfectum quid esse videatur, in eo Perfectum quoque aliquid esse, necesse
sit. Etenim sublata Perfectione, unde illud, quod Imperfectum perhibetur,
exstiterit, ne fingi quidem potest. Neque enim a Diminutis Inconsummatisque,
Natura Rerum cepit exordum; sed ab Integris Absolutisque procedens, in haec
extrema, atque effaeta dilabitur. Whatsoever is said to be Imperfect, is
accounted such, by the Diminution of that which is Perfect, From whence it
comes to pass, that if in any kind, any thing appear Imperfect, there must of
Necessity be something also, in that Kind, Perfect. For Perfection being once
taken away, it could not be imagined, from whence that which is accounted
Imperfect, should have proceeded. Nor did the Nature of things, take beginning,
from Inconsummate and Imperfect things, but proceedings from things Absolute
and Complete, thence descend down to these lower, Effete, and Languid things.
But of this more elsewhere.

Wherefore since Infinite, is the same with Absolutely Perfect, we having a
Notion or Idea of the Latter, must needs have of the Former. From whence we
learn also, that though the word Infinite, be in the form thereof, Negative,
yet is the Sense of it, in those things which are really capable of the same,
Positive; it being all one with Absolutely Perfect: as likewise the Sense of
the word Finite, is Negative; it being the same with Imperfect. So that, Finite
is properly the Negation of Infinite, as that which in order of Nature is
before it; and not Infinite the Negation of Finite. However in those things
which are capable of no true Infinity, because they are Essentially Finite, as
Number, Corporeal Magnitude, and Time, Infinity being there a mere Imaginary
thing, and a Nonentity, it can only be conceived, by the Negation of Finite;
as we also conceive Nothing, by the Negation of Something; that is, we can have
no Positive Conception at all thereof.

We conclude, To assert an Infinite Being, is nothing else but to assert a
Being Absolutely Perfect, such as Never was Not, or had no Beginning, which
could produce all things Possible and Conceivable, and upon which all other
things must depend. And this is to assert a God; One Absolutely Perfect Being,
the Original of all things. God, and Infinite, and Absolutely Perfect, being
but different Names for One and the same thing.

We come now to the Fourth Atheistick Objection, That Theology is nothing but
an Arbitrarious Compilement of Inconsistent and Contradictious Notions. Where
First, we deny not, but that as some Theologers (or Bigotical Religionists) or
later times, extend the Divine Omnipotence, to things Contradictious and
Impossible, as to the Making of One and the same Body, to be all of it, in
several distant places at once: so may others sometimes unskilfully attribute
to the Deity, things Inconsistent or Contradictious to one another, because
seeming to them to be all Perfections. As for example, though it be concluded
generally by Theologers, that there is a Natural Justice and Sanctity in the
Deity, yet do some notwithstanding contend, That the Will of God is not
determined by any Antecedent Rule or Nature of Justice, but that whatsoever he
could be supposed to Will Arbitrarily, would therefore be Ipso facto Just;
which is called by them the Divine Sovereignty, and looked upon as a Great
Perfection. Though it be certain that these Two Things are directly
Contradictious to one another; viz. That there is something (...), in its own
Nature Just and Unjust, or a Natural Sanctity in God; and That the Arbitrary
Will and Command of the Deity, is the only Rule of Justice and Injustice. Again
some Theologers determining, That Whatsoever is in God, is God, or Essential to
the Deity; they conceiving such an Immutability to be a Necessary Perfection
thereof, seem thereby not only to Contradict all Liberty of Will in the Deity,
which themselves notwithstanding contend for in a high degree; that all things
are Arbitrarily determined by Divine Decree; but also to take away from it, all
Power of Acting ad Extra, and of Perceiving or Animadverting things done
sucessively here in the World. But it will not follow from these and the like
Contradictions, of mistaken Theologers, that therefore Theology it self is
Contradictious, and has nothing of Philosophic Truth at all in it; no more
than because Philosophers also hold Contradictory Opinions, that therefore
Philosophy it self is Contradictious, and that there is Nothing Absolutely True
or False, but (according to the Protagorean Doctrine) all Seeming and
Fantastical.

But in the next place we add, that though it be true, that the Nature of
things, admits of nothing Contradictious, and that whatsoever plainly Implies a
Contradiction, must therefore of necessity be a Nonentity, yet is this Rule
notwithstanding, obnoxious to be much abused, when whatsoever men's Shallow and
Gross Understandings cannot Reach to, they will therefore presently conclude to
be Contradictious, and Impossible. As for example, the Atheists and
Materialists cannot Conceive of any other Substance besides Body, and therefore
do they determine presently, that Incorporeal Substance is a Contradiction in
the very Terms; it being as much as to say Incorporeal Body; wherefore when God
is said by Theologers, to be an Incorporeal Substance, this is to them an
Absolute Impossibility. Thus a Modern Writer; The Universe, that is, the whole
Mass of all things, is Corporeal; that is to say, Body. Now every Part of Body
is Body, and Consequently every Part of the Universe is Body; and that which is
not Body is no part thereof. And because the Universe is All, that which is no
part of it, is nothing. Therefore when Spirits are called Incorporeal, this is
only a name of Honor, and it may with more Piety be attributed to God himself,
in whom we consider, not what Attribute best expresses his Nature which is
Incomprehensible; But what best expresses our Desire to Honor him. Where,
Incorporeal, is said to be, an Attribute of Honor, that is, such an Attribute,
as expresses only the Veneration of men's Minds, but signifies nothing in
Nature, nor has any Philosophic Truth and Reality under it: a Substance
Incorporeal being as Contradictious, as Something and Nothing. Notwithstanding
which, this Contradiction is only in the Weakness and Childishness of these
men's Understandings, and not the thing it self; it being Demonstrable, that
there is some other Substance besides Body, according to the True and Genuine
Notion of it. But because, this mistake is not proper to Atheists only, there
being some Theists also, who labor under this same Infirmity of Mind, not to
be able to Conceive any other Substance besides Body, and who therefore assert
a Corporeal Deity: we shall in the next place show, from a passage of a Modern
Writer, what kind of Contradictions they are, which these Atheists impute to
all Theology; namely such as these, that it supposes God, to Perceive things
Sensible, without any Organs of Sense; and to Understand and be Wise without
any Brains. Pious men (says he) attribute to God Almighty for Honors sake,
whatsoever they see Honorable in the world, as Seeing, Hearing, Willing,
Knowing, Justice, Wisdom, etc. But they deny him such poor things, as Eyes,
Ears and Brains, and other Organs, without which we Worms, neither have, nor
can conceive, such Faculties to Be; and so far they do well. But when they
dispute of God's Actions Philosophically, then do they Consider them again, as
if He had indeed such Faculties. This is not well, and thence is it, that they
fall into so many Difficulties. We ought not to dispute of God's Nature. He is
no fit Subject of our Philosophy. True Religion consists in Obedience to
Christ's Lieutenants, and in giving God such Honor, both in Attributes and
Actions, as they in their several Lieutenancies shall ordain. Where the plain
and Vndisguised meaning of the Author seems to be this; That God is no Subject
of Philosophy, as all Real things are: (accordingly as he declares elsewhere,
that Religio non est Philosophia sed Lex, Religion is not a Matter of
Philosophy, but only of Law and Arbitrary Constitution) He having no Real
Nature of his own, nor being any True Inhabitant of the World or Heaven, but
(as all other Ghosts and Spirits) an Inhabitant of men's Brains only, that is, a
Figment of their Fear and Fancy, or a mere Political Scarecrow. And therefore
such Attributes are to be given to him, without any Scrupulosity, as the Civil
Law of every Country shall appoint, and no other. The Wise and Nasute, very
well understanding, that all this Business of Religion, is nothing but mere
Pageantry, and that the Attributes of the Deity, indeed signify neither True
nor False nor any thing in Nature, but only men's Reverence and Devotion toward
the Object of their Fear: the manner of expressing which, is determined by
Civil Law. Wherefore to say, that God sees all Things, and yet has no Eyes;
and that he hears all things, and yet has no Ears; and that he Understands and
is Wise, and yet has no Brains; and whatsoever else you will please to say of
him, as Attributes of Honor and only as signifying Devotion, is thus far well
enough. But when men, not understanding the true Cabal, will needs go further,
they mistaking Attributes of Honor, for Attributes of Nature and of
Philosophic Truth, and making them Premises to infer Absolute Truth, and
convince Falsehood from, or Matters to Dispute and Reason upon, that is, when
they will needs suppose such a thing as a God, Really to Exist in the World,
then do they involve themselves in all manner of Contradiction, Nonsense, and
Absurdity; as for example, to affirm seriously, that this God Really sees all
things in the world, and yet has no Eyes; and that He indeed hears all things,
and yet has no Ears; and Lastly that he Understands and is Wise, and yet has
no Brains, which things are all Absolutely Contradictious, Unconceivable and
Impossible. The sum of all is this, that when Religion and Theology, which is
indeed nothing but Law and Phantastry, is made Philosophy, then is it all mere
Jargon and Insignificant Nonsense. And now we see, what those Contradictions
are, which the Atheists charge upon Theology; such as owe all their Being, only
to the Grossness, Sottishness, and Brutishness, of these men's own
apprehensions. From whence proceeds likewise, this following Definition of
Knowledge and Understanding, That it is nothing but a Tumult of the Mind,
raised by External Things, Pressing the Organical Parts of man's Body. O Ye
Brutish among the People, when will ye Understand? and ye Fools, when will ye
be Wise? He that Planted the Ear (and gave man's Soul a power of hearing
thereby) shall not He (though himself have no Ears) hear? He that formed the
Eye, (and gave the Humane Soul a power of Seeing, by it as an Instrument) shall
not he (though himself have no Eyes) see? Lastly, He that teaches man
Knowledge, (or gave him an Understanding Mind, besides Brains) shall not he
(though himself be without Brains) Know and Understand?

It is certain, that no Simple Idea, as that of a Triangle or a Square, of a
Cube or Sphere, can possibly be Contradictious to it self; and therefore much
less can the Idea of a Perfect Being (which is the Compendious Idea of God) it
being more Simple, than any of the other. Indeed this Simple Idea of a Perfect
Being, is Pregnant of many Attributes, and therefore the Idea of God, more
fully declared by them all, may seem to be in this respect a Compounded Idea,
or One Idea and Conception, Consisting or made up of Many; which if they were
really Contradictious, would render the whole, a Nonentity. As for Example,
This, A Plain Triangle, whose Three Angles are Greater than Two Right ones; it
being Contradictious and Unconceivable, is therefore no True Idea, but a
Non-Entitie. But all the Genuine Attributes of the Deity, of which its Entire
Idea is made up, are Things as Demonstrable of a Perfect Being, as the
Properties of a Triangle or a Square are of those Ideas respectively, and
therefore cannot they Possibly be Contradictious, neither to it, nor to one
another; because those things which agree in one Third, must needs agree
together amongst themselves.

Nay the Genuine Attributes of the Deity, namely, such as are Demonstrable of
an Absolutely Perfect Being, are not only not Contradictious; but also
necessarily Connected together, and Inseparable from one another. For there
could not possibly be, One Thing Infinite in Wisdom Only, Another Thing
Infinite Only in Power, and Another thing Only Infinite in Duration or Eternal.
But the very same thing which is Infinite in Wisdom, must needs be also
Infinite in Power, and Infinite in Duration, and so vice versa. That which is
Infinite in any one Perfection, must of necessity, have all Perfections in it.
Thus are all the Genuine Attributes of the Deity, not only not Contradictious,
but also Inseparably Concatenate; and the Idea of God no Congeries either of
Disagreeing things; or else of such as are unnecessarily Connected with one
another.

In very truth, all the several Attributes of the Deity, are nothing else but
so many Partial and Inadequate Conceptions, of One and the Same, Simple Perfect
Being, taken in as it were by piecemeal: by reason of the Imperfection of our
Humane Understandings, which could not fully Conceive it all together at once:
And therefore are they Really all but One thing, though they have the
Appearance of Multiplicity to us. As the One Simple Light of the Sun, diversely
Refracted and Reflected from a Rorid Cloud, has to us the Appearance, of the
variegated Colors of the Rainbow.

Wherefore the Attributes of God, are no Bundle of Vnconceivables, and
Impossibles, huddled up together; nor Attributes of Honor and Complement only,
and nothing but the Religious Nonsense of Astonished Minds, expressing their
Devotion toward what they Fear; but all of them Attributes of Nature, and of
most severe Philosophic Truth. Neither is the Idea of God, an Arbitrarious
Compilement, of things Unnecessarily Connected, and Separable from one another:
it is no Factitious nor Fictitious thing, made up by any Feigning Power of the
Soul, but it is a Natural and most Simple Uncompounded Idea; such as to which
nothing can be Arbitrariously added, nor nothing detracted from.
Notwithstanding which, by reason of the Imperfection of humane Minds there may
be, and are, different Apprehensions concerning it For as every one that has a
Conception of a Plain Triangle in general, does not therefore know, that it
includes this Property in it, to have Three Angles Equal to Two Right ones; nor
does every one, who has an Idea of a Rectangular Triangle, presently
understand, that the Square of the Substense, is Equal to the Squares of both
the Sides; so neither does every one, who has a Conception of a Perfect Being,
therefore presently know all that is included in that Idea. Moreover men may
easily mistake things, for Absolute Perfections, which are not such, as has
been partly already showed.

And now whereas the Atheists, pretend in the next place, to give an Account of
that Supposed Contradictiousness, in the Idea and Attributes of God; namely,
that it proceeded principally, from Fear, or the Confounded Nonsense of men's
Astonished Minds, huddling up together all Imaginable Attributes of Honor,
Courtship, and Complement without any Philosophic Truth, Sense, or
Signification: as also in part from the Fiction and Imposture of Politicians:
all this has been already prevented, and the Foundation thereof quite taken
away, by our showing, that there is nothing in the Genuine Idea of God and his
Attributes, but what is Demostrable of a Perfect Being, and that there cannot
be the least either Added to that Idea, or Detracted from it, any more than
there can be any thing Added to, or Detracted from the Idea of a Triangle or of
a Square. From whence it follows unavoidably, that there cannot possibly be any
thing, either Contradictious or Arbitrarious in the Divine Idea, and that the
Genuine Attributes thereof, are Attributes of Necessary Philosophic Truth:
namely, such as do not only speak the Piety, Devotion, and Reverence of men's
own Minds; but declare the Real Nature of the thing it self. Wherefore when a
Modern Atheistick Writer, affirms of all those who Reason and conclude
concerning God's Nature, from his Attributes; That Losing their Understanding
in the very first attempt, they fall from one Inconvenience (or Absurdity) to
another without end, after the same manner as when one ignorant of
Court-ceremonies, coming into the presence of a greater person than he was wont
to speak to, and stumbling at his entrance, to save himself from falling lets
slip his Cloak, to recover his Cloak, lets fall his Hat, and so with one
disorder after another, discovers his Rusticity and Astonishment: We say, that
though there be something of Wit and Fancy in this, yet as it is applied to
Theology and the Genuine Attributes of the Deity, there is not the least of
Philosophic Truth. However we deny not, but that some, either out of
Superstition, or else out of Flattery, (for thus are they styled by St. Jerome,
Stulti Adulatores Dei, Foolish Flatterers of God Almighty) have sometimes
attributed such things to him, as are Incongruous to his Nature, and under a
pretense of Honoring him, by Magnifying his Power and Sovereignty, do indeed
most highly Dishonor him; they representing him to be such a Being, as is no
way Amiable or Desirable.

But the Atheists are most of all concerned, to give an Account of that
Unquestionable Phenomenon, the General Persuasion of the Existence of a God, in
the Minds of men, and their Prop^nsity to Religion, in all ages and places of
the world; whence this should come, if there be really no such thing in Nature.
And this they think to do, in the Last place also, Partly, from men's Own Fear,
together with their Ignorance of Causes, and Partly, from the Fiction of
Lawmakers and Politicians, they endeavoring thereby to keep men to Civil
Subjection under them. Where we shall First plainly and Nakedly d^clare the
Atheists meaning, and then manifest the Invalidity and Foolery of these their
Pretenses, to salve the forementioned Phenomenon.

First therefore, these Atheists affirm, That mankind by reason of their
Natural Imbecility, are in perpetual Solicitude, Anxiety, and Fear, concerning
Future Events, or their Good and Evil Fortune to come; and this Passion of Fear
inclining men to Imagine things Formidable and Fearful, and to Suspect or
Believe the Existence of what really is not; I say, that this Distrustful Fear
and Jealousy in the Minds of men, concerning their Future Condition, raises up
to them the Phantasm, of a most Affrightful Spectre, an Invisible Understanding
Being, Arbitrarily Governing and Swaying the affairs of the whole World, and at
pleasure Tyrannizing over Mankind. And when men's Exorbitant Fear and Fancy, has
thus raised up to it self, such a Mormo or Bugbear, such an Affrightful Spectre
as this, a thing that is really no Inhabitant of the World or of Heaven, but
only of men's Brains; they afterward stand in awe of this their Own Imagination,
and Tremblingly worship this Creature and Figment of their own Fear and Fancy,
as a thing Really Existing without them, or a God: devising all manner of
expressions of Honor and Reverence toward it, and anxiously endeavoring, by
all ways conceivable, to Propitiate and Atone the same. And thus have they
brought upon themselves, a most heavy Yoke of Bondage, and filled their Lives
with all manner of Bitterness and Misery.

Again to this Fear of Future Events, the Atheists add also Ignorance of
Causes, as a further Account of this Phenomenon of Religion, so generally
entertained in the world. For Mankind (say they) are Naturally Inquisitive into
the Causes of things, and that not only of the Events of their Own Good and
Evil Fortune, but also of the Phenomenon of the World, and the Effects of
Nature. And such is their Curiosity, that wheresoever they can discover no
Visible and Natural Causes, there are they prone to Feign and Imagine, other
Causes Invisible and Supernatural. As it was observed of the Tragic
Dramatists, that whenever they could not well extricate themselves, they were
wont to bring in a God upon the Stage: and as Aristotle records of
Anaxagoras, that he never betook himself to Mind or Understanding, that is, to
God, for a Cause; but only then when he was at a loss for other Natural and
Necessary Causes. From whence these Atheists would infer, that nothing but
Ignorance of Causes, made Anaxagoras to assert a Deity. Wherefore it is no
wonder (say they) if the Generality of Mankind, being Ignorant of the Causes,
almost of all Events, and Effects of Nature, have by reason of their Natural
Curiosity and Fear Feigned or Introduced, one Invisible Power or Agent
Omnipotent, as the Supreme Cause of all things: they betaking themselves
thereto, as to a kind of Refuge, Asylum, or Sanctuary for their Ignorance.

These two Accounts of the Phenomenon of Religion, from men's Fear and
Solicitude about Future Events, and from their Ignorance of Causes, together
with their Curiosity, are thus joined together by a Modern Writer; Perpetual
fear of Future Evils, always accompanying mankind, in the Ignorance of Causes,
as it were in the Dark, must needs have for Object Something. And therefore
when there is nothing to be seen, there is nothing to accuse for their Evil
Fortune, but some Power or Agent Invisible. Moreover it is concluded, that from
the same Originals, sprang, not only that vulgar opinion of Inferior Ghosts
and Spirits also, subservient to the Supreme Deity (as the Great Ghost of the
whole World) (Apparitions being nothing but men's own Dreams and Phancies taken
by them for Sensations) but also men's taking things Casual for Prognostics,
and their being so Superstitiously addicted to Omens and Portents, Oracles, and
Divinations and Prophecies; this proceeding likewise, from the same Fantastic
Supposition, that the things of the World, are disposed of, not by Nature, but
by some Understanding and Intending Agent or Person.

But lest these Two forementioned Accounts, of that Phenomenon of Religion,
and the Belief of a Deity, so Epidemical to Mankind, should yet seem
insufficient; the Atheists will superadd a Third to them, from the Fiction and
Imposture of Civil Sovereigns, Crafty Lawmakers and Designing Politicians. Who
perceiving a great advantage to be made, from the Belief of a God and Religion,
for the better keeping of men in Obedience and Subjection to themselves, and in
Peace and Civil Society with one another (when they are persuaded, that besides
the Punishments appointed by Laws, which can only take place upon open and
convicted Transgressors, and are often eluded and avoided, there are other
Punishments that will be inflicted even upon the secret violators of them, both
in this Life and after Death, by a Divine, Invisible and Irresistible Hand)
have thereupon Dexterously laid hold of men's Fear and Ignorance, and cherished
those Seeds of Religion in them (being the Infirmities of their Nature) and
further confirmed their Belief of Ghosts and Spirits, Miracles and Prodigies,
Oracles and Divinations, by Tales or Fables, publicly allowed and recommended.
According to that Definition of Religion, given by a Modern Writer, Fear of
Power Invisible, Feigned by the Mind, or Imagined from Tales publicly allowed,
Religion; not allowed, Superstition. And that Religion thus Nursed up by
Politicians, might be every way Compliant with, and Obsequious to their
Designs, and no way Refractory to the same; it has been their great care to
persuade the People, that their Laws were not merely their own Inventions, but
that themselves were only the Interpreters of the Gods therein, and that the
same things were really displeasing to the Gods, which were forbidden by them:
God ruling over the world no otherwise than in them, as his Vicegerents;
according to that Assertion of a Late Writer, Deum nullum Regnum in homines
habere, nisi per eos qui Imperium tenent, Tract. Theol. Pelit.
that God Reigns over men, only in the Civil Sovereigns. This is therefore
another Atheistick Account of Religions so generally prevailing in the world,
from its being a fit Engine of State, and Politicians generally looking upon
it, as an Arcanum Imperii, a Mystery of Government, to possess the Minds of the
People with the Belief of a God, and to keep them busily employed in the
exercises of Religion, thereby to render them the more Tame and Gentle; apt to
Obedience, Subjection, Peace and Civil Society.

Neither is all this, the mere Invention of Modern Atheists, but indeed the old
Atheistick Cabal; as may appear partly, from that known Passage of the Poet,
That the Gods were first made by Fear; and from Lucretius his so fequently
insisting upon the same, according to the mind of Epicurus. For in his First
Book, he makes Terrorem animi, and Tenebras, Terror of Mind, and Darkness, the
Chief Causes of Theism: and in his Sixth, he further pursues the same Grounds,
especially the Latter of them, after this manner; Lamb. 528.
Caetera quae fieri in Terris Coeloque tuentur,
Mortales, pavidis quom pendent mentibu' saepe,
Efficient animos humiles formidine Divum:
Depressosque premunt ad terram, propterea quod
IGNORANTIA CAVSARVM, confer Deorum
Cogit ad Imperium res; and concedere Regnum, and,
Quorum operum causas nulla ratione videre
Possunt, haec fieri Divino Numine rentur.
To this Sense. Mortals, when with Trembling Minds they behold the Objects both
of Heaven and Earth, they become depressed and sunk down under the Fear of the
Gods. Ignorance of Causes setting up the Reign and Empire of the Gods. For when
men can find no Natural Causes of these things, they suppose them presently, to
have been done by a Divine Power.

And this Ignorance of Causes, is also elsewhere insisted upon by the same
Poet, as the chief Source of Religion, or the Belief of a God. Lib. 5. Lamb. p.
500.


Praeterea coeli rations ordine certo,
Et varia annorum cernebant tempora verti;
Nec poterant quibus id fieret cognoscere causis.
Ergo PERFVGIVM sibi habebant, omnia Divis
Tradere, and ipsorum nutu facere omnia flecti.
Moreover when a Modern Writer, declares the Opinion of Ghosts, to be one of
those things, in which consists the Natural Seeds of Religion: As also that
this Opinion proceeds from the Ignorance how to distinguish Dreams and other
strong Phancies, from Vision and Sense; he seems herein to have trod likewise
in the Footsteps of Lucretius, giving not obscurely, the same Account of
Religion in his Fifth Book. Nunc quae causa Deum per magnas Numina gentes,
Pervolgarit, and ararum compleverit Vrbes, etc.
Non ita difficile est rationem reddere Verbis.
Quippe etenim jam tum Divum mortalia Secla,
Egregias animo facies vigilante videbant,
Et magis in Somnis, mirando corporis auctu.
His igitur Sensum tribuebant, etc.
That is, How the Noise of the Gods, came thus to ring over the whole world,
and to fill all places with Temples and Altars, is not a thing very difficult
to give an account of, it proceeding first, from men's Fearful Dreams, and their
Phantasms when awake; taken by them for Visions and Sensations. Whereupon they
attributed not only Sense to these things as really Existing, but also
Immortality and great Power. For though this were properly an Account only, of
those Inferior and Plebeian Gods, called Demons and Genii, yet was it
supposed, that the belief of these things, did easily dispose the minds of men
also, to the Persuasion of One Supreme Omnipotent Deity over all.

Lastly, That the Ancient Atheists, as well as the Modern, pretended, the
Opinion of a God, and Religion, to have been a Political Invention, is
frequently declared in the writings of the Pagans; as in this of Cicero, Ii qui
dixerunt totam de Diis Immortalibus Opinionem, sictam esse ab hominibus
Sapientibus, Reipublicae causa, ut quos Ratio non posset, eos ad Officium
Religio duceret; nonne omnem Religionem sunditus sustulerunt? They who affirmed
the whole opinion of the Gods, to have been feigned by wise men for the sake of
the Commonwealth, that so Religion might engage those to their Duty whom Reason
could not; did they not utterly destroy all Religion? And the sense of the
Ancicient Atheists is thus represented by Plato; (...)^ De Leg. L. 10.
They First of all affirm, that the Gods are not by Nature, but by Art and Laws
only, and that from thence it comes to pass, that they are different to
different Nations and Countries, accordingly as the several humors of their
Lawmakers did chance to determine. And before Plato, Critias one of the Thirty
Tyrants of Athens, plainly declared Religion at first to have been a Political
Intrigue in those Verses of his recorded by Sextus the Philosopher, beginning
to this purpose; That there was a time at first, when men's life was Disorderly
and Brutish, and the Will of the Stronger was the only Law. After which they
consented and agreed together to make Civil Laws; that so the disorderly might
be punished. Notwithstanding which, it was still found that men were only
hindered from open, but not from secret Injustices. Whereupon some Sagacious and
Witty person was the Author of a further Invention, to deterr men as well from
secret, as from open Injuries; (...)^
(...),
(...)^
(...),
(...).
Namely, by introducing or feigning a God Immortal and Incorruptible, who hears
and sees and takes notice of all things. Critias then concluding his Poem in
these words, (...)
(...).
And in this manner do I conceive, some One at first, to have persuaded mortals
to believe, that there is a kind of Gods.

Thus have we fully declared, the sense of the Atheists, in their Account of
the Phenomenon of Religion and the Belief of a God; namely, that they derive it
principally from these Three Springs or Originals; First from men's own Fear and
Solicitude concerning Future Events, or their Good and Evil Fortune. Secondly,
from their Ignorance of the Causes both of those Events, and the Phenomenon of
Nature; together with their Curiosity. And Lastly, from the Fiction of Civil
Sovereigns, Lawmakers, and Politicians. The Weakness and Foolery of all which,
we shall now briefly manifest. First therefore, it is certain, that such an
Excess of Fear, as makes any one constantly and obstinately to believe, the
Existence of That, which there is no manner of ground neither from Sense not
Reason for; tending also to the great Disquiet of men's own Lives, and the
Terror of their Minds; cannot be accounted other than a kind of Crazedness or
Distraction. Wherefore the Atheists themselves acknowledging, the Generality of
mankind, to be possessed with such a Belief of a Deity, when they resolve this
into such an Excess of Fear; it is all one, as if they should affirm, the
Generality of mankind, to be Frighted out of their Wits, or Crazed and
Distempered in their Brains: none but a few Atheists, who being undaunted and
undismaied have escaped this Panick Terror, remaining Sober and in their Right
Senses. But whereas the Atheists, thus impute to the Generality of mankind not
only Light-Minded Credulity, and Phantastry, but also such an Excess of Fear,
as differs nothing at all from Crazedness and Distraction or Madness; We affirm
on the contrary, that their supposed Courage, Stayedness and Sobriety, is
really nothing else but the Dull and Sottish Stupidity of their minds; Dead and
Heavy Incredulity, and Earthly Diffidence or Distrust; by reason whereof, they
will believe nothing but what they can Feel or See.

Theists indeed have a Religious Fear of God, which is Consequent from him, or
their Belief of him (of which more afterward;) but the Deity it self or the
Belief thereof, was not Created by any Antecedent Fear, that is, by Fear
concerning Men's Good and Evil Fortune; it being certain, that none are less
Solicitous concerning such Events, that they who are most truly Religious. The
Reason whereof is, because these place their Chief Good, in nothing that is
(...), Aliene or in Another Power, and Exposed to the strokes of Fortune; but
in that which is most truly their Own, namely the Right use of their own Will.
As the Atheists on the contrary, must needs for this very reason be liable to
great Fears and Solicitudes, concerning Outward Events, because they place
their Good and Evil, in the (...), the Passion of Pleasure and Pain; or at
least denying Natural Honesty, they acknowledge no other Good, but what belongs
to the Animal Life only, and so is under the Empire of Fortune. And that the
Atheists are indeed generally, Timorous and Fearful, Suspicious and Distrustful
things; seems to appear plainly, from their building all their Politics, Civil
Societies, and Justice, (improperly so called) upon that only Foundation of
Fe^r and Distrust.

But the Grand Error of the Atheists here is this, that they suppose the
Deity, according to the sense of the Generality of mankind, to be nothing but a
Mormo, Bugbear, or Terriculum; an Affrightful, Hurtful, and most Vndesirable
thing: Whereas men every where invoke the Deity in their Straits and
Difficulties for aid and assistance; looking upon it as Exorable and Plaeable;
and by their Trust and Confidence in it, acknowledge its Goodness and
Benignity. De Regno p ^.
Synesius affirms, that though men were otherwise much divided in their
opinions, yet (...), They all every where, both Wise and Unwise, agree in this,
that God is to be praised, as one who is Good and Benign.

If amongst the Pagans, there were any, who understood that Proverbial Speech,
(...) in the worst sense, as if God Almighty, were of an Envious and Spiteful
Nature, these were certainly, but a few Ill-natured men, who therefore drew a
Picture of the Deity, according to their own Likeness. For the Proverb in that
sense, was disclaimed and cried down, by all the wiser Pagans; as Aristotle,
who affirmed the Poets to have lied in this, Metaph. L. ^: c. 2. (...) c. de
Herod. Malign.
as well as they did in many other things; and Plutarch, who taxes Herodotus
for insinuating, (...), The Deity universally (that is, All the Gods) to be of
an Envious and Vexatious or Spiteful disposition, whereas Himself appropriated
this only to that Evil Demon or Principle asserted by him; as appears from
the Life of P. Aemilius written by him, where he affirms, not that (...), The
Deity Universally was of an Envious Nature, but, That there is a Certain Deity
or Demon, whose proper task it is, to bring down all great and overswelling
humane Prosperity, and so to temper every man's Life, that none may be happy in
this world sincerely and unmixedly, without a check of Adversity; which is as
if a Christian, should ascribe it to the Devil. And Plato plainly declares the
reason of God's making the World at first, to have been no other than this,
(...), because he was Good, and there is no manner of Envy in that which is
Good. From whence he also concluded, (...), That God therefore willed, all
things should be made the most like himself, that is, after the best manner.
But the true meaning of that Ill-languaged Proverb, seems at first, to have
been no other, than what, besides Hesiod, the Scripture it self also attributes
to God almighty, that he affects to Humble and Abase the Pride of men, and to
pull down all High, Towering, and Lofty things, whether as Noxious and Hurtful
to the men themselves, or as in some sense Invidious to him, and Derogatory
from his Honor, who alone ought to be exalted, and no flesh to glory before
him. And there has been so much experience of such a thing as this in the
world, that the Epicurean Poet himself, could not but confess, that there was
some Hidden Force or Power which seemed to have a spite to all Over-swelling
Greatnesses, and affect to cast contempt and scorn upon the Pride of men, Lamb.
503.
Vsque adeo res humanas Vis Abdita quaedam
Obterit, and pulchros fasces, saevasque secures,
Proculcare, ac ludibrio sibi habere videtur.
Where he plainly Reeled and Staggered in his Atheism, or else was indeed a
Theist, but knew it not; it being certain that there can be no such Force as
this, in Regno Atomorum, in the Reign or Empire of Senseless Atoms. And as for
those among Christians, who make such a horrid Representation of God Almighty,
as one who Created far the greatest part of mankind, for no other end or
design, but only this, that he might Recreate and Delight himself in their
Eternal Torments; these also do but transcribe or copy out their own Ill
Nature, and then read it in the Deity; the Scripture declaring on the contrary,
That God is Love. Nevertheless these very persons in the mean time, dearly hug
and embrace God Almighty in their own Conceit, as one that is Fondly Good,
Kind, and Gracious to themselves; he having fastened his affections upon their
very Persons, without any consideration of their Dispositions or Qualifications.

It is true indeed, that Religion is often expressed in the Scripture, by the
Fear of God, and Fear has been said to be Prima Mensura Deitatis, the First
Measure of the Divinity in us, or the First Impression that Religion makes upon
men in this Obnoxious and Guilty state, before they have arrived to the true
Love of God and Righteousness. But this Religious Fear, is not a Fear of God,
as a mere Arbitrary Omnipotent Being, much less as Hurtful and Mischievous
(which could not be disjoined from Hatred;) but an aweful regard of him, as of
one who is Essentially Just, and as well a Punisher of Vice and Wickedness, as
a Rewarder of Virtue. Lucretius himself, when he describes this Religious Fear
of men, confessing it to to be conjoined with a Conscience of their Duty, or to
include the same within it self.

P. 503.
Tunc Populi Gentesque tremunt, etc.
Ne quod ob admissum foede dictumve superbe,
Poenarum grave sit solvendi tempus adactum.
And this is the Sense of the Generality of mankind, that there being a Natural
Difference of Good and Evil Moral, there is an Impartial Justice in the Deity
which presideth over the same, and inclines it as well, to Punish the wicked,
as to Reward the Virtuous: ^p. ad (...). P. ^^. Cass.
Epicurus himself acknowledging thus much, (...), Theists suppose, that there
are both great Evils inflicted upon the wicked from the Gods; and also great
Rewards by them bestowed upon the Good. And this Fear of God, is not only
Beneficial to mankind in general, by repressing the growth of wickedness, but
also wholesome and Salutary to those very persons themselves, that are thus
Religiously affected, it being Preservative of them both from Moral Evils, and
likewise from the Evils of Punishment consequent thereupon. This is the True
and Genuine Fear of Religion; which when it degenerates into a Dark kind, of
Jealous and Suspicious Fear of God Almighty, either as a Hurtful, or as a mere
Arbitrary and Tyrannical Being, then is it looked upon, as the Vice or Extreme
of Religion, and distinguished from it by that name of (...), Superstition.
Thus is the Character of a Superstitious Man given by Plutarch, (...), (...).
That he thinks there are Gods, but that they are Noxious and Hurtful; and
(...), a Superstitious man must needs Hate God, as well as Fear him. The true
Fear of God (as the Son of Sirach speaks) is the Beginning of his Love, Cap.
25.12.
and Faith is the Beginning of cleaving to him. As if he should have said, The
first Entrance into Religion is an Awful regard to God as the Punisher of Vice;
the Second step forwards therein, is Faith or Confidence in God, whereby men
Rely upon him for Good, and Cleave to him: and the Top and Perfection of all
Religion, is the Love of God above all, as the most Amiable Being.
Christianity, the best of Religions, recommendeth Faith to us, as the Inlet or
Introduction into all True and Ingenuous Piety; for He that comes to God,
Hebr. c. 11 1:
must not only believe that he Is, but also that he is a Rewarder of those that
seek him. Which Faith is better defined in the Scripture, than by any
Scholastic; to be the Substance of things (that are to be) hoped for, and the
Evidence of things not seen. That is, a Confident Persuasion of things that
fall not under Sight, (because they are either Invisible or Future) and which
also are to be Hoped for. So that Religious Fear consists well with Faith,
and Faith is near of kin to Hope, and the result of both Faith and Hope, is
Love: which Faith, Hope and Love, do all suppose an Essential Goodness in the
Deity. God is such a Being, who if He were not, were of all things whatsoever
most to be Wished for. It being indeed no way desirable (as that noble Emperor
concluded) for a man to live in a world, void of a God and Providence. He that
believes a God, believes all that Good and Perfection in the Universe, which
his Heart can possibly wish or desire. It is the Interest of none, that there
should be no God, but only of such wretched Persons, as have abandoned their
First and only true Interest, of being Good, and Friends to God, and are
desperately resolved upon ways of Wickedness.

The Reason why the Atheists do thus grossly mistake the Notion of, God, and
conceive of him differently from the Generality of mankind, as a thing which is
only to be Feared, and must consequently be Hated, is from nothing but their
own Vice and Ill Nature. For first, their Vice so far blinding them, as to make
them think, that the Moral Differences of Good and Evil, have no foundation in
Nature, but only in Law or Arbitrary Constitution (which Law is contrary to
Nature, Nature being Liberty, but Law Restraint;) as they cannot but really
Hate that, which Hinders them of their True Liberty and Chief Good, so must
they needs interpret the Severity of the Deity so much spoken of against
Wickedness, to be nothing else, but Cruelty and Arbitrary Tyranny. Again it is
a wretched Ill-natured Maxim, which these Atheists have, Cic. de N.D.L. 1.213.
Lamb.
That there is Nulla Naturalis Charitas, No Natural Charity, but that Omnis
Benevolentia oritur ex Imbecillitate and Metu, All Benevolence arises only,
from Imbecility and Fear; that is, from being either obnoxious to another
Power, or standing in need of his Help. So that all that is now called Love and
Friendship amongst Men, is according to these really nothing, but either a
crouching under Another Power, whom they cannot Resist; or else Mercatura
quaedam Vtilitatum, a certain kind of Merchandising for Vtilities. And thus
does Cotta in Cicero declare their sense, Cic. Ibid.
Ne Homines quidem censetis, nisi Imbecilli essent, futuros Beneficos aut
Benignos, You conceive that no man would be any way Beneficent or Benevolent to
another, were it not for his Imbecility or Indigence. But as for God Almighty,
these Atheists conclude, That upon the supposition of his Existence, there
could not be so much as this Spurious Love or Benevolence in him neither,
toward any thing; because by reason of his Absolute and Irresistible Power, He
would neither stand in Need of Any thing, and be devoid of all Fear. Thus the
forementioned Cotta. Quid est Praestantius Bonitate and Beneficentia? Cic. Ibid.
Qua cum carere Deum vultis, neminem Deo nec Deum nec Hominem Carum, neminem ab
eo amari vultis. Ita fit ut non modo Homines a Diis, sed ipsi Dii inter se ab
aliis alii negligantur. What is there more excellent than Goodness and
Beneficence? which when you will needs have God to be utterly devoid of, you
suppose that neither any God nor Man, is Dear to the Supreme God, or beloved of
him. From whence it will follow* that not only men are neglected by the Gods,
but also the Gods amongst themselves are neglected by one another. Accordingly
a late Pretender to Politics, who in this manner, discards all Natural Justice
and Charity, determines concerning God, Regnandi and Puniendi eos qui Leges
suas violant, Jus Deo esse a Sola Potentia Irresistibli, That he has no other
Right of Reigning over men, and of Punishing those who transgress his Laws, but
only from his Irresistible Power. Which indeed is all one as to say, That God
has no Right at all of Ruling over mankind, and imposing Commands upon them,
but what he does in this kind, he does it only by Force and Power; Right, and
Might, (or Power) being very different things from one another, and there being
no Jus or Right without Natural Justice; so that the word Right is here only
Abused. And Consentaneously hereunto the same Writer further adds,, Si Jus
Regnandi habeat Deus ab Omnipotentia sua, manifestum est Obligationem ad
praestandum ipsi Obedientiam incumbere Hominibus propter Imbicillitatem, That
if God's Right of Commanding, be derived only from his Omnipotence, then is it
manifest, that men's Obligation to obey him, lies upon them only from their
Imbecility. Or as it is further explained by him, Homines ideo Deo subjectos
esse, quia Omnipotentes non sunt, aut quia ad Resistendum satis Virium non
habent, That men are therefore only Subject to God, because they are not
Omnipotent, or have not sufficient Power to Resist him. Thus do we see plainly,
how the Atheists by reason of their Vice and and Ill Nature, (which makes them
deny all Natural Justice and Honesty, all Natural Charity and Benevolence)
transform the Deity into a monstrous shape; such an Omnipotent Being, as if he
were, could have nothing neither of Justice, in him, nor of Ben^volence toward
his Creatures; and whose only Right and Authority of Commanding them, would be
his Irresistible Power; whom his Creatures could not place any Hope, Trust and
Confidence in, nor have any other Obligation to obey, than that of Fear and
Necessity, proceeding from their Imbecility, or Inability to resist him. And
such a Deity as this, is indeed a Mormo or Bugbear, a most Formidable and
Affrightful thing.

But all this is nothing, but the Atheists False Imagination; True Religion
representing a most comfortable Prospect of things from the Deity; whereas on
the contrary, the Atheistick Scene of things, is Dismal, Hopeless and Forlorn,
That there should be no other Good, than what depends upon things wholly out of
our own power, the momentany gratification of our Insatiate Appetites, and the
perpetual pouring in to a Dolium Pertusum, a Perforated and Leaking Vessel.
That our selves should be but a Congeries of Atoms, upon the dissolution of
whose Compages, our Life should vanish into nothing, and all our Hope perish.
That there should be no Providence over us, nor any Kind and Good-natured Being
above, to take care of us, there being nothing without us, but Dead and
Senseless Matter. True indeed there could be no spiteful Designs in Senseless
Atoms, or a Dark Inconscious Nature. Upon which account, Plutarch would grant,
De Supersi.
that even this Atheistick Hypothesis it self, as bad as it is, were
notwithstanding to be preferred, before that of an Omnipotent, Spiteful and
Malicious Being, (if there can be any such Hypothesis as this) a Monarchy of
the Manichean Evil Principle, reigning all alone over the whole world, without
any Corrival, and having an undisturbed Empire. Nevertheless it is certain
also, that there could be no Faith nor Hope neither, in these Senseless Atoms,
both Necessarily and Fortuitously moved, no more than there could be Faith and
Hope in a Whirlwind, or in a Tempestous Sea, whose merciless waves are
Inexorable, and deaf to all Cries and Supplications. For which reason Epicurus
himself confessed, Epist. ad Men. P. 49. Gass.
that it was better to give credit to the Fable of the Gods, (as he calls it)
than to serve the Atheistick Fate, or that Material Necessity of all things,
introduced by those Atheistick Physiologers Leucippus and Democritus; (...)^
Because there is Hopes that the Gods may be prevailed with, by worship and
prayer; but the other (Necessity) is altogether deaf and Inexorable. And though
Epicurus thought to mend the matter, and make the Atheistick Hypothesis more
tolerable, by introducing into it (contrary to the Tenor of those Priciples)
Liberty of Will in Men; yet this being not a Power over things Without us, but
our selves only, could alter the case very little. Epicurus himself was in a
Panick Fear, lest the frame of Heaven should sometime upon a sudden crack, and
tumble about his Ears, and this Fortuitous Compilement of Atoms be dissolved
into a Chaos, -- Tria talia Texta
Vna Dies dabit exitio; multosque per annos
Sustentata ruet moles, and Machina mundi.
And what Comfort could his Liberty of Will then afford Him, who placed all his
happiness in Security from External Evils? (...), De Superst.
(says Plutarch) The Atheistick Design in shaking off the Belief of a God, was
to be without Fear; but by means hereof, they framed such a System of things to
themselves, as under which, they could not have the least Hope, Faith or
Confidence. Thus running from Fear, did they plunge themselves into Fear; for
they who are without Hope, can never be free from Fear. Endless of necessity
must the Fears and Anxieties of those men be, who shake off that One Fear of
God, that would only preserve them from Evil, and have no Faith nor Hope in
him. Wherefore we might conclude upon better grounds than the Atheists do of
Theism; that Atheism (which has no foundation at all in Nature nor in Reason)
springs first from the Imposture of Fear. For the Faith of Religion, being the
Substance or Confidence of such things not seen, as are to be Hoped for;
Atheistick Insidelity must needs on the contrary be, a certain heavy
Diffidence, Despondence and Misgiving of Mind, or a Timorous Distrust and
Disbelief of Good, to be Hoped for, beyond the reach of Sense; namely of an
Invisible Being Omnipotent, that exercises a Just, Kind, and Gracious
Povidence, over all those who commit their ways to him, with an endeavor to
please him, both here in this Life and after Death. But Vice, or the Love of
Lawless Liberty, prevailing over such Disbelieving persons, makes them by
degrees, more and more desirous, that there should be no God; that is, no such
Hinderer of their Liberty, and to count it a happiness to be freed from the
Fear of him, whose Justice (if he were) they must needs be obnoxious to.

And now have we made it Evident, that these Atheists who make Religion and the
Belief of a God, to proceed from the Imposture of Fear, do first of all
disguise the Deity, and put a Monstrous, Horrid and Affrightful Vizard upon it,
transforming it into such a thing, as can only be Feared and Hated; and then do
they conclude concerning it (as well indeed they may) that there is no such
thing as this, really Existing in Nature, but that it is only a Mormo or
Bugbear, raised up by men's Fear and Fancy. Of the Two, it might better be
said, that the Opinion of a God, sprung from men's Hope of Good, than from their
Fear of Evil; but really, it springs neither from Hope nor Fear, (however in
different Circumstances it raises both those Passions in our Minds;) nor is it
the Imposture of any Passion, but that whose Belief is supported and Sustained,
by the strongest and clearest Reason; as shall be declared in due place. But
the Sense of a Deity, often Preventing Ratiocination in us, and urging it self
more Immediately upon us, it is certain that there is also, besides a Rational
Belief thereof, a Natural Prolepsis or Anticipation in the Minds of men
concerning it, which by Aristotle is called (...), A Vaticination.

Thus have we sufficiently confuted, the First Atheistick Pretense, to salve
the Phenomenon of Religion and the Belief of a God, so generally entertained,
from the Imposture of Fear: we come now to the Second, That it proceeded from
the Ignorance of Causes also, or Men's want of Philosophy: they being prone, by
reason of their Innate Curiosity, where they find no Causes to make or feign
them; and from their Fear, in the Absence of Natural and Necessary Causes, to
imagine Supernatural and Divine; this also affording them a handsome Cover and
Pretext for their Ignorance. For which cause these Atheists stick not to affirm
of God Almighty, what some Philosophers do of Occult Qualities, that he is but
Persugium and Asylum Ignorantiae, Lucret. p.. 500. L.
a Refuge and Shelter for men's Ignorance; that is, in plain and downright
Langu^ge, The mere Sanctuary of Fools.

And these two things are here commonly joined together by these Atheists, both
Fear, and Ignorance of Causes, as which jointly concur in the Production of
Theism. Because as the Fear of Children raises up Bugbears especially in the
Dark, so do they suppose in like manner, the Fear of men, in the Darkness of
their Ignorance of Causes especially, to raise up the Mormo, Spectre or
Phantasm of a God; which is thus intimated by the Epicurean Poet, -- Omnia
Caecis
In tenebris Metuunt.
And accordingly Democritus gave this account of the Original of Theism or
Religion, Steph. P^c. Ph^l. 158. ex Sextu.
(...)^ That when in old times, men observed strange and affrightful things in
the Meteors and the Heaven, as Thunder, Lightning, Thunderbolts and Eclipses;
they not knowing the Causes thereof, and being terrified thereby, presently
imputed them to the Gods. And Epicurus declares this to have been the reason,
why he took such great pains in the study of Physiology, that by finding out
the Natural and Necessary Causes of things, he might be able to free both
himself and others from the Terror of a God, which would otherwise Invade and
Assault them: the Importunity of men's minds, whenever they are at a loss for
Natural Causes, urging them so much, with the Fear, Suspicion, and Jealousy of
a Deity.

Wherefore the Atheists thus dabling in Physiology, and finding out as they
conceive, Material and Mechanical Caus^s, for some of the Phaenom^na of Nature,
and especially for such of them, as the unskilful Vulgar some times impute to
God himself; when they can prove Eclipses (for example) to be no Miracles, and
render it probable, that Thunder is not the Voice of God Almighty himself, as
it were roaring above in the Heavens, merely to affright and amaze poor
Mortals, and make them quake and tremble; and that Thunderbolts are not there
flung by his own hands, as the direful messengers of his wrath and displeasure;
they presently conclude triumphantly thereupon, concerning Nature or Matter,
that it does Ipsa sua per se, sponte, omnia, Diis agere expers, Do all things
alone of it self without a God. But we shall here make it appear in a few
Instances as briefly as we may, that Philosophy and the True Knowledge of
Causes, leads to God; and that Atheism is nothing but Ignorance of Causes and
of Philosophy.

For first, no Atheist, who derives all from senseless Atoms or Matter, is able
to assign any Cause at all of Himself, or give any true account of the Original
of his own Soul or Mind, it being utterly Unconceivable and Impossible, that
Soul and Mind, Sense, Reason and Understanding, should ever arise from
Irrational and Senseless Matter however modified; or result from Atoms, devoid
of all manner of Qualities; that is, from mere Magnitude, Figure, Site and
Motion of Parts. For though it be indeed absurd to say (as these Atheists
allege) that Laughing and Crying Things, are made out of Laughing and Crying
Principles, Et Ridere potest non ex Ridentibu' factus; Yet does it not
therefore follow, that Sensitive and Rational Beings, might result from a
Composition of Irrational and Senseless Atoms, which according to the
Democritick Hypothesis, have nothing in them, but Magnitude, Figure, Site, and
Motion, or Rest. Because Laughing and Crying, are Motions, which result from
the Mechanism of Humane Bodies, in such a manner Organized, but Sense and
Understanding are neither Local Motion, nor Mechanism. And the Case will be the
very same, both in the Anaximandrian or Hylopathian, and in the Stratonick or
Hylozoick Atheism, because Sense and Conscious Understanding, could no more
result, either from those Qualities of Heat and Cold, Moist and Dry,
contempered together, or from the mere Organization of Inanimate and Senseless
Matter, than it could from the Concursus, Motus, Ordo, Positura, Figurae, of
Atoms devoid of all manner of Qualities. Had there been once nothing but
Senseless Matter, Fortuitously Moved, there could never have emerged into Being,
any Soul or Mind, Sense and Understanding: because no Effect can possibly
transcend the Perfection of its Cause. Wherefore Atheists supposing Themselves,
and all Souls and Minds, to have sprung from Stupid and Senseless Matter; and
all that Wisdom which is any where in the World, both Political and
Philosophical, to be the Result of mere Fortune and Chance; must needs be
concluded, to be Grossly Ignorant of Causes; which had they not been, they could
never have been Atheists. So that Ignorance of Causes, is the Seed, not of
Theism, but of Atheism: true Philosophy, and the Knowledge of the Cause of our
Selves, leading necessarily to a Deity.

Again, Atheists are Ignorant of the Cause of Motion in Bodies also; by which
notwithstanding they suppose all things to be done; that is, they are never
able to Salve this Phenomenon, so long as they are Atheists, and acknowledge
no other Substance besides Matter or Body. For First it is undeniably certain,
that Motion is not Essential to all Body as such, because then no Particles of
Matter could ever Rest; and consequently there could have been no Generation,
nor no such Mundane System produced as this is, which requires a certain
Proportionate Commixture of Motion and Rest; no Sun, nor Moon, nor Earth, nor
Bodies of Animals; since there could be no Coherent Consistency of any thing,
when all things fluttered and were in continual Separation and Divulsion from
one another. Again it is certain likewise, that Matter or Body as such, has no
Power of Moving it self Freely or Spontaneously neither, by Will or Appetite;
both because the same Inconvenience would from hence ensue likewise, and
because the Phenomenon or Appearances do plainly evince the contrary. And as
for that Prodigiously Absurd Paradox, of some few Hylozoick Atheists, that all
Matter as such, and therefore every Smallest Particle thereof, has not only
Life Essentially belonging to it, but also Perfect Wisdom and Knowledge,
together with Appetite, and Self-moving Power, though without Animal Sense or
Consciousness: this, I say, will be elsewhere in due place further confuted.
But the Generality of the ancient Atheists, that is, the Anaximandrians and
Democriticks, attributed no manner of Life to Matter as such; and therefore
could ascribe no Voluntary, or Spontaneous Motion to the same, but Fortuitous
only; according to that of the Epicurean Poet already cited, Nam certe neque
Consilio, Primordia rerum,
Ordine se quaeque, atque sagaci mente locarunt;
Nec quos quaeque darent Motus pepigere profecto.
Wherefore these Democriticks, as Aristotle somewhere intimates, were able to
assign no other Cause of Motion, than only this, That One Body moved another
from Eternity Infinitely, so that there was no (...), no First Vnmoved Mover,
ever to be found; because there is no Beginning nor First in Eternity. From
whence probably that Doctrine of some Atheistick Stoics in Alex. Aphrodisius
was derived, That there is no First in the rank and order of Causes. Alex. Aph.
Lib. de Fato, P.
In the footsteps of which Philosophers, a Modern Writer seems to have
trodden, when declaring himself after this manner; Si quis ab Effectu
quocunque, ad Causam ejus Immediatam, atque inde and Remotiorem, ac sic
perpetuo ratiocinatione ascenderit, non tamen in aeternum procedere poterit,
sed defatigatus aliquando deficiet. If any one will from whatsoever Effect,
ascend upward to its Immediate Cause, and from thence to a Remoter, and so
onwards perpetually, in his Ratiocination; yet shall he never be able to hold
on thorough all Eternity, but at length being quite tired out with his Journey,
be forced to desist or give over. Which seems to be all one, as if he should
have said; One thing Moved or Caused another Infinitely from Eternity, in which
there being no Beginning, there is consequently no First Mover or Cause to be
reached unto. But this Infinite Progress of these Democriticks, in the Order of
Causes, and their shifting off the Cause of Motion, from one thing to another
without end or beginning, was rightly understood by Aristotle, to be indeed the
Assigning of No Cause of Motion at all, (...), They acknowledging (says he) no
First Mover according to Nature, must needs make an idle Progress Infinitely;
that is, in the Language of this Philosopher, assign no Cause at all of Motion.
Epicurus therefore to mend the matter, though according to the Principles of
the Atomick Physiology, he discarded all other Qualities, yet did he
notwithstanding admit this One Quality of Gravity or Ponderosity in Atoms,
pressing them continually downwards in Infinite Space. In which, as nothing
could be more Absurd nor Vnphilosophical, than to make Upwards and Downwards in
Infinite Space, or a Gravity tending to no Center, nor Place of Rest; so did he
not assign any Cause of Motion neither; but only in effect affirm, the Atoms
therefore to tend Downwards, because they did so: a Quality of Gravity
signifying only an Endeavor to tend Downwards, but Why or Wherefore, no body
knows. And it is all one as if Epicurus should have said; that Atoms moved
Downwards by an Occult Quality, he either betaking himself to this as an
Asylum, a Sanctuary or Refuge for his Ignorance; or else indeed more absurdly
making his very Ignorance it self (disguized under that name of a Quality) to
be the Cause of Motion. Thus the Atheists universally, either assigned no Cause
at all for Motion, as the Anaximandrians and Democriticks; or else no True one,
as the Hylozoists; when to avoid Incorporeal Substance, they would venture to
attribute, Perfect Understanding, Appetite or Will, and Self-moving Power, to
all Senseless Matter whatsoever. But since it appears plainly, that Matter or
Body cannot Move it self; either the Motion of all Bodies, must have no manner
of Cause, or else must there of necessity, be some other Substance besides
Body, such as is Self-active and Hylarchical, or has a Natural Power, of
Ruling over Matter. Upon which latter account, Plato rightly determined, that
Cogitation, which is Self-activity or Autochinesie, was in order of Nature,
before the Local Motion of Body, which is Heterochinesie. Though Motion
considered Passively in Bodies, or taken for their Translation, or Change of
Distance and Place, be indeed a Corporeal thing, or a Mode of those Bodies
themselves moving; yet as it is considered Actively, for the Vis Movens, that
Active Force which causes this Translation or Change of Place, so is it an
Incorporeal thing; the Energy of a Self-Active Substance, upon that sluggish
Matter or Body, which cannot at all move it self. Wherefore in the Bodies of
Animals, the True and Proper Cause of Motion, or the Determination thereof at
least; is not the Matter it self Organized; but the Soul either as Cogitative,
or Plastickly-Self Active, Vitally united thereunto, and Naturally Ruling over
it. But in the whole World it is either God himself, Originally impressing
(...) a certain Quantity of Motion upon the Matter of the Universe, and
constantly conserving the same, according to that of the Sripture, Act. 17.28.
In him we Live and Move: (which seems to have been the Sense also of that
Noble Agrigentine Poet and Philosopher, when he described God, to be only, A
Pure or Holy Mind, that with swift thoughts agitates the whole World) or else
it is Instrumentally, an Inferior Created Spirit, Soul, or Life of Nature,
that is, a Subordinate Hylarchical Principle, which has a Power of Moving
Matter Regularly, according to the Direction of a Superior Perfect Mind. And
thus do we see again, that Ignorance of Causes, is the Seed of Atheism, and not
of Theism; no Atheists being able to assign a true Cause of Motion; the
Knowledge whereof plainly leads to a God.

Furthermore those Atheists who acknowledge no other Principle of things, but
Senseless Matter Fortuitously moved, must needs be Ignorant also of the Cause of
that Grand Phenomenon, called by Aristotle, the (...), the Well and Fit in
Nature, that is, of the most Artificial Frame of the whole Mundane System in
General, and of the Bodies of Animals in Particular, together with the
Conspiring Harmony of all. For they who boasted themselves able to give Natural
Causes of all things whatsoever without a God; can give no other Cause at all
of this Phenomenon, but only that the World Happened by Chance to be thus made
as it is. Now they who make Fortune and Chance, to be the only Cause of this so
Admirable Phenomenon, the most Regular and Artificial Frame, and Harmony of
the Universe; they either make the mere Absence and Want of a Cause, to be a
Cause, Fortune and Chance being nothing else but the Absence or want of an
Intending Cause. Or else do they make, their own Ignorance of a Cause, and They
know not How, to be a Cause; as the Author of the Leviathan interprets the
meaning hereof, Many times (says he) men put for Cause of Natural Events,
their own Ignorance, but disguised in other words, as when they say, that
Fortune is the Cause of things Contingent, that is, of things whereof they know
no Cause. Or they affirm against all Reason, one Contrary to be the Cause of
another, as Confusion to be the Cause of Order, Pulchritude and Harmony; Chance
and Fortune, to be the Cause of Art and Skill; Folly and Nonsense, the Cause of
the most Wise and Regular Contrivance. Or Lastly, they deny it to have any
Cause at all, since they deny an Intending Cause, and there cannot Possibly be
any other Cause of Artificialness and Conspiring Harmony, than Mind and Wisdom,
Council and Contrivance.

But because the Atheists here make some Pretenses for this their Ignorance, we
shall not conceal any of them, but bring them all to light; to the end that we
may discover their Weakness and Foolery. First therefore they Pretend, that the
World is not so Artificially and Well made, but that it might have been made
much Better, and that there are many Faults and Flaws to be found therein; from
whence they would infer, that it was not made by a God, he being supposed by
Theists, to be no Bungler, but a Perfect Mind, or a Being Infinitely Good and
Wise, who therefore should have made all things for the Best.

But this being already set down by it self, as a Twelfth Atheistick Objection
against a Deity, we must reserve the Confutation thereof for its proper place.
Only we shall observe thus much here by the way; That those Theists of Later
times, who either because they Fancy a mere Arbitary Deity; or because their
Faith in the Divine Goodness is but weak; or because they Judge of things
according to their own Private Appetites, and Selfish Passions, and not with a
Free Uncaptivated Universality of Mind, and an Impartial Regard to the Good of
the Whole; or because they look only upon the Present Scene of things, and take
not in the Future into consideration, nor have a Comprehensive View of the
whole Plot of Divine Providence together; or lastly, because we Mortals do all
stand upon too Low a Ground, to take a commanding view and Prospect upon the
whole Frame of things; and our shallow Understandings are not able to fathom
the Depths of the Divine Wisdom, nor trace all the Methods and Designs of
Providence; grant, That the World might have been made much Better than now it
is; which indeed is all one as to say, that it is Not Well made; these
Neoterick Christians (I say) seem hereby, to give a much greater advantage to
the Atheists, than the Pagan Theists themselves heretofore did, who stood their
Ground, and generously maintained against them; that Mind being the Maker of
all things, and not Fortune or Chance, nor Arbitary Self-will, and Irational
Humor Omnipotent, the (...), that which is Absolutely the Best in every case,
so far as the Necessity of things would admit, and in compliance with the Good
of the Whole, was the Measure and Rule both of Nature and Providence.

Again the Atomick Atheists further allege, that though there be many things
in the world, which serve well for Uses, yet it does not at all follow, that
therefore they were made Intentionally and Designedly for those Uses; because
though things Happen by Chance to be so or so Made, yet may they serve for
something or other afterward, and have their several Uses Consequent. Wherefore
all the things of Nature, Happened (say they) by Chance, to be so made as they
are, and their several Uses notwithstanding were Consequent, or Following
thereupon. Thus the Epicurean Poet, Lucret. L. 4. P. 367. Lamb.
-- Nil ideo natum est in Corpore, ut Vti
Possemus, sed quod Natum est id procreat Vsum.
Nothing in man's Body was made out of design for any Use, but all the several
Parts thereof, happening to be so made as they are, their Uses were Consequent
thereupon. In like manner the Old Atheistick Philosophers in Aristotle, Phys.
L. 2. c. 8.
concluded, (...)^ That the Former Teeth, were made by Material or Mechanical
Necessity, Thin and Sharp, by means whereof they became fit for Cutting; but
the Jaw-Teeth Thick and Broad, whereby they became Useful for the Grinding of
Food. But neither of them were Intended to be such, for the sake of these Uses,
but Happened by Chance only. And the like concerning all the other Parts of the
Body, which seem to be made for Ends. Accordingly the same Aristotle,
represents the sense of those ancient Atheists, concerning the other Parts of
the Universe, or Things of Nature, that they were all likewise made such, by
the Necessity of Material (or Mechanical) Motions Vndirected, and yet had
nevertheless their several Uses Consequent, upon this their Accidental
Structure. (...), etc. What hinders but that Nature might act without any
respect to Ends or Good and Better, as Jupiter or the Heaven, raineth not
Intentionally to make the Corn grow, but from Necessity? Because the vapors
being raised up into the Middle Region, and there Refrigerated and Condensed,
must needs descend down again in the form of Water. But this happens by mere
Chance and without any Intention, that the Grain is made to grow thereby; as
the Contrary sometimes Happens, by the excess of it.

But to this we Reply, That though a thing that Happens Accidentally to be so
or so Made, may afterward notwithstanding prove often serviceable for some Use
or other; yet when any thing consists of many Parts, that are all
Artificially proportionated together, and with much Curiosity accommodated one
to another; any one of which Parts having been wanting, or otherwise in the
least placed and disposed of, would have rendered the whole altogether Inept for
such a Use; then may we well conclude it not to have been made by Chance, but
by Counsel and Design Intentionally, for such Uses. As for example, The Eye,
whose Structure and Fabric consisting of many Parts (Humors and Membranes) is
so Artificially composed; no reasonable person who considers the whole Anatomy
thereof, and the Curiosity of its Structure, can think otherwise of it, but
that it was made out of Design for the Use of Seeing; and did not Happen
Accidentally to be so made, and then the Use of Seeing follow; as the Epicurean
Poet would fain persuade us, Lumina ne facias Oculorum clara Creata, P. 367.
Lamb.

Prospicere ut possimus.
You are by all means to take heed, of entertaining that so dangerous Opinion
(to Atheism) that Eyes were made for the sake of Seeing; and Ears for the sake
of Hearing. But for a man to think, that not only Eyes happened to be so made,
and the Use of Seeing Vnintended Followed; but also that in all the same
Animals, Ears Happened to be so made too, and the Use of Hearing Followed them;
and a Mouth and Tongue Happened to be so made likewise, and the Use of Eating,
and (in men) of Speaking, was also Accidentally Consequent thereupon; and Feet
were in the same Animals made by Chance too, and the Use of Walking Followed;
and Hands made in them by Chance also, upon which so many necessary Uses
depend; besides Innumerble other Parts of the Body, both Similar and Organical,
none of which could have been wanting, without rendering the whole Inept or
Useless; I say, to think, that all these things should Happen by Chance to be
Thus made in every one and the same Animal, and not Designed by Mind or
Council, that they might jointly Con^ur and Contribute to the Good of the
whole; This argues the greatest Insensibility of Mind Imaginable. But this
Absurd and Ridiculous Conceit has been long since so industriously Confuted,
and the folly thereof so fully manifested, by the learned Pagan Philosopher and
Physician, Galen, in his Book of the Use of Parts, that it would be altogether
Superfluous to insist any more upon it.

Wherefore that the Former Teeth are made Thin and Sharp, and the Jaw-Teeth
Thick and Broad, by Chance only, and not for Use, was one of the Democritick
Dotages; as also That nothing in the Clouds and Meteors, was intended for the
Good of this Habitable Earth, within whose Atmo-sphere they are contained, but
all proceeeded from Material and Mechanical Necessity. Which Conceit, though
Cartesius seem to have written his whole Book of Meteors in favor of, he
beginning it with the Derision of those, who Seat God in the Clouds, and
imagine his hands to be Employed, in opening and shutting the Cloisters of the
Winds, in sprinkling the Flowers with dews, and thunder-striking the Tops of
Mountains; and closing his Discourse with this Boast; that he had now made it
manifest, there was no need to fly to Miracles, (that is, to Bring in a God
upon the Stage) to salve those Phenomenon; yet were it easy enough to
demonstrate, the Defectiveness of those his Mechanical Undertakings, in sundry
particulars, and to evince that all those things could not be carried on, with
such constant Regularity, by mere Fortuitous Mechanism, without any Superior
Principle to guide and steer them. Nevertheless we acknowledge, that God and
Nature do things every where, in the most Frugal and Compendious way, and with
the least Operoseness, and therefore that the Mechanic Powers are not
rejected, but taken in, so far as they could comply serviceably with the
Intellectual Model and Platform. But still so, as that all is supervised by One
Understanding and Intending Cause, and nothing passes, without His Approbation;
who when either those Mechanic Powers fall short, or the Stubborn Necessity of
Matter proves uncompliant, does overruled the same, and supply the Defects
thereof, by that which is Vital; and that without setting his own Hands
immediately to every work too; there being a Subservient Minister under him, an
Artificial Nature, which as an Archeus of the whole world, governs' the
Fluctuating Mechanism thereof, and does all things faithfully, for Ends and
Purposes, Intended by its Director.

But our Atomick Atheists still further allege, That though it might well seem
strange, that Matter Fortuitously moved, should at the very first jump, fall
into such a Regular Frame as this is, having so many Aptitudes for Uses, so
many Correspondencies between several things, and such an agreeing Harmony in
the whole; yet ought it not to seem a jot strange, if Atoms by Motion, making
all possible Combinations and Contextures, and trying all manner of Conclusions
and Experiments, should after Innumerable other Freaks, and Discongruous Forms
produced, in length of time, fall into such a System as this is. Wherefore they
affirm, that this Earth of ours at first, brought forth diverse Monstrous and
Irregular shapes of Animals, Orba pedum partim, manuum viduata vicissim;
Lucret. L. 5. p 476. Lamb.

Multa sine ore etiam, sine Voltu caeca reperta.
some without Feet, some without Hands, some without a Mouth and Face, some
wanting fit Muscles and Nerves for the Motion of their members. And the old
Philosophic Atheists, were so frank and lavish herein, that they stuck not to
affirm, amongst those monstrous shapes of Animals there were once produced,
Centaurs, and Scyllas, and Chimeras; (...), mixtly Boviform and Hominiform,
Biform and Triform Animals: but Epicurus a little ashamed of this, as that
which must needs look Oddly and Ridiculously, and seeming more Cautious and
Castigate, pretends to correct the Extravagancy of this Fancy, Sed neque
Centauri fuerunt, neque tempore in ullo, Luc. L. 5. p. 479.

Esse queat Duplici Natura, and Corpore Bino,
Ex alienigenis Membris compacta potestas.
Nevertheless, there were not then any Centaurs, nor Biform and Triform
Animals; he adding, that they who feigned such things as these, might as well
fancy, Rivers flowing with Golden Streams, and Trees Germinating sparkling
Diamonds, and such vastly Gigantean men, as could stride over Seas, and take up
Mountains in their Clutches, and turn the Heavens about with the strength of
their arms. Against all which notwithstanding, he gravely gives such a Reason,
as plainly overthrows his own Principles, Res sic quaeque suo ritu procedit,
and omnes, P. 480.

Foedere Naturae certo discrimina servant.
Because things by a certain Covenant of Nature, always keep up their Specific
Differences, without being confounded together. For what Covenant of Nature can
there be in Infinite Chance? or what Law can there be set to the Absolutely
Fortuitous Motions of Atoms, to circumscribe them by? Wherefore it must be
acknowledged, that according to the genuine Hypothesis of the Atomick Atheism,
all Imaginable Forms of Inanimate Bodies, Plants and Animals, as Centaurs,
Scylla's and Chimaera's, are producible by the Fortuitous Motions of Matter,
there being nothing to hinder it, whilst it does, Omnimodis coire, atque omnia
pertentare
Quaecunque inter se possint congressa creare,
Put it self into all kind of Combinations, play all manner of Freaks, and try
all possible Conclusions and Experiments. But they Pretend, that these
Monstrous, Irregular Shapes of Animals, were not therefore now to be found,
because by reason of their Inept Fabric, they could not propagate their kind
by Generation, as neither indeed Preserve their own Individuals. Thus does
Lucretius declare the sense of Epicurus, Lamb. p. 476.
-- Quoniam Natura absterruit auctum
Nec potuere cupitum aetatis tangere florem,
Nec reperire cibum, nec jungi per Veneris res.
And that this Atheistick Doctrine was older than Epicurus, appears from
these words of Aristotle, Not. Ausc. L. 2. c. 8.
(...)^ When Animals Happened at first to be made, in all manner of Forms,
those of them only, were preserved and continued to the present time, which
chanced to be fitly made (for Generation) but all the others perished, as
Empedocles affirms of the Partly-Oxe-and-Partly-Man-Animals. Moreover the
ancient both Anaximandrian and Democritick Atheists, concluded that besides
this One World of ours, there were other Infinite Worlds, (they conceiving it
as absurd to think, there should be but One only World in Infinite Space, as
that in a vast plowed and sowed Field, there should grow up only One Ear of
Corn, and no more) and they would have us believe, that amongst these Infinite
Worlds (all of them Fortuitously made) there is not One of a Thousand or
perhaps of Ten thousand, that has such Regularity, Concinnity, and Harmony in
it, as this World that we chanced to emerge in. Now it cannot be thought
strange (as they suppose) if amongst Infinite Worlds, One or Two, should chance
to fall into some Regularity. They would also confidently assure us, that the
present System of things, in this World of ours, shall not long continue such
as it is, but after a while fall into Confusion and Disorder again; -- Mundi
naturam totius aetas
Mutat, and ex alio terram status excipit alter,
Quod potuit nequeat, possit quod non tulit ante:
The same wheel of Fortune, which moving upward, has brought into view this
Scene of things that now is, turning round, will sometime or other, carry it
all away again, introducing a new one in its stead: and then shall we have
Centaurs, and Scylla's and Chimera's again; all manner of Inept Forms of
Animals, as before.

But because men may yet be puzzled with the Universality and Constancy of this
Regularity, and its long Continuance through so many Ages, that there are no
Records at all of the contrary any where to be found; the Atomick Atheist
further adds, that the Senseless Atoms, playing and toying up and down, without
any care or thought, and from Eternity Trying all manner of Tricks, Conclusions
and Experiments, were at length (they know not how) Taught, and by the
Necessity of things themselves, as it were, Driven, to a certain kind of Trade
of Artificialness and Methodicalness: so that though their Motions were at
First all Casual and Fortuitous, yet in length of Time, they became Orderly and
Artificial, and Governed by a certain Law; they contracting as it were upon
themselves by long Practice and Experience, a kind of Habit of moving
Regularly; or else being by the mere Necessity of things, at length forced so
to move, as they should have done, had Art and Wisdom directed them. Thus
Epicurus in his Epistle to Herodotus, P. 28. Gass.
(...), It must be held, that Nature is both Taught and Necessitated by the
things themselves: Or else as Gassendus interprets the words, quadam veluti
Naturali Necessariaque Doctrina sensim imbuta; by little and little Embued,
with a certain kind of Natural and Necessary Doctrine.

To which Atheistick Pretenses, we shall briefly reply; First, that it is but
an Idle Dream, or rather Impudent Forgery of these Atheists, that here^ofore
there were in this World of ours, all manner of Monstrous and Irregular Shapes
of Animals produced; Centaurs, Scylla's, and Chim^ra's, etc. and indeed at
first none but such: There being not the least footstep of any such thing
appearing in all the Monument^ of Antiquity, and Traditions of Former times;
and these Atheists being not able to give any manner of reason, why there
should not be such produced as well at this Present time, however the
Individuals themselves could not continue long, or propagate by Generation; or
at least why it should not Happen, that in some Ages or Countries, there were
either all Androgyna, of both Sexes, or else no Animal but of One Sex, Male, or
Female only; or lastly none of any Sex at all. Neither is there any more reason
to give credit to these Atheists, when (though enemies to Divination) they
would Prophecy concerning Future times, that in this World of ours, all shall
sometime fall into Confusion and Nonsense again. And as their Infinity of
Worlds, is an Absolute Impossibility; so to their Bold and Confident Assertion,
concerning those Supposed other Worlds; as if they had traveled over them all;
that amongst Ten Thousand of them, there is hardly One, that has so much
Regularity in it, as this World of ours; it might be replied, with equal
Confidence, and much more Probability of Reason; That were every Planet about
this Sun of ours an Habitable Earth; and every Fixed Star a Sun, having
likewise its s^veral other Planets or Habitable Earths moving round about it;
and not any one of these Desert or Uninhabited, but all Peopled with Animals;
we say, were this so extravagant Supposition true; That there would not be
found any one Ridiculous or Inept System amongst them all; but that the Divine
Art and Wisdom (which being Infinite, can never be Defective, nor any where
Idle) would exercise its Dominion upon all, and every where Impress the
Sculptures and Signatures of it self.

In the next place we affirm, That the Fortuitous Motions of Senseless Atomi,
trying never so many Experiments and Conclusions, and making (...) Minds, when
they apply their own Properties to things without them, and think because
themselves Intend, and act for Ends, that therefore Nature does the like. And
they might as well say, that Nature Laughs and Cries, Speaks and Walks,
Syllogizes and Philosophizes, because themselves do so. But as a Modern
Philosopher concludes; The Universe, as one Aggregate of things Natural, has
no Intention belonging to it. And accordingly were all Final Causes rightly
banished by Democritus out of Physiology, as Aristotle records of him, (...)^
That he reduced all things to Natural and Necessary Causes, altogether
rejecting Final.

To all which we briefly reply; That there are indeed two Extremes here to be
avoided, the One of those, who derive all things from the Fortuitous Motions of
Senseless Matter, which is the Extreme of the Atomick Atheists; the Other of
Bigotical Religionists, who will needs have God (...), to do all things himself
immediately; as if all in Nature were Miracle. But there is a Middle betwixt
both these Extremes; namely, to suppose, that besides God and in Subordination
to him, there is a Nature (not Fortuitous, but) Artificial and Methodical,
which governing the Motion of Matter and bringing it into Regularity, is a
Secondary or Inferior Cause of Generations. Now this Natura Artificiosa, this
Artificial Nature, though it self indeed do not understand the Reason of what
it does, nor properly Intend the Ends thereof, yet may it well be conceived to
act Regularly for the sake of Ends Understood and Intended, by that Perfect
Mind, upon which it depends. As the Manuary Opificers, understand not the
Designs of the Architect, but only drudgingly perform their several tasks
imposed by him: and as Types or Forms of Letters, composed together, Print
Coherent Philosophic Sense, which themselves understand nothing of (upon which
Artificial or Spermatick Nature, we have largely insisted before, in the
Appendix to the Third Chapter.) And thus, neither are all things performed
Immediately and Miraculously by God himself, neither are they all done
Fortuitously and Temerariously, but Regularly and Methodically for the sake of
Ends, though not Understood by Nature it self, but by that Higher Mind which is
the Cause of it, and does as it were continually Inspire it. Some indeed have
unskilfully attributed their Own Properties, or Animal Idiopathies to Inanimate
Bodies, as when they say, that Matter desires Forms as the Female does the
Male, and that Heavy Bodies descend down by Appetite toward the Center, that so
they may rest therein: and that they sometimes again, Ascend in Discretion, to
avoid a Vacuum. Of which Fanciful Extravagances, if the Advancer of Learning be
understood, there is nothing to be reprehended in this following passage of
his, Incredibile est quantum agmen Idolorum Philosophiae immiserit; Naturalism
Operationum ad Similitudinem Actionum Humanarum Reductio; It is incredible, how
many Errors have been transfused into Philosophy, from this One Delusion, of
Reducing Natural actions, to the Mode of Humane; or of thinking that Nature
acts as a Man does. But if that of his be extended further, to take away all
Final Causes from the things of Nature, as if nothing were done therein for
Ends Intended by a Higher Mind, then is it the very Spirit of Atheism and
Infidelity. It is no Idol of the Cave or Den (to use that Affected Language)
that is, no Prejudice, or Fallacy imposed upon our selves, from the attributing
our own Animalish Properties, to things without us; to think that the Frame and
System of this whole World, was contrived by a Perfect Understanding Being or
Mind (now also presiding over the same) which has every where Printed the
Signatures of its own Wisdom upon the Matter. As also, that though Nature it
self do not properly Intend, yet it acts according to an Intellectual
Platform Prescribed to it, as being the Manuary Opificer of the Divine
Architectonick Art, or this Art it self as it were Transfused into the Matter
and Embodied in it. Thus Cicero's Balbus long since declared concerning it;
that it was not, Vis quaedam sine Ratione, ciens Motus in Corporibus
Necessarios; sed Vis particeps Ordinis, tanquam via progrediens; cujus
Solertiam nulla Ars, nemo Artifex consequi potest imitando; Not a force
Unguided by Reason, Exciting Necessary Motions in Bodies Temerariously; but
such a Force as partakes of Order, and proceeds as it were Methodically; whose
Cunning or Ingeniosity, no Art or Humane Opificer can possibly reach to by
Imitation. For, it is altogether Unconceivable, how we Our Selves should have
Mind and Intention in us, were there none in the Universe, or in that Highest
Principle from which all proceeds. Moreover it was truly affirmed by Aristotle,
that there is much more of Art in some of the things of Nature, than there is
in any thing Artificially made by men; and therefore Intention, or Final and
Mental Causality, can no more be secluded from the consideration of Natural,
than it can from that of Artificial things. Now it is plain that Things
Artificial, as a House or Clock, can neither be Understood, nor any true Cause
of them assigned, without Design, or Intention for Ends and Good. For to say,
that a House, is Stones, Timber, Mortar, Iron, Glass, Lead, etc. all put
together, is not to give a Definition thereof, or to tell what indeed it is; it
being such an Apt Disposition of all these Materials, as may make up the whole
fit for Habitation, and the Uses of men. Wherefore this is not sufficiently to
assign the Cause of a House neither; to declare out of what Quarry the Stones
were dugg, nor in what Woods or Forests the Timber was felled, and the like:
Nor as Aristotle adds, Not. Ausc. L. 2. c. 9.
(...)^ If any one should go about thus to give an account of a House from
Material Necessity (as the Atheistick Philosophers then did of the World and
the Bodies of Animals) That the Heavier things being carried downward of their
own accord, and the Lighter upward; therefore the Stones and Foundation lay at
the bottom, and the Earth for the Walls being Lighter was Higher; and the
Timber being yet Lighter, Higher than that; but above all the Straw or Thatch,
it being the Lightest of all: Nor lastly, if as the same Aristotle elsewhere
also suggesteth, one should further pretend, that a House was therefore made
such, (...), etc. merely because the Hands of the Laborers, and the Axes, and
Hammers and Trowels, and other Instruments, Chanced all to be moved so and so.
We say, that none of all these, would be to assign the true cause of a House;
without declaring, that the Architect first framed in his Mind a Model or
Platform of such a thing, to be made out of of those Materials, so aptly
disposed, into a Foundation, Walls, Roof, Doors, Rooms, Stairs, Chimneys,
Windows, etc. as might render the whole fit for Habitation, and other Humane
uses. And no more certainly can the Things of Nature, (in whose very Essence
Final Causality is as much included) be either rightly Understood, or the
Causes of them assigned, merely from Matter and Mechanism, or the Necessary and
Unguided Motion thereof; without Design or Intention for Ends and Good.
Wherefore to say, that the Bodies of Animals became such, merely because the
Fluid Seed, by Motion Happened to make such Traces, and beget such Stamina and
Lineament^, as out of which that Compages of the whole resulted; is not to
assign a Cause of them, but to Dissemble, Smother, and Conceal their True
Efficient Cause, which is the Wisdom and Contrivance of that Divine Architect
and Geometer, making them every way fit, for the Inhabitation and uses of their
respective Souls. Neither indeed can we banish, all Final, that is all Mental
Causality, from Philosophy, or the Consideration of Nature, without banishing
at the same time, Reason and Understanding from our selves; and looking upon
the Things of Nature, with no other Eyes, than Brutes do. However none of the
Ancient Atheists, would ever undertake to assign Necessary Causes, for all the
Parts of the Bodies of Animals, and their Efformation, from mere Matter,
Motion, and Mechanism: Those small and pitiful attempts in order thereunto that
have been made by some of them in a few Instances, (as that the Spina Dorsi,
came from the Flexure of the Bodies of Animals, when they first sprung out of
the Earth; the Intestines from the Flux of Humors excavating a crooked and
winding Channel for it self, and that the Nostrils were broke open, by the
Eruption of breath;) these, I say, only showing the Vnfeisableness and
Impossibility thereof. And therefore Democritus was so wise, as never to
pretend to give an Account in this way, of the Formation of the Foetus, he
looking upon it, as a thing absolutely Desperate; nor would he venture to say
any more concerning it (as Aristotle informs us) than (...), that it always
comes so to pass of necessity; but stopped all further Enquiry concerning it
after this manner, (...), That to demand, about any of these things, for what
Cause it was thus, was to demand a Beginning of Infinite. As if, all the
Motions from Eternity, had an Influence upon, and Contribution to, whatsoever
Corporeal thing was now produced. And Lucretius notwithstanding all his
swaggering, and boasting, that He and Epicurus were able to assign Natural and
Necessary Causes for every thing, without a God; has no where so much as one
word concerning it. We conclude therefore, that Aristotle's Judgment concerning
Final Causes in Philosophy, is much to be preferred before that of Democritus,
(...), Not. Ausc. L. 2. ^. 9.
That Both kind of Causes (Material, and Final) ought to be declared by a
Physiologer, but especially the Final; the End being the Cause of the Matter,
but the M^tter not the Cause of the End. And thus do we see plainly, that the
Atomick Atheists are utterly ignorant of the Cause, (...), of the R^^u^ar and
Artificial Frame of the things in Nature, and cons^quently of the wh^le Mundane
S^stem; the True Knowledge whereof, n^c^ss^rily leads to a God.

But it is prodigiously strange, that these Atheists, should in this their
Ignorance and Sott^shn^ss, be Justified by any Professed Theists and Christians
of Later times; who Atomizing in their Physiology also, would fain persuade us
in like manner, that this whole Mundane System, together with Plants, and
Animals, was derived, merely from the Necessary and Unguided Motion, of the
Small Particles of Matter, at first turned round in a Vortex, or else jumbled
all together in a Chaos, without any Intention for Ends and Good, that is,
without the Direction of any Mind. God in the mean time standing by, only as an
Idle Sp^ctator, of this Lusus Atomorum, this Sportful Dance of Atoms* and of
the various Results thereof. Nay these Mechanic Theists, have here quite
outstripped and outdone, the Atomick Atheists themselves, they being much more
Immodest and Extravagant, than ever those were. For the Professed Atheists,
durst never venture to affirm, that this Regular System of things, Resulted
from the Fortuitous Motions of Atoms, at the very first; before they had for a
long time together, produced many other Inept Combinations, or Aggregate Forms
of particular things, and Nonsensical Systems of the whole. And they supposed
also, that the Regularity of things here in this world, would not always
continue such neither, but that some time or other, Confusion and Disorder
would break in again. Moreover, that besides this World of ours, there are at
this very instant, Innumerable other worlds Irregular, and that there is but
One of a Thousand or ten Thousand, amongst the Infinite Worlds, that have such
Regularity in them. The reason of all which is, because it was generally taken
for granted and looked upon as a Common Notion, that (...), as Aristotle
expresses it, that None of those things which are from Fortune or Chance, come
to pass constantly and always alike. But our Mechanic or Atomick Theists, will
have their Atoms, never so much as once to have Fumbled, in these their
Fortuitous Motions; nor to have produced any Inept System, or Incongruous Forms
at all; but from the very first all along, to have taken up their Places, and
have Ranged themselves, so Orderly, Methodically and Discreetly; as that they
could not possibly have done it better, had they been Directed by the most
Perfect Wisdom. Wherefore these Atomick Theists, utterly Evacuate that grand
Argument for a God, taken from the Phenomenon of the Artificial Frame of
things, which has been so much insisted on in all Ages, and which commonly
makes the strongest impression of any other, upon the Minds of men; they
leaving only certain Metaphysical Arguments for a Deity, which though never so
good, yet by reason of their Subtilty, can do but little Execution upon the
Minds of the Generality, and even amongst the Learned, do oftentimes beget,
more of Doubtful Disputation and Skepticism, than of Clear Conviction and
Satisfaction. The Atheists in the mean time laughing in their sleeves, and not
a little triumphing, to see the Cause of Theism, thus betrayed by its professed
Friends and Assertors, and the Grand Argument for the same, totally Slurred by
them; and so their work done, as it were to their hands, for them.

Now as this argues the greatest Insensibility of Mind, or Sottishness and
Stupidity, in Pretended Theists, not to take the least notice of the Regular
and Artificial Frame of things, or of the Signatures of the Divine Art and
Wisdom in them, nor to look upon the World and things of Nature, with any Other
Eyes, than Oxen and Horses do; so are there many Phenomenon in Nature, which
being partly Above the Force of these Mechanic Powers, and partly Contrary to
the same, can therefore never be Salved by them, nor without Final Causes, and
some Vital Principle. As for example, that of Gravity, or the Tendency of
Bodies Downward, the Motion of the Diaphragma in Respiration, the Systole and
Diastole of the Heart, which was before declared to be a Muscular Constriction
and Relaxation, and there-not Mechanical but Vital. We might also add amongst
many others, the Intersection of the Plains of the Equator and Ecliptic or the
Earth's Diurnal Motion, upon an Axis not Parallel with that of the Ecliptic,
nor Perpendicular to the Plain thereof. For though Car^esius would needs
imagine this Earth of ours once to have been a Sun, and so it self the Center
of a lesser Vortex; whose Axis was then Directed after this manner, and which
therefore still kept the same Site or Posture, by reason of the Striate
Particles, finding no fit Pores or Traces for their passage thorough it, but
only in this Direction; yet does he himself confess, that because these Two
Motions of the Earth, the Annual and Diurnal, would be much more conveniently
made upon Parallel Axes, therefore according to the Laws of Mechanism, they
should perpetually be brought nearer and nearer together, till at length the
Equator and the Ecliptic come to have their Axes Parallel to one another.
Which as it has not yet come to pass, so neither has there been, for these
last two Thousand years, (according to the best Observations and Judgments of
Astronomers) any nearer approach, made of them to one another. Wherefore the
Continuation of these ^wo Motions of the Earth, the Annual and Diurnal, upon
Axes differ^nt or not Parallel, is resolvable into nothing, but a Final and
Mental Cause, or the (...), because it was Best it should be so, the Variety of
the Seasons of the year depending hereupon. But the greatest of all the
particular Phenomenon, is the Organization and Formation of the Bodies of
Animals, consisting of such Variety and Curiosity; which these Mechanic
Philosophers being no way able to give an account of, from the Necessary Motion
of Matter, Unguided by Mind for Ends, prudently therefore break off their
System there, when they should come to Animals, and so leave it altogether
untouched. We acknowledge indeed, that there is a Posthumous Piece extant,
imputed to Cartesius, and entitled, De la Formation du Foetus, wherein there
is some Pretense made to salve all this by Fortuitous Mechanism. But as the
Theory thereof is wholly built upon a False Supposition, sufficiently confuted
by the Learned Harvey, in his Book of Generation, That the Seed does Materially
enter, into the Composition of the Egg; so is it all along Precarious and
Exceptionable; nor does it extend at all to the Differences that are in several
Animals, or offer the least Reason, why an Animal of one Species or Kind, might
not be Formed out of the Seed of another.

It is here indeed Pretended by these Mechanic Theists, that Final Causes,
therefore ought not to be of any Regard to a Philosopher, because we should not
arrogate to Our selves to be as Wise as God Almighty is, or to be Privy to his
Secrets. Thus in the Metaphysical Meditations; Atque ob hanc Vnicam Rationem
totum illud Causarum genus, quod a Fine peti solet, in Rebus Physicis nullum
Vsum habere existimo; non enim absque Temeritate me puto, investigare posse
Fines Dei. And again likewise in the Principles of Philosophy. Nullas unquam
Rations circa Res Naturales, a Fine quem Deus aut Natura in iis faciendis sibi
proposuit, admittimus, quia non tantum nobis debemus arrogare, ut ejus
Consiliorum participes esse possimus. But the Question is not, Whether we can
always reach to the Ends of God Almighty, and know what is Absolutely Best in
every case, and accordingly make Conclusions, that therefore the thing is, or
ought to be so; but, Whether any thing at all, were made by God, for Ends and
Good, otherwise than would of it self have resulted from the Fortuitous Motion
of Matter. Nevertheless we see no Reason at all, why it should be thought
Presumption, or Intrusion into the Secrets of God Almighty, to affirm, that
Eyes were made by him for the End of Seeing (and accordingly so contrived as
might best conduce thereunto) and Ears for the End of Hearing, and the like.
This being so plain, that nothing but Sottish Stupidity, or Atheistick
Incredulity (masked perhaps under an Hypocritical Veil of Humility) can make
any doubt thereof. And therefore Aristotle justly reprehended Anaxagoras, for
that Absurd Aphorism of his, (...), That Man was therefore the Wisest (or most
Solert) of all Animals, because he Chanced to have hands. He not doubting to
affirm on the Contrary; (...)^ That it was far more reasonable to think, that
because Man was the Wisest (or most Solert and Active) of all Animals,
therefore he had Hands given him. For Nature (says he) distributeth as a Wise
man does, what is suitable to every one; and it is more Proper to give Pipes to
one that has Musical Skill, than upon him that has Pipes, to bestow Musical
Skill.

Wherefore these Mechanic Theists would further, allege, and that wi^h some
more Color of Reason; That it is below the Dignity of God Almighty, to
condescend to all those mean and trivial Offices, and to do the Things of
Nature himself immediately; as also that it would be but a Botch in Nature, if
the Defects thereof were every where to be supplied by Miracle. But to this
also the Reply is easy; That though the Divine Wisdom it self contrived the
System of the whole World, for Ends and Good, yet Nature, as an Inferior
Minister, immediately Executes the same; I say, not a Dead, Fortui^^us, and
merely Mechanichal; but a Vital, Orderly and Artificial Nature. Which Nature,
asserted by most of the Ancient Philosophers who were Theists, Steph. Poet.
Philos.
is thus described by Proclus, (...), (...), (...)^ (...)
(...),
(...)^
(...).
Nature, is the Last of all those Causes that Fabricate this Corporeal and
Sensible world, and the utmost Bound of Incorporeal Substances. Which being
full of Reasons and Powers, Orders, and Presides over all Mundane affairs. It
proceeding (according to the Magic Oracles) from that Supreme Goddess, the
Divine Wisdom, which is the Fountain of all Life, as well Intellectual, as that
which is Concrete with Matter. Which Wisdom, this Nature always essentially
depending upon, passes through all things unhinderably: by means whereof, even
Inanimate things, partake of a kind of Life; and things Corruptible remain
Eternal in their Species, they being contained by its Standing Forms or Ideas,
as their Causes. And thus does the Oracle describe Nature, as presiding over
the whole Corporeal Word, and perpetually turning round the Heavens. Here have
we a Description of One Universal Substantial Life, Soul, or Spirit of Nature,
Subordinate to the Deity; besides which the same Proclus, elsewhere supposes
other Particular Natures, or Spermatick Reasons, in those Words of his, (...)^
After the first Soul, are there particular Souls, and after the Universal
Nature, Particular Natures. Where it may be observed by the way, that this
Proclus, though he were a Superstitious Pagan, much addicted to the Multiplying
of Gods (Subordinate to one Supreme) or a Bigotick Polytheist, who had a humor
of Deifying almost every thing, and therefore would have this Nature forsooth
to be called a Gooddess too; yet does he declare it not to be properly such,
but Abusively only (viz. because it was no Intellectual Thing) as he says the
Bodies of the Sun, Moon and Stars, supposed to be Animated, were called Gods
too, they being the Statues of the Gods. This is the meaning of those Words,
(...)^ Nature is a God or Goddess, not as having Godship properly belonging to
it, ^ut as the Divine Bodies are called Gods, because they are Statues of the
Gods.

Wherefore we cannot otherwise conclude concerning these our Mechanic Theists,
who will thus needs derive all Corporeal things from a Dead and Stupid Nature,
or from the Necessary Motions of Sensl^ss Matter, without the Direction of any
Mind, or Intention for Ends and Good; but that they are indeed Cousin-Germans
to Atheists; or possessed in a Degree, with a kind of Atheistick Enthusiasm, or
Fanaticism; they being so far forth, Inspired, with a Spirit of Infidelity,
which is the Spirit of Atheism.

But these Mechanic Theists are again counterballanced by another sort of
Atheists, not Mechanical nor Fortuitous; namely the Hylozoists; who are
unquestionably convinced, that Opera Naturae sunt Opera Intelligentiae, that
the Works of Nature are Works of Understanding; and that the Original of these
Corporeal things was not Dead and Stupid Matter Fortuitously moved; upon which
account Strato derided, Democritus his Rough and Smooth, Crooked and Hooky
Atoms, as mere Dreams and Dotages. But these notwithstanding, because they
would not admit of any other Substance besides Matter, suppose Life and
Perception, Essentially to belong to all Matter as such; whereby it has a
Perfect Knowledge of whatsoever it self could Do or Suffer (though without
Animal-consciousness) and can Form it self to the Best advantage; sometimes
improving it self by Organization, to Sense in Brutes, and to Reason and
Reflexive Understanding in Men. Wherefore according to the Principles of these
Hylozoists, there is not any need of a God, at all; that is, of one Perfect
Mind or Understanding Being presiding over the whole world; they concluding
accordingly, the Opinion of a God, to be only a Mistaking, of the Inadequate
Conception of Matter in General, its Life and Energetick Nature taken alone
Abstractly, for a Complete Substance by it self. Nevertheless these Hylozoick
Atheists, are no way able by this Hypothesis of theirs neither, to salve that
Phenomenon of the Regularity and Harmony of the whole Universe; because every
Part of Matter, being according to them, a Distinct Percipient by it self,
whose knowledge extends only to its own Concernment; and there being no one
thing presiding over all; the things of the whole World ((...), in which all
things are Co-ordered together) could never have fallen, into One such Agreeing
and Conspiring Harmony.

And as for those other Cosmo-Plastick Atheists, who suppose the whole World to
be as it were but One Huge Plant, Tree, or Vegetable, or to have One
Spermatick, Plastic, and Artificial Nature only, Orderly and Methodically
disposing the whole, but without Sense and Understanding, these can no way do
the business neither, that is, salve the forementioned Phenomenon, it being
utterly Impossible, that there should be any such Artificial and Regular
Nature, otherwise than as derived from, and depending upon, a Perfect Mind or
Wisdom.

And thus do we see plainly, that no Atheists whatsoever, can Salve the
Phenomenon of Nature, and this Particularly, of the Regular Frame and Harmony
of the Universe; and that true Philosophy, or the Knowledge of Causes,
Necessarily leads to a God.

But besides these Phenomenon, of Cogitation or Soul and Mind in Animals, Local
Motion in Bodies, and the Artificial Frame of things for Ends and Uses,
together with the Conspiring Harmony of the Whole; which can no way be Salved
without a Deity; We might here further add, that the Fortuitous, that is, the
Anaximandrian and Democritick Atheists, who Universally asserted the Novity of
this Mundane System, were not able to give any tolerable account neither, of
the First Beginning of Men, and those Greater Animals, that are no otherwise
begotten, than in the way of Generation, by the Commixture of Male and Female.

Aristotle in his Book of the Generation of Animals, writes thus; (...)^ Lib.
3. c. ult.
If Men and Fourfooted Animals, were ever Generated out of the Earth, as some
affirm, it may be probably conceived to have been, one of these Two ways;
either that they were Produced as Worms out of Putrefaction, or else Formed in
certain Eggs; growing out of the Earth. And then after a while he concludes
again, (...), That if there were any Beginning of the Generation of all
Animals, it is reasonable to think it, to have been one of these Two
forementioned ways. It is well known that Aristotle, though a Theist,
elsewhere asserteth the World's Eternity, according to which Hypothesis of his,
there was never any First Male nor Female, in any kind of Animals, but one
begat another Infinitely without any Beginning; a thing utterly repugnant to
our Humane Faculties, that are never able to frame any Conception of such an
Infinity of Number and Time, and of a Succesive Generation from Eternity. But
here Aristotle himself seems staggering or Skeptical about it; If Men were ever
Generated out of the Earth; and, If there were any Beginning of the Generation
of Animals: As he does also, in his Topics, Lib. 1. c. 9.
propound it for an Instance of a thing Disputable, (...), Whether the World
were Eternal or no? he ranking it amongst those (...), Those Great things for
which we can give no certain Reason, one way nor other. Now (says he) If the
World had a Beginning, and If Men were once (...) or (...), Earth-Born, then
must they have been in all probability, either Generated as Worms, out of
Putrefaction, or else out of Eggs; he supposing (it seems) those Eggs to have
grown out of the Earth. But the Generality of Atheists in Aristotle's time, as
well as Theists, denying this Eternity of the Mundane System, as not so
agreeable with their Hypothesis, because so Constant and Invariable an Order in
the World, from Eternity, has not such an appearance or semblance of Chance,
nor can be easily supposed to have been, without the Providence of a Perfect
Mind, presiding over it, and Senior to it (as Aristotle conceived) in Nature
though not in Time; They therefore in all Probability concluded likewise, Men
at First to have been Generated One of these Two ways, either out of
Putrefaction, or from Eggs; and this by the Fortuitous Motion of Matter;
without the Providence or Direction of any Deity. But after Aristotle, Epicurus
Phancied those First Men and other Animals, to have heen Formed in certain
Wombs or Bags growing out of the Earth, Crescebant Vteri terrae radicibus apti;
And this no otherwise than by the Fortuitous Motion of Atoms also.

But if Men had been at First Formed after this manner, either in Wombs or Eggs
(growing out of the Earth) or Generated out of Putrefaction, by Chance; then
could there be no reason imaginable, why it should not sometimes so Happen now,
the Motions of Atoms being as Brisk and Vigorous, as ever they were, and so to
continue to all Eternity: so that there is not the least Ground at all, for
that Precarious Fancy and Pretense of Epicurus, that the Earth as a
Childbearing Woman, growing old, became at length Effete and Barren. Moreover
the Men thus at first excluded out of Bags, Wombs or Eggshells, or Generated
out of Putrefaction, were supposed by these Atheists themselves, to have been
produced, not in a Mature and Adult, but an Infant-like, Weak and Tender State,
just such as they are now born into the World; by means whereof they could
neither be able to Feed and Nourish themselves, nor defend themselves from
harms and Injuries. But when the same Epicurus would here pretend also, that
the Earth which had been so Fruitful a Mother, became afterward by Chance too,
as tender and indulgent a Nurse, of this her own Progeny, and sent forth
Streams or Rivers of Milk after them, out of those Gaps of her Wounded Surface,
which they had before burst out of, as Critolaus long since observed, In Philo.
Quod Mund. Incurr
he might as well have feigned, the Earth to have had Breasts and Nipples too,
as Wombs and Milk; and then what should hinder, but that she might have Arms
and Hands also, and Swaddling-bands to boot? Neither is that less Precarious,
when the same Atheistick Philosopher adds, that in this Imaginary State of the
Newborn world, there was for a long time neither any Immoderate Heat nor Cold,
nor any Rude and Churlish Blasts of Wind, the least to annoy or injure those
tender Earth-born Infants and Nurslings. All which things being considered,
Anaximander seems of the Two, to have concluded more wisely, that Men, because
they require a longer time than other Animals to be hatched up in, were at
first Generated in the Bellies of Fishes, and there nourished up for a good
while, till they were at length able to defend, and shift for themselves, and
then were Disgorged, and cast up upon dry land. Thus do we see, that there is
nothing in the World so Monstrous, nor Prodigiously Absurd, which men
Atheistically inclined, will not rather Imagine, and Swallow down; than
entertain the Notion of a God.

Wherefore here is Dignus Vindice Nodus, and this Phenomenon of the First
Beginning of Mankind, and other Greater Animals, cannot be Salved otherwise,
than according to the Mosaic History, by admitting of (...), a God out of a
Machin, that is, an Extraordinary Manifestation of the Deity, in forming Man,
and other Animals, Male and Female, once out of the Earth; and that not in a
Rude, Tender and Infant-like State, but Mature and Adult, ^h^t so they might be
able immediately, to shift for themselves, Mul^iply and Propagate their kind by
Generation; and this being once done, and now no longer any necessity, of such
an extraordinary way of proceeding; then putting a stop immediately thereunto,
that so no more Terriginae nor Autochthones, Earth-born M^n, should be any
longer p^oduced. For all these circumstances being put together, it plainly
appears, that this whole Phenomenon, surpasses, not only the Mechanical, but
also the Plastic Powers; their being much of Discretion in it, which the
latter of these, cannot arrive to neither; they always acting, Fatally and
Necessarily. Nevertheless we shall not here determine, Whether God Almighty
might not* make use of the Subservient Ministry of Angels or Superior Spirits,
Created before Man, in this first extraordinary Efformation of the Bodies of
Animals out of the Earth, in a Mature and Adult State: as Plato in his Timaeus,
introduces the Supreme God (whom he supposes to be the immediate Creator of
all Immortal Souls) thus bespeaking the Junior Gods, and setting them a work in
the Fabrifaction of Mortal Bodies, (...), It is your work now to Adaptate the
Mortal to the Immortal, and to Generate or make Terrestrial Animals; He
afterward adding, (...), That after the sowing of Immortal Souls, (the Supreme
God) committed to these Junior Gods, the task of forming Mortal Bodies. Which
of Plato's, some conceive to have been derived from that of Moses, Let us make
Man after our own Image.

Moreover, these Atheists are no more able to Salve that other Common and
Ordinary Phenomenon neither, of the Conservation of the Species of all
Animals, by keeping up constantly in the world, a due Numerical Proportion
between the Sexes of Male and Female. For did this depend only upon Fortuitous
Mechanism, it cannot well be conceived, but that in some ages or other, there
should happen to be, either all Males, or all Females; and so the Species fail.
Nay it cannot well be thought otherwise, but that there is in this a Providence
also, Superior to that of the Plastic or Spermatick Nature, which has not so
much of Knowledge and Discretion allowed to it, as whereby to be able alone, to
govern this Affair.

Lastly, there are yet other Phenomenon, no less Real, though not
Physiological, which Atheists can no way Salve; as that of Natural Justice, and
Hon^sty, Duty, and Obligation; the true Foundation both of Ethics and
Politics; and the (...), Liberty of Will, properly so called, not that of
Fortuitous Determination, when there is a Perfect Equality or Indifferency of
Eligibility in Objects; but that whereby men dese^ve Commendation and Blame,
Rewards and Punishments, and so become fit Objects for Remunerative Justice to
display it self upon, a Main Hinge upon which Religion Turns; (though those
Two be not commonly so well distinguished as they ought.) For when Epicurus (an
Absolute Atheist) departing here from Democritus, pretended to Salve this, by
his Exiguum Clinamen Principiorum, this attempt of his, was no other, than a
plain Delirancy, or Atheistick Phrenzy in him.

And now have we already, Preventively Confuted, the Third Atheistick Pretense
also, to Salve the Phenomenon of Religion and the Belief of a God, so
generally entertained; namely from the Fiction and Imposture of Politicians; we
having not only manifested, that there is a Natural Prolepsis and Anticipation
of a God, in the Minds of men, as the Object of their Fear, Preventing Reason;
but also that the Belief thereof, is sustained and upheld, by the strongest
Reason; the Phenomenon of Nature being no way Salvable, nor the Causes of
things Assigneable, without a Deity; so that Religion being Founded, both upon
the Instincts of Nature, and upon Solid Reason, cannot possibly be any Fiction
or Imposture of Politicians. Nevertheless we shall speak something particularly
to this also. The Atheists therefore conceive, that though those Infirmities of
Humane Nature, men's Fear and Ignorant Credulity, do much dispose and incline
them, to the Belief of a God, or else of a Rank of Beings, Superior to men
(whether Visible or Invisible) commonly called by the Pagans, Gods; yet would
not this be so generally entertained, as it is; especially that of One Supreme
Deity, the First Original of all things, and Monarch of the Universe, had it
not been for the Fraud and Fiction of Lawmakers and Civil Sovereigns, who the
better to keep men in Peace and Subjection under them, and in a kind of
Religious and Superstitious Observation of their Laws, and Devotion to the
same, devized this Notion of a God, and then possessed the Minds of men with a
Belief of his Existence, and an Awe of him.

Now we deny not, but that Politicians may sometimes abuse Religion, and make
it serve for the promoting of their own private Interests and Designs; which
yet they could not so well do neither, were the thing it self, a mere Cheat and
Figment of their own, and had no Reality at all in Nature, nor any thing Solid
at the bottom of it. But since Religion obtains so universally every where, it
is not conceivable, how Civil Sovereigns throughout the whole World, some of
which are so distant, and have so little Correspondence with one another, should
notwithstanding, all so well agree in this One Cheating Mystery of Government,
or Piece of State-Coozenage; nor if they could, how they should be able so
effectually to posses the Generality of mankind, (as well wise as unwise) with
such a Constant Fear, Awe, and Dread, of a mere Counterfeit thing, and an
Invisible Nothing; and which has not only no manner of Foundation neither in
Sense nor Reason, but also (as the Atheists suppose) tends to their own great
Terror and Disquietment; and so brings them at once under a miserable
Vassallage both of Mind and Body. Especially since men are not generally, so
apt to think, that how much the more any have of Power and Dignity, they have
therefore so much the more of Knowledge and Skill, in Philosophy and the Things
of Nature, above others. And is it not strange, that the world should not all
this while, have suspected or discovered this Cheat and Juggle of Politicians,
and have Smelt out, a Plot upon themselves, in the Fiction of Religion, to take
away their Liberty and enthral them under Bondage: and that so many of these
Politicians and Civil Sovereigns themselves also, should have been unacquainted
herewith, and as simply awed, with the Fear of this Invisible Nothing, as any
others? All other Cheats and Juggles when they are once never so little
detected, are presently thereupon dashed quite out of countenance, and have
never any more the Confidence to obtrude themselves upon the world. But though
the Atheists have for these Two Thousand years past, been continually buzzing
into men's Ears, that Religion is nothing but a mere State-Juggle and Political
Imposture, yet has not the Credit thereof been the least impaired thereby, nor
its Power and Dominion over the Minds of men abated; from whence it may be
concluded, that it is no Counterfeit and Fictitious thing, but what is deeply
rooted in the Intellectual Nature of man, a thing Solid at the bottom, and
Supported by its own strength. Which yet may more fully appear from
Christianity, a Religion founded in no Humane Policy, nor tending to promote
any Worldly Interest or Design; which yet by its own, or the Divine Force, has
prevailed over the Power and Policy, the Rage and Madness of all Civil States,
Jewish and Pagan, and has Conquered so great a Part of the Persecuting World
under it; and that not by Resisting, or Opposing Force, but by suffering Deaths
and Martyrdoms, in way of Adherence to that Principle, That it is better to
obey God than Men. Which thing was thus Presignified in the Prophetic
Scripture; Why do the Heathen Rage, and the People imagine a Vain thing? The
Kings of the Earth set themselves, and the Rulers take Counsel together,
against the Lord, and against his Christ, etc. He that sits in the Heavens
shall laugh, the Lord shall have them in Derision. Then shall he speak unto
them in his Wrath, etc. Yet have I set my King upon my Holy Hill of Sion. I
will give thee the Heathen for thine Inheritance, and the Uttermost Parts of
the Earth for thy Possession. Be wise now therefore, O ye Kings, etc.

But that Theism, or Religion, is no Gullery or Imposture, will be yet further
made unquestionably Evident. That the generality of Mankind have agreed in the
acknowledgment of one Supreme Deity, as a Being Eternal and Necessarily
Existent, Absolutely Perfect, and Omnipotent, and the Maker of the whole World,
has been already largely proved in the foregoing Discourse. To which purpose
is this of Sextus the Philosopher, Adv. Math. 314.
(...)^ All men have this common Prolepsis, concerning God, that he is a Living
Being Incorruptible, Perfectly Happy, and Incapable of all manner of Evil. And
the Notion of that God, which Epicurus opposed, was no other than this, An
Understanding Being, having all Happiness, with Incorruptibility, that Framed
the whole World. Now, I say, that if there be no such thing as this Existing,
and this Idea of God, be a mere Fictitious Thing, then was it altogether
Arbitrarious. But it is unconceivable, how the Generality of Mankind, (a few
Atheists only excepted) should universally agree, in one and the same
Arbitrarious Figment. This Argumentation has been formerly used, by some
Theists, as appears from the forementioned Sextus, (...)^ Adv. Mat^. 314.
It is altogether Irrational to think, that all men should by Chance, light
upon the same Properties (in the Idea of God) without being Naturally moved
thereunto. Neither is that any sufficient account which the Atheists would here
give, that Statesmen and Politicians, every where thus possessed the Minds of
men with One and the same Idea; the Difficulty still remaining, how Civil
Sovereigns and Lawmakers, in all the distant parts of the world, and such as
had no Communication nor Intercourse with one another; should universally Jump,
in one and the same Fictitious and Arbitrarious Idea.

Moreover, were there no God, it is Not Conceivable, how that forementioned
Idea should ever have Entered into the Minds of men, or how it could have been
Formed in them. And here the Atheists again, think it enough, to say that this
Notion or Idea was Put into the Minds of the Generality of mankind, by
Lawmakers and Politicians, Telling them, of such a Being, and persuading them
to believe his Existence; or that it was from the first Feigner or Inventor of
it, propagated all along and conveyed down, by Oral Tradition. But this argues
their great Ignorance in Philosophy to think that any Notion or Idea, is put
into men's Minds from without, merely by Telling, or by Words; we being Passive
to nothing else from words, but their Sounds and the Phantasms thereof; they
only occasioning the Soul to excite such Notions, as it had before within it
self (whether Innate or Adventitious) which those words by the Compact and
Agreement of men were made to be Signs of; or else to reflect also further,
upon those Ideas of their own, Consider them more Distinctly, and Compare them
with one another. And though all Learning be not the Remembrance of what the
Soul once before actually understood, in a Pre-existent State, as Plato
somewhere would have it, according to that of Boethius, Quod si Platonis Musa
personat Verum,
Quod quisque Discit, Immenior Recordatur;
Yet is all Humane Teaching, but Maieutical, or Obstetricious; and not the
filling of the Soul as a Vessel, merely by Pouring into it from Without, but
the Kindling of it from Within; or helping it so to excite and awaken, compare,
and compound its own Notions, as whereby to arrive at the Knowledge, of that
which it was before Ignorant of; as the thing was better expressed by the
forementioned Philosophic Poet, in these words, Haeret profecto Semen
introrsum Very,
Quod excitatur Ventilante Doctrina.
Wherefore the mere Telling of men, There is a God, could not infuse any Idea
of him into their Minds; nor yet the further giving this Definition of him,
that he is a Being Absolutely Perfect, Eternal and Self-Existent, make them
understand any thing of his Nature, were they not able to Excite Notions or
Ideas from within themselves, correspondent to those several words. However the
Difficulty still remains, How those Civil Sovereigns and Lawmakers, or how
Critias, his very first Inventor of that Cheat of a God, could Form that Idea,
within themselves, since upon supposition of his Nonexistence, it is the Idea
of Nothing, or of a Nonentity. And this was Judiciously Hinted also by the
same Sextus; Adv. Math. 3^3, 314.
(...); The Atheists affirming, that certain Lawmakers first put this Notion
of a God, into the minds of men, do not consider, that they still remain
entangled in the Difficulty, if any one further demand of them, how those
Lawmakers themselves could first form that Idea? From whence it is afterward
concluded, (...). That therefore the Notion of a God, sprung not from the
Arbitrarious Fiction, of Lawmakers and Politicians.

But some Atheists will yet further Reply, That ^here is a Feigning Power in
the Humane Soul, whereby it can Frame Ideas or Conceptions of such things, as
actually never were nor will be; as of a Centaur, or of a Golden Mountain; and
that by such a Feigning Power as this, the Idea of God, though there be no such
thing Existing, might be Framed. And here we deny not, but that the Humane Soul
has a Power of Compounding Ideas and Things, together, which Exist Severally,
and Apart, in Nature, but never were, nor will be, in that Conjunction: and
this indeed is all the Feigning Power that it has. For the Mind cannot make
any New Cogitation, which was not before, but only Compound that which Is. As
the Painter cannot Feign Colors, but must use such as exist in Nature, only he
can Variously Compound them together, and by his Pencil, draw the Figures and
Lineaments of such things as no where are; as he can add to the Head and Face
of a Man, the Neck, Shoulders, and Body of a Horse. In like manner that more
Subtle Painter or Limner, the Mind and Imagination of man, can frame Compounded
Ideas of things, which no where Exist, but yet His Simple Colors
nothwithstanding, must be Real; He cannot Feign any Cogitation, which was not
in Nature, nor make a Positive Conception of that which is Absolutely Nothing;
which were no less than to make, Nothing to be Something, or Create Something
out of Nothing. And though the whole of these Fictitious Ideas (as of a Golden
Mountain) does not any where actually Exist, yet for as much as it does not
Absolutely Imply a Contradiction, for it so to do, therefore has it also a
Possible Entity too, and otherwise it could not be Conceivable. As a Triangular
Square, for example, being a Contradictious Thing, has not so much as a
Possible Entity, and therefore is not Conceivable as such; (though both a
Triangle and a Square severally be Conceivable) it being mere None-Sence,
Nothing, and no Idea at all. Nay we Conceive, that a Theist may presume with
Reverence to say, that God Almighty himself, though he can Create More or Fewer
Really Existent things, as he pleases, and could make a whole world out of
Nothing, yet can he not make more Cogitation or Conception, then Is; or was
before contained in his own Infinite Mind and Eternal Wisdom; nor have a
Positive Idea of any thing, which has neither Actual nor Possible Entity.

But the Idea of God, is not a Compilement or Aggregation of things, which
Exist Scatteredly and Apart in the World; for then would it be a mere
Arbitrarious thing; and it might be what every one pleased; one Adding more
things together, and another Fewer; but each of them writing, the Name or Title
of God, as bungling Painters did, under these there several Figments. Whereas
we have already proved, that the Idea of God, is One most Simple Idea, of an
Absolutely Perfect Being, though having several Partial and Inadequate
Conceptions; so that nothing can be Added to it, nor Detracted from it, there
being nothing included therein, but what is Demonstrable of a Perfect Being,
and therefore nothing at all Arbitrarious.

Moreover, many of those Partial Conceptions contained in the entire Idea of
God, are no where else to be found in the whole world, Existing Singly and
Apart; and therefore, if there be no God, they must needs be Absolute
Non-Entities; as Immutability, Necessary Existence, Infinity, and Perfection,
etc. so that the Painter that makes this Idea, must here Feign Colors
themselves, or Create New Cogitation and Conception out of Nothing, upon the
Atheistick Supposicion.

Lastly, If there be no God now Existing, it is Impossible that ever there
should be any, and so the Whole Idea of God, would be the Idea of that, which
has no Possible Entity neither; whereas those other Fictitious Ideas, made by
the Mind of man, though they be of such things, as have no Actual Existence,
yet have they all a Possible Entity as was said before.

But that we may Conceal nothing of the Atheists Strength, we must here
acknowledge, that some of them have yet pretended further, that besides this
Power of Compounding things together, the human Soul has also another
Ampliating, or Increasing and Improving Power, by both which together, though
there be no God Existing, nor yet Possible; the Idea of him, may be
Fictitiously made: those Partial Ideas which are no where else to be found,
arising, as they say, from a (...), a Transition and Gradual Procession from
men; in way of Amplification, Adv. Math. P. 317.
Augmentation and Improvement. Thus do we read in Sextus, (...) (...). The
Ideas, of the Eternity, Incorruptibility, and Perfect Happiness of the Deity,
were Fictitiously made, by way of Transition from men. For as by increasing a
man of an ordinary Stature in our Imagination, we Fictitiously make the
Phantasm of a Cyclops; so when beholding a Happy Man that abounds with all
good things, we Amplify, Intend, and as it were Swell the same in our Minds
higher and higher, we then arrive at length to the Idea of a Being Absolutely
Happy, that is, a God. So did the Ancients, taking notice of a very Longeve
man, and increasing this length of Age, further and further Infinitely, by that
means Frame the Notion or Idea of Eternity, and attribute the same to God.

But to this we Reply; First, that according to the Principles of the Atheists
themselves, there could not possibly be any such Amplifying and Feigning Power
of the Soul, as whereby it could Make More than Is; because they suppose it to
have no Active Power at all; but all our Conceptions to be nothing but mere
Passions, from the Objects without; according to that of Protagoras in Plato's
Thaeetetus, (...), P. 167. Serr.
It is neither possible; for a man to conceive that which is not; nor any more
or otherwise, than he Suffers. Again as Sextus the Philosopher also intimates,
the Atheists are here plainly guilty, of that Fallacy or Error in
Ratiocination, which is commonly called a Circle, or (...). For whereas they
could not otherwise Judge, the greatest Perfection and Happiness which ever
they had experience of in men, to be Imperfect, then by an Anticipated Idea of
Perfection, and Happiness, with which it was in their minds compared; (by
virtue of which Idea also, it comes to pass, that they are able to Amplify
those lesser Perfections of men further and further, and can take occasion from
Imperfect Things, to think of that which is Absolutely Perfect:) that is,
whereas these Atheists themselves first make the Idea of Imperfection, from
Perfection; they not attending to this, do again go about, to make up the
Notion or Idea, of that which is Absolutely Perfect (by way of Amplification)
from that which is Imperfect. But that men have a Notion of Absolute Perfection
in them, by which as the Rule or Measure, they (comparing other things
therewith) Judge them to be Imperfect; and which is therefore in Order of
Nature First; may appear from hence, because all Theologers as well Pagan as
Christian, give this Direction, for the Conceiving of God, that it should
principally be done, Per Viam Remotionis, by way of Remotion of all
Imperfection from him. Thus Alcinous, (...), The first way of Conceiving of
God, is by Remotion or Abstraction. We add in the last place, That Finite
things put together can never make up Infinite, as may appear from that
Instance of Humane Longevity proposed, for if one should Amplify that never so
much, by adding of more and more Past Time or years to it; yet would he never
thereby by able, to arrive at Eternity without beginning. God differs not from
these Imperfect Created things, in Degrees only, but in the Whole Kind. And
though Infinite Space may perhaps be here Objected, as a thing taken for
granted, which being nothing but Extension or Magnitude, must therefore consist
or be made up of Finite Parts, yet as was it before declared, we have no
certainty of any more than this; that the Finite World might have been made
Bigger and Bigger Infinitely or Without End, which Infinity of Magnitude, is
but like that of Number, Potential; from whence it may be inferred as well of
the one, as the other, that it can never be Actually Infinite. Wherefore were
there no Infinitely Perfect Being in Nature, the Idea thereof could never be
made up by any Amplifying Power of the Soul, or by the Addition of Finites.
Neither is that of any moment, which Gassendus so much objecteth here to the
contrary, that though there were no God or Infinite Being, yet might the Idea
of him as well be Feigned, by the Mind, as that of Infinite Worlds, or of
Infinite Matter, was by some Philosophers. For Infinite Worlds and Infinite
Matter, are but words Ill Put-together; Infinity being a Real thing in Nature,
(and no Fiction of the Mind) as well as the World or Matter; but yet proper to
the Deity only. But it is no wonder, if they who denied a God, yet retaining
this Notion of Infinity, should misapply the same, as they did also other
Properties of the Deity, to Matter.

To conclude this; Our humane Soul cannot Feign or Create any New Cogitation or
Conception, that was not before, but only variously compound that which Is: nor
can it ever make a Positive Idea of an Absolute Nonentity, that is, such as
has neither Actual nor Possible Existence. Much less could our Imperfect
Beings, Create the Entity of so Vast a Thought, as that of an Infinitely
Perfect Being, out of Nothing; this being indeed more then for God Almighty, or
a Perfect Being, to Create a Real World out of Nothing: because there is no
Repugnancy at all in the Latter, as there is in the Former. We affirm
therefore, that Were there no God, the Idea of an Absolutely or Infinitely
Perfect Being, could never have been Made or Feigned, neither by Politicians,
nor by Poets, nor Philosophers, nor any other. Which may be accounted another
Argument for a Deity.

But that Religion is no Figment of Politicians, will further unquestionably
appear, from that which now shall follow. As the Religion of an Oath, is a
Necessary Vinculum of Civil Society; so Obligation in Conscience, respecting
the Deity as its Original, and as the Punisher of the Violation thereof, is the
very Foundation of all Civil Sovereignty. For Pacts and Covenants (into which
some would resolve all Civil Power) without this Obligation in Conscience, are
nothing but mere Words and Breath: and the Laws and Commands of Civil
Sovereigns, do not make Obligation, but presuppose it, as a thing in Order of
Nature Before them, and without which they would be Invalid. Which is a Truth
so Evident, that the Writer De Cive, could not dissemble it, Imper. c. 14.
Sect. 21.
(though he did not rightly understand this Natural Obligation) but
acknowledges it in these words, Obligatio ad Obedientiam Civilem, cujus vi
Leges Civiles Validae sunt, Omni Lege Civili prior est. -- Quod si quis
Princeps Summus, Legem Civilem in hanc Formulam conciperet, Non Rebellabis,
nihil efficeret. Nam nisi prius Obligentur Cives ad Obediendum, hoc est, ad Non
Rebellandum, Omnis Lex Invalida est; and si prius Obligentur est Superflua. The
Obligation to Civil Obedience, by the force of which all the Civil Laws become
Valid, is before those Civil Laws. And if any Prince should make a Law to this
purpose, That no man should Rebel against him, this would signify nothing,
because unless they to whom it is made, were before Obliged to Obey, or not to
Rebel, the Law is Invalid; and if they were, then is it Superfluous. Now this
Previous Obligation to Civil Obedience, cannot be derived (as the forementioned
Writer De Cive, and of the Leviathan, supposes) from men's Private Vtility only,
because every man being Judge of this for himself, it would then be Lawful for
any Subject, to Rebel against his Sovereign Prince, and to Poison or Stab him,
whenever he could reasonably persuade himself, that it would tend to his own
Advantage; or that he should thereby procure the Sovereignty. Were the
Obligation to Civil Obedience, Made only by men's Private Vtility, it would as
easily be Dissolved by the same. It remains therefore, that Conscience and
Religious Obligation to Duty, is the only Basis, and Essential Foundation of a
Polity or Commonwealth; without which there could be no Right or Authority of
Commanding in any Sovereign, nor Validity in any Laws. Wherefore Religious
Obligation cannot be thought to be the Fiction or Imposture of Civil
Sovereigns, unless Civil Sovereignty it self, be accounted a Fiction and
Imposture; or a thing which has no Foundation in Nature, but is either wholly
Artificial, or Violent.

Moreover had a Religious Regard to the Deity, been a mere Figment or Invention
of Politicians, to promote their own Ends, and keep men in Obedience and
Subjection under them, then would they doubtless, have so framed and contrived
it, as that it should have been every way Flexible and Compliant: namely by
persuading the world, that whatsoever was Commanded by themselves, was
agreeable to the Divine Will, and whatever was Forbidden by their Laws, was
displeasing to God Almighty, and would be Punished by him: God ruling over the
World, no otherwise, than by and in, these Civil Sovereigns, as his
Vicegerents; and as the only Prophet's and Interpreters of his will to men. So
that the Civil Law of every Country, and the Arbitrary will of Sovereigns,
should be acknowledged to be the only Measure of Just and Unjust (there being
nothing Naturally such) the only Rule of Conscience and Religion. For from
Religion thus Modelled, Civil Sovereigns might think to have an Absolute Power,
or an Infinite Right, of Doing or Commanding whatsoever they pleased, without
exception, nothing being Unlawful to them, and their Subjects being always
Obliged, in Conscience, without the least Scruple, to Obey.

But this is but a mere Larva of Religion, and would be but a Mocketory of God
Almighty; and indeed this is the only Religion that can be called, a Political
Figment. Neither could the generality of mankind, be ever yet thus persuaded,
that the Arbitrary Will of Civil Sovereigns, was the only Rule of Justice and
Conscience; and that God Almighty could Command nothing, nor Reveal his will
concerning Religion, to mankind otherwise than by these, as his Prophets and
Interpreters. True Religion and Conscience, are no such Waxen things, Servilely
Addicted, to the Arbitrary Wills of men; but Immorigerous, Stiff, and
Inflexible: they respecting the Deity only, his Eternal or Everlasting Laws;
and his Revealed Will; with which whenever Humane Laws clash (a thing not
impossible) they conclude, that then God ought to be Obeyed, and not Men. For
which Cause the Profane Politicians, declare open war against this Religion,
as a thing utterly Inconsistent with Civil Sovereignty; because it introduces a
Fear greater than the Fear of the Leviathan; namely that of Him, who can
inflict Eternal Punishments after Death; as also because it clashes with that
monstrous, Infinite and Unlimited Power of theirs, which is such a Thing, as is
not attributed by Genuine Theists, to God Almighty himself; a Power of making
their mere Arbitrary Will the Rule of Justice, and not Justice the Rule of
their Will. Thus does a Modern Writer of Politics, condemn it, for Seditious
Doctrine, tending to the Dissolution of a Common Wealth, That Subjects may make
a Judgment of Good and Evil, Lev. p. 168.
Just and Unjust; or have any other Conscience besides the Law of the Land. As
also this, De Cive. c. 12. Sect. 2.

Lev. c 38. p. 238.


That Subjects may Sin in obeying the Commands of their Sovereign. He likewise
adds, That it is Impossible, a Common Wealth should stand, where any other than
the Sovereign, has a Power of giving greater rewards than Life, and of
inflicting greater punishments than Death. Now Eternal Life is a greater reward
than the Life present, and Eternal torment than the Death of Nature. Wherefore
God Almighty being the Dispenser of Eternal Rewards and Punishments; this is
all one as if he should have said, It is impossible a Common Wealth should
stand, where the Belief of a God, who can Punish with Eternal Torments after
this Life, is entertained. Thus does the same Writer declare, Lev. p. 8.
That if the Superstitious Fear of Spirits (whereof God is the Chief) and
things depending thereupon, were taken away, men would be much more fitted than
they are, for Civil Obedience: And that they who assert the Immortality of
Souls, or their capability of receiving punishments after Death; Page 373.
fright men from obeying the Laws of their Country, with Empty names, as men
fright Birds from the Corn, with an Empty Dublet, a Hat, and a Crooked Stick.
And accordingly He concludes, that Civil Sovereigns do not only make Justice,
but Religion also; and that no Scripture or Divine Revelation can Oblige,
unless it be first made Law, or stamped with their Authority. Now since that
which can make Religion and Gods, must it self needs be greater than all Gods,
it follows according to the Tenor of this Doctrine, that the Civil Sovereign
is in Reality, the Supreme Numen: Or else at least, that the Leviathan (the
King over all the Children of Pride) is the Highest Deity, next to Senseless
Omnipotent Matter; the One of these being the Atheists Natural, the Other their
Artificial God. Nevertheless we shall here observe by the way, that whilst
these Atheistick Politicians, thus endeavor, to Swell up the Civil Sovereign,
and to bestow upon him, an Infinite Right, by removing to that end out of his
way; Natural Justice, Conscience, Religion, and God himself; they do indeed
thereby absolutely divest him of all Right and Authority; since the Subject is
now no longer Obliged in Conscience to Obey him, and so in stead of True Right
and Authority, they leave him nothing but mere Brutish Force. Wherefore since
Theism and True Religion are thus plainly disowned and disclaimed by these
Politicians, as altogether Inconsistent with their Designs, they cannot be
supposed to have been the Figments of Civil Sovereigns, or the mere Creatures
of Political Art. And thus have we abundantly confuted, those three Atheistick
Pretenses, to salve the Phenomenon of Religion; from Fear, and the Ignorance
of Causes, and the Fiction of Politicians.

But since besides those Ordinary Phenomenon before mentioned, which are no way
Salvable by Atheists, there are certain other Phenomenon Extraordinary, that
either immediately prove a God and Providence, or else that there is a Rank of
Understanding Beings Invisible, Superior to men, from whence a Deity may be
afterward inferred; namely these Three Especially, Apparitions, Miracles, and
Prophecies: (Where the Atheists Obstinatly denying Matter of Fact and History,
will needs impute these things, either to Juggling Fraud and Knavery; or else to
men's own Fear and Fancy, and their Ignorance how to distinguish Dreams, and
other strong Imaginations from Vision and Sense; or Lastly to certain Religious
Tales or Legends, allowed by the Public Authority of Civil Sovereigns, for
Political Ends;) we shall here Suggest something briefly, to vindicate the
Historick Truth of those Phenomenon, against Atheists.

First therefore, as for Apparitions, Though there be much of Fabulosity in
these Relations, yet can it not reasonably be concluded, that there is nothing
at all of Truth in them: since something of this kind, has been averred in all
Ages, and many times attested by persons of Unquestionable Prudence, and
Unsuspected Veracity. And whereas the Atheists impute the Original of these
things, to men's Mistaking both their Dreams, and their Waking Phancies, for
Real Visions and Sensations; they do hereby plainly contradict one Main
Fundamental Principle of their own Philosophy, that Sense is the only Ground of
Certainty, and the Criterion of all Truth: for if Prudent and Intelligent
persons may be so frequently mistaken, in confounding their own Dreams and
Phancies with Sensations, how can there be any Certainty of knowledge at all
from Sense? However, they here derogate so much both from Sense, and from
Humane Testimonies, as that if the like were done in other Cases, it would
plainly overthrow all Humane Life.

Wherefore other Atheists, being apprehensive of this Inconvenience, of denying
so many Sensible Appearances, and Testimonies, or Relations of Fact; have chose
rather to acknowledge the Reality of Apparitions; nevertheless concluding them
to be things Caused and Created, by the Power of Imagination only; as if the
strength of Imagination were such, that it could not only Create Phancies, but
also Real Sensible Objects, and that at a distance too from the Imaginers, such
as whereby the Sense of others shall be for the time affected, though they
quickly vanish away again. From which Prodigious Paradox, we may take notice of
the Fanaticism of some Atheists, and that there is nothing so monstrously
Absurd, which men infected with Atheistick Incredulity, will not rather
entertain into their Belief, than admit of any thing that shall the least
hazard or endanger, the Existence of a God. For if there be once any Invisible
Ghosts or Spirits acknowledged, as Things Permanent, it will not be easy for
any to give a reason, why there might not be one Supreme Ghost also, presiding
over them all, and the whole world.

In the last place therefore, we shall observe, that Democritus was yet further
convinced, by these Relations of Apparitions; so as to grant that there was a
certain kind of Permanent Beings and Independent upon Imagination, Superior to
men, which could Appear in different Forms* and again disappear at pleasure,
called by him Idols or Images; he supposing them to be of the same nature, with
those Exuvious Effluxes, that stream continually from the surface of Bodies:
only he would not allow them to have any thing Immortal at all in them, but
their Concretions to be at length all Dissolvable, and their Personalities then
to vanish into nothing. Adv. Ma^^. p. 311.
Thus Sextus the Philosopher* (...). Democritus affirms, that there are
certoin Idols or Specter, that do often approach to men, some of which are
Beneficent and some Maleficent. Upon which account, he wishes, that it might
be his good hap, to meet with fortunate Idols. And he adds, that these are of
a Vast bigness, and very Longeve, but not Incorruptible, and that they
sometimes do fore-signifie unto men future events, both Visibly appearing to
them and sending forth audible voices. Now though Democritus were much blamed
for this Concession of his Fellow-Atheists, as giving thereby, too great an
advantage to Theists; yet in his own opinion, did he sufficiently secure
himself against the Danger of a God from hence, by supposing all these Idols of
his, to be Corruptible, they being indeed nothing but certain Finer Concretions
of Atoms, a kind of Aereal and Ethereal Animals; that were all Body, and
without any Immortal Soul, as he supposed men also to be: so that a God could
be no more proved from them, than from the Existence of men. For thus he adds
in Sextus, (...)^ Men in ancient times, having a sense of these Apparitions or
Idols, fell from thence into the opinion of a God; although there be besides
these Idols, no other God, that has an Incorruptible Nature. However, though
Democritus continued thus grossly Atheistical, yet was he further convinced,
than our Modern Atheists will be, that the Stories of Apparitions were not all
Fabulcus, and that there are not only Terrestrial, but also Aerial and
Aetherial Animal^; nor this Ear^^ of ours alone Peopled and Inhabited, whilst
all those other vast Regio^s above, lie Desert, Solitary, and Wast. Where it
may be observed ag^in that diverse of the Ancient Fathers, though they agreed
not so far with Democritus, as to make the Angelical Beings to be altogether
(...) did they likewise suppose them to have their certain Subti^^ (...) A^rial
Bodies. In which respect St. Austin in his 115. Epistle* (...) Angels
Aethereos, and Devils, Aereos Animantes. Page 29.
Thus Psellus in his Dialogue, (...). But you are to know, that Demons or
Devils, are not altogether Incorporeal, but that they are Joined to Bodies, and
so Converse with Bodies, which may be learned also from the Fathers, the Divine
Basil contending, that there are Bodies, not only in Devils, but also in the
pure Angels themselves, as certain Subtle, Airy Defecate Spirits. Where
afterward he shows, how the (...), that Body which is Connate with Angels,
differs from that which Devils are united to, in respect of the Radiant
Splendor of the one, and the Dark Fuliginous Obscurity of the other. Moreover
that Devils are not without Bodies, he endeavors further to confirm, from the
words of our Savior, that they shall be Punished with Fire, which (says he)
were a thing impossible, were they All of them Incorporeal. And some perhaps
will attempt to prove the same concerning Angels too, from those other words of
our Savior, where speaking of the Resurrection State, he affirms, that they
who shall be accounted worthy thereof, shall neither marry nor be given in
marriage, but be (...), Equal to the Angels: which Comparative Expression of
men, as to their Bodies, with Angels; would be thought not so proper, were the
Angels absolutely devoid of all Body. But of this we determine not.

To this Phenomenon of Apparitions, might be added those Two others of
Magicians or Wizards, Demoniacks or Energumeni; both of these proving also, the
Real Existence of Spirits, and that they are not mere Phancies, and Imaginary
Inhabitants of men's Brains only, but Real Inhabitants of the World. As also,
that among those Spirits there are some Foul, Unclean and Wicked Ones; (though
not made such by God, but by their own Apostasy) which is some confirmation of
the Truth of Christianity, the Scripture insisting so much upon these Evil
Demons or Devils, and declaring it to be one design of our Savior Christ's
coming into the World, to oppose these Confederate Powers of the Kingdom of
Darkness, and to rescue mankind from the Thraldom and Bondage thereof. As for
Wizards and Magicians, Persons who associate and confederate themselves in a
peculiar manner with these Evil Spirits, for the gratification of their own
Revenge, Lust, Ambition, and other Passions; besides the Scriptures, there has
been so full an attestation given to them, by persons unconcerned in all Ages,
that those our so confident Exploders of them, in this present Age, can hardly
escape the suspicion, of having some Hankring toward Atheism. But as for the
Demoniacks and Energumeni; It has been much wondered, that there should be so
many of them in our Savior's time, and hardly any or none, in this present Age
of ours. Certain it is from the Writings of Josephus, in sundry places, that
the Pharisaick Jews, were then generally possessed with an Opinion of these
(...), Demoniacks; men Possessed with Devils, or Infested by them. And that
this was not a mere Phrase or Form of Speech only amongst them, for persons
very Ill-affected in their Bodies, may appear from hence, that Josephus
declares it as his opinion, concerning the Demons or Devils, that they were
(...), the Spirits or Souls of wicked men deceased, getting into the Bodies of
the Living. From hence it was that Jews in our Savior's time were not at all
Surprised with his casting out of Devils, it being usual for them also then to
Exorcise the same, an Art which they pretended to have learned from Solomon. Of
whom thus Josephus, Ant. J^d. Lib. 8. c. 2.
(...). God also taught Solomon, an Art against Demons and Devils, for the
benefit and Cure of men. Who composed certain Incantations, by which diseases
are cured, and left forms of exorcisms, whereby Devils are expelled and driven
away. Which Method of curing, prevails much amongst us, at this very day.
Notwithstanding which, we think it not at all probable, what a late Atheistick
Writer has asserted, that the heads of the Jews were then all of them so full
of Demons and Devils, that they generally took all manner of Bodily Diseases,
such as Fevers and Agues, and Dumbness and Deafness, for Devils. Though we
grant that this very thing, was imputed by Plotinus afterward to the Gnostics,
that they supposed all Diseases to be Devils, and therefore not to be cured by
Physic, but expelled by Words or Charms. Thus he, En. 2. Lib. 9. c. 14. (...)
etc. (...). Now when they affirm Diseases to be Demons or Devils, and pretend
that they can expel them by words, undertaking to do the same; they hereby
indeed render themselves considerable to the vulgar, who are wont not a little
to admire the powers of Magicians. But they will not be able to persuade wise
men, that Diseases have no natural Causes, as from Repletion, or Inanition, or
Putrefaction, or the like: Which is a thing manifest from their cure, they
being oftentimes removed by purgation, and bleeding, and abstinence. Unless
perhaps these men will say, that the Devil is by this means Starved, and made
to Pine away. Nor can we think that the Jews in our Savior's time, either
supposed all Madmen to be Demoniacks, or all Demoniacks Madmen (though this
latter seems to be asserted by an Eminent Writer of our own) we reading of
Devils cast out from others besides Madmen; and of a woman which had a Spirit
of Infirmity only, and was bowed together, and could not lift up her self,
which is said by our Savior Christ to have been Bound by Satan. Wherefore the
sense of the Jews formerly seems to have been this, that when there was any
unusual and extraordinary Symptoms, in any bodily Distemper, but especially
that of Madness, this being looked upon something more than Natural, was
imputed by them to the Possession or Infestation of some Devil. Neither was
this proper to the Jews only at that time, to suppose Evil Demons to be the
Causes of such bodily diseases, as had extraordinary Symptoms, and especially
Madness; but the Greeks and other Gentiles also were embued with the same
Persuasion; as appears from Apollonius Tyanaeus his curing a Laughing
Demoniack at Athens, he ejecting that Evil Spirit, by threats and menaces, who
is said at his departure, to have tumbled down a Royal Porch in the City with
great noise. As also, from his freeing the City of Ephesus from the Plague, by
stoning an old Ragged Beggar, said by Apollonius to have been the Plague, which
appeared to be a Demon, by his changing himself, into the form of a Shagged Dog.

But that there is some Truth in this Opinion, and that at this very day, Evil
Spirits or Demons, do sometimes really Act upon the Bodies of men, and either
Inflict or Augment bodily Distempers and Diseases, has been the Judgment of
two very experienced Physicians, Sennertus and Fernelius. The Former in his
Book, De Mania. Lib. 1. cap. 15. writing thus, Etsi sine ulla Corporis Morbosa
Dispositione, Deo permittente, hominem Obsidere and Occupare Demon possi^,
tamen quandoque Morbis, and praecipue Melancholicis, sese immiscet Demon; and
forsan frequentius hoc accidit, quam saepe creditur. Although the Devil may, by
Divine permission, Possess men without any Morbid Disposition, yet does he
usually intermingle himself with Bodily Diseases, and especially those of
Melancholy; and perhaps this comes to pass ostner, than is commonly believed
or suspected. The other in his, De Abditis rerum Causis, where having
attributed real Effects upon the bodies of men, to Witchcraft and Enchantment,
he adds; Neque solum morbos, verum etiam Daemonas, scelerati homines in
corpora immittunt. Hi quidem visuntur Furoris quadam specie distorti; hoc uno
tamen a Simplici Furore distant, quod sum ardua obloquantur, praeterita and
occulta renuntient, assidentiumque arcana reserent. Neither do these wicked
Magicians only inflict Diseases upon men's Bodies; but also send Devils into
them; By means whereof they appear distorted with a kind of fury and madness,
which yet differs from a Simple Madness (or the Disease so called) in this,
that they speak of very high and difficult matters, declare things past
unknown, and discover the Secrets of those that sit by. Of which he subjoyns
two Notable Instances, of Persons well known to himself, that were plainly
Demoniacal, Possessed, or Acted by an Evil Demon; one whereof shall be
afterward mentioned. But when Maniacal Persons, do not only discover Secrets,
and declare things Past, but Future also, besides this, speak in Languages,
which they had never learnt, this puts it out of all doubt and question, that
they are not mere Mad men or Maniaci, but Demoniacks or Energumeni. And that
since the time of our Savior Christ, there have been often such, may be made
evident from the Records of credible Writers. Psellus in his Book (...), De
Operat. Daem. averrs it, of a certain Maniacal Woman, That though she knew
nothing but her own Mother tongue, yet when a Stranger who was an Arm^nian was
brought into the Room to her, she spoke to him presently in the Arm^nian
Language, (...), Page 69.
We all stood amazed, when we heard, a woman that had never seen an Armenian
before in all her life, nor had learnt any thing, but the use of her Distaff,
to speak the Armenian Language readily. Where the Relater also affirms the
same Maniacal Person, to have foretold certain Future Events, which happened
shortly after to himself, (...). Page 6^.
Then looking upon me, she (or rather the Demon) said, thou shall suffer
wonderful pains and torments in thy Body, For the Demons are extremely angry
with thee, for opposing their Services and Worship; and they will inflict great
evils upon thee, out of which thou shall not be able to escape, unless a Power
greater than that of Demons, exempt thee from them. All which things (says he)
happened shortly after to me, and I was brought very low even near to Death by
them; but was by my Savior wonderfully delivered. Whereupon Psellus concludes,
(...), Who is there therefore, that considering this Oracle or Prediction, will
conclude (as some Physicians do) all kind of Madnesses, to be nothing but the
Exorbitant Motions of the Matter or Humors, and not the Tragic Passions of
the Demons. But because this Instance is remoter from our present Times, we
shall set down another remarkable one of a later Date, out of the forementioned
Fernelius, who was an eyewitness thereof. A young man of a Noble Family, who
was strangly Convulsed in his Body, having sometimes one member, and sometimes
another, violently agitated, insomuch that four several persons were scarcely
able to hold them; and this at first without any distemper at all in his head,
or crazedness in brain. To whom Fernelius with other skilful Physicians being
called, applied all manner of remedies; Blisters, Purgations, Cupping-Glasses,
Fomentations, Unctions, Plasters, and Strengthening Medicines; but all in
vain. The reason whereof is thus given by the the same Fernelius. Quoniam omnes
long aberamus a cognitione very. Nam Mense Tertio, primum deprehensus Demon
quidam totius Mali Author: Voce, insuetisque verbis ac sententiis tum Latinis
tum Graecis, (quanquam ignarus Linguae Graecae Laborans esset) se prodens. Is
multa ^ssidentium maximaque medicorum Secreta detegebat, ridens quod irritis
Pharmacis corpus hoc pene jugulassent. Because we were all far from the
Knowledge of the truth. For in the Third Month it was first plainly discovered
to us, that it was a certain Demon who was the Author of all this mischief. He
manifesting himself by his Speech, and by unusual Words and Sentences, both in
Greek and Latin (though the Patient were altogether ignorant of the Greek
Tongue) and by his revealing many of the Secrets of those who stood by,
especially of the Physicians, whom also he derided for tormenting the Patient
in that manner, with their frustraneous remedies. Here therefore have we an
unquestionable Instance, of a Demoniack in these Latter times of ours, and such
a one who at first for two Months together, had no manner of Madness or Mania
at all upon him, though afterward the Demon possessing his Whole Body, used his
tongue and spoke therewith. Fernelius concludes his whole Discourse, in this
manner, These things do I produce, to make it manifest, that Evil Demons (or
Devils) do sometimes enter into the very Bodies of men, afflicting and
tormenting them after an unheard of manner; but that at other times, though
they do not enter into, and possess their whole body, yet partly by exagitating
and disturbing the profitable humors thereof, partly by traducing the noxious
into the principal parts, or else by by obstructing the Veins and other
Passages with them, or disordering the structure of the Members, they cause
innumerable Diseases. There are many other Instances of this kind, recorded by
Modern Writers unexceptionable, of Persons either wholly Demoniacal and
Possessed by Evil Demons (this appearing from their discovering Secrets, and
speaking Languages, which they had never learnt) or else otherwise so Affected
and Infested by them, as to have certain Unusual and Supernatural Symptoms;
which for brevities sake, we shall here omit. However we thought it necessary,
thus much to insist upon this Argument of Demoniacks, as well for the
Vindication of Christianity, as for the Conviction of Atheists; we finding some
so staggering in their Religion, that from this one thing alone of Demoniacks
(they being so strongly possessed, that there neither is, nor ever was any
such) they are ready enough to suspect, the whole Gospel or New Testament it
self, of Fabulosity and Imposture.

We come now to the Second Head proposed, of Miracles and Effects Supernatural.
That there has been some thing Miraculous or Above Nature, sometimes done even
among the Pagans, (whether by Good or Evil Spirits;) appears not only from
their own Records, but also from the Scripture it self. And it is well known,
that they pretended (besides Oracles) to Miracles also, even after the times of
Christianity; and that not only in Apollonius Tyanaeus, and Apuleius, but also
in the Roman Emperors themselves; as Vespasian and Adrian; but especially in
the Temple of Aesculapius; thus much appearing from that Greek Table therein
hung up at Rome, in which amongst other things this is Recorded, That a blind
man being commanded by the Oracle, to kneel before the Altar, and then passing
from the Right side thereof, to the Left, to lay five fingers upon the Altar,
and afterward lifting up his hand, to touch his eyes therewith; all this being
done accordingly, he recovered his sight, the people all applauding, that great
Miracles were done, under the Emperor Antoninus, etc. But we have in the
Scripture an account of Miracles both greater in Number, and of a higher
Nature; done especially by Moses, and our Savior Christ and his Apostles.

Wherefore it seems, that there are Two Sorts of Miracles or Effects
Supernatural. First, such as though they could not be done by any Ordinary and
Natural Causes here amongst us, and in that respect may be called Supernatural,
yet might notwithstanding be done, God Permitting only, by the Ordinary and
Natural Power of other Invisible Created Spirits, Angels or Demons. As for
example, If a Stone or other Heavy body, should first ascend upwards, and then
hang in the Air, without any Visible either Mover or Supporter, this would be
to us a Miracle or Effect Supernatural; and yet according to Vulgar Opinion,
might this be done, by the Natural Power of Created Invisible Beings, Angels or
Demons; God only permitting, without whose special Providence it is conceived,
they cannot, thus intermeddle, with our humane affairs. Again, If a perfectly
Illitterate Person, should readily speak Greek, or Latin, this also would be
to us a Miracle or Effect Supernatural, for so is the Apostles speaking with
Tounges accounted; and yet in Demoniacks, is this sometimes done, by Evil
Demons, God only Permitting. Such also amongst the Pagans, was that Miraculum
Cotis, (as Apuleius calls it) that Miracle of the Whetstone, done by Accius
Navius, when at his command, it was divided into Two, with a Razor. But
Secondly there is another sort of Miracles, or Effects Supernatural, such as
are above the Power of all Second Causes, or any Natural Created Being
whatsoever, and so can be attributed to none, but God Almighty himself, the
Author of Nature; who therefore can Control it at pleasure.

As for that late Theological Politician, who writing against Miracles, denies
as well those of the Former, as of this Latter Kind, contending that a Miracle
is nothing but a Name, which the Ignorant Vulgar gives, to Opus Naturae
Insolitum, any Unwonted work of Nature, or to what themselves can assign no
Cause off; as also that if there were any such thing done, Contrary to Nature
or Above it, it would rather Weaken than Confirm, Our Belief of the Divine
Existence; We find his Discourse every way so Weak, Groundless, and
Inconsiderable; that we could not think it here to deserve a Confutation.

But of the Former Sort of those Miracles, is that to be understood, Deuter.
the 13. If there arise among you a Prophet or dreamer of Dreams, and gives
thee a Sign or a Wonder, and the Sign or Wonder come to pass, whereof he spoke
unto thee saying; Let us go after other Gods, and serve them; thou shall not
hearken to the words of that Prophet or Dreamer of Dreams, for the Lord your
God Proves you, to know whether you love the Lord your God with all your
heart, and with all your Soul. For it cannot be Supposed, that God Almighty
would himself, purposely Inspire any man to exhort others to Idolatry, and
immediately assist such a one, with his own Supernatural Power, of doing
Miracles, in Confirmation of such Doctrine. But the meaning is, that by the
suggestion of Evil Spirits, some False Prophets might be raised up, to tempt
the Jews to Idolatry; or at least, that by Assistance of them, such Miracles
might be wrought, in Confirmation thereof, as those sometimes done by the
Egyptian Sorcerers or Magicians, God himself not interposing in this case, to
hinder them, for this reason, that he might hereby, Prove and Try their
Faithfulness toward him. For as much as both by the Pure Light of Nature, and
God's Revealed Will, before confirmed by Miracles, Idolatry, or the Religious
Worship of any but God Almighty, had been sufficiently condemned. From whence
it is evident, that Miracles alone, (at least such Miracles as these,) are no
sufficient Confirmation of a True Prophet, without consideration had of the
Doctrine taught by him. For though a man should have done never so many true
and real Miracles, amongst the Jews, and yet should persuade to Idolatry, he
was by them confidently to be condemned to death, for a false Prophet.

Accordingly in the New Testament, do we read, that our Savior Christ
forewarned his Disciples, That False Prophets and False Christ's should arise,
and show great Signs or Wonders, in so much that if it were possible, they
should seduce the very Elect. And St. Paul foretells, concerning the Man of
Sin, or Antichrist, That his coming should be after the working of Satan, with
all Power, and Signs, and Wonders (or Miracles) of a Lie. For we conceive that
by (...) in this place, are not properly meant, Feigned and Counterfeit
Miracles, that is, mere Cheating and Juggling tricks; but True Wonders and Real
Miracles (viz. of the Former Sort mentioned) done for the Confirmation of a
Lie, as the Doctrine of this Man of Sin, is there afterward called; For
otherwise how could his coming be said to be, According to the Working of
Satan, with all Power? In like manner also in St. John's Apocalypse, where the
coming of the same Man of Sin and the Mystery of Iniquity, is again described,
we read Chapter 13. of a Two Horned Beast like a Lamb, That he shall do great
wonders and deceive those that dwell on the Earth, by means of those Miracles,
which he has power to do, in the sight of the Beast. And again Chapter 16. Of
certain unclean Spirits like Frogs, coming out of the mouth of the Dragon, and
of the Beast, and of the False Prophet; which are the Spirits of Devils working
Miracles, that go forth to the Kings of the Earth. And Lastly Chapter 19. Of
the False Prophet, that wrought Miracles before the Beast. All which seem to be
understood, not of Feigned and Counterfeit Miracles only, but of True and Real
also, Effected by the Working of Satan, in Confirmation of a Lie, that is, of
Idolatry, False Religion and Imposture; God Almighty permitting it, partly in
way of Probation or Trial of the faithfulness of his own servants; and partly
in way of Just Judgment and Punishment upon those, who receive not the Love of
the Truth, that they might be saved; as the Apostle declares. Wherefore those
Miracles pretended for diverse Ages past, to have been done, before the Relics
of Saints, and Images, etc. were they all True, could by no means justify or
warrant, that Religious Worship, by many given to them; because True and Real
Miracles, done in order to the promoting of Idolatry, are so far from
Justifying that Idolatry, that they are themselves Condemned by it, to be
(...), the Miracles of a Lie, done by the Working of Satan.

But as for the Miracles of our Savior Christ, had they been all of them only
of the Former Kind, such as might have been done, God permitting, by the
Natural Power of Created Spirits, and their Assistance, yet for as much as he
came in the Name of the Lord, teaching neither Idolatry, nor any thing contrary
to the clear Light and Law of Nature, therefore ought he by reason of those
Miracles, to have been received by the Jews themselves, and owned for a True
Prophet, according to the Doctrine of Moses himself. Who both in the 13. and
18. Chapter of Deuter. plainly supposes, that God would in no other Case,
permit any False Prophet, to do Miracles, by the assistance of Evil Spirits,
save only in that of Idolatry, and, (which is always understood, of what is
plainly Discoverable by the Light of Nature to be False, or Evil.) The reason
whereof is manifest, because if he should, this would be an Invincible
Temptation; which it is inconsistent with the Divine Goodness, to expose men
unto. And our Savior Christ, was unquestionably, that One Eximious Prophet,
which God Almighty by Moses promised to send unto the Israelites, upon occasion
of their own desire made to him at Horeb* Let me not hear again, the voice of
the Lord my God, nor let me see this great Fire any more, that I die not.
Whereupon the Lord said, Deuteronomy. 18*
They have well spoken that which they have spoken, I will raise them up a
Prophet from among their Brethren, like unto thee, and put my words in his
mouth, and he shall speak unto them all that I shall command him; and whosoever
will not hearken to the words, which he shall speak in my name, I will require
it of him. Which is all one as if he should have said; I will no more speak to
them with Thunder and Lightning, nor reveal my will with a Terrible Voice out
of Flaming Fire, but the next great Manifestation of my self, or further
Revelation of my Will, shall be, by a Prophet, from amongst their own Brethren,
I putting my words into his mouth, and speaking to them by him. Whose words
they shall be as much obliged to hearken to, as if I had spoken them (as
before) from the top of the Fiery Mount. And that they may have no Color for
their Disbelieving this great Prophet especially, or their disobeying of him, I
plainly declare, that whosoever comes in my Name, and does True and Real
Miracles, shall be acknowledged undoubtedly for a True Prophet sent by me, and
accordingly Believed and Obeyed; and none rejected under the Notion of False
Prophets, but only such, as either, do not Real Miracles, or else if they do,
come in the name of Other Gods, or Exhort to Idolatry. Nevertheless, our
Savior Christ, wrought other Miracles also, of a higher Nature, by the
Immediate Power of God Almighty himself; as for example, when before himself,
he raised Lazarus, who had been dead four days, to life; since it cannot be
conceived, to be in the Power of Created Spirits (whether Bad or Good) when
ever they please, to bring back the Souls of men deceased to their Bodies
again, or change the Laws of Nature and Fate. However it must not be thought,
that God will ever set this Seal of his to a Lie, or that which is plainly
contrary to the Light and Law of Nature.

The conclusion is, that though all Miracles promiscuously, do not immediately
prove the Existence of a God, nor Confirm a Prophet, or whatsoever Doctrine;
yet do they all of them evince, that there is a Rank of Invisible Understanding
Beings, Superior to men, which the Atheists commonly deny. And we read of some
such Miracles also, as could not be wrought, but by a Power Perfectly Super
Natural, or by God Almighty himself. But to deny and disbelieve all Miracles,
is either to deny all Certainty of Sense, which would be indeed to make
Sensation it self Miraculous; or else monstrously and unreasonably to derogate
from Humane Testimonies and History. The Jews would never have so stiffly and
pertinaciously adhered to the Ceremonial Law of Moses, had they not all along
believed it, to have been unquestionably confirmed by Miracles; and that the
Gentiles should at first have entertained the Faith of Christ without Miracles,
would it self have been The Greatest of Miracles.

The Last Extraordinary Phenomenon proposed, was that of Divination, Oracles,
Prophecies, or Predictions of Future Events, otherwise Unforeknowable to men:
which either Evince a God, or at least that there are Understanding Beings
Superior to men. For if there be Presention or Foreknowledge of such Future
Events, as are to Humane Understanding alone, altogether Unforeknowable, then
is it certain, that there is some more Perfect Understanding, or Knowledge, in
the World, than that of men. And thus is that Maxim of the Ancient Pagan
Theists, in the Genuine and proper sense thereof, unquestionably true, Si
Divinatio est Dii sunt, If there be Divination, or Presention of Future Events,
(Vndiscoverable by men) then are there Gods: which in their Language, was no
more than to say, Understanding Beings Superior to men.

Wherefore we must here distinguish of Oracles and Predictions, after the same
manner as we did before of Mir^^les, that they may be of Two Kinds. First, such
as might proceed, only from the Natural Presaging Power of Created Spirits
Superior to men, whether called Angels or Demons. For these being supposed to
have not only clearer understandings than men, and a greater insight into
Nature, but also be reason of their Agility and Invisibility, opportunity of
knowing things remotely distant, and of being privy to men's Secret Machinations
and Consultations; it is easily conceivable, that many Future Events nigh at
hand, which cannot be foreknown by men, may be (probably at least) foreseen by
them; and that without any Miraculous Divine Revelation, their Causes being
already in Being. As men learned in Astronomy, can foretell Eclipses of the Sun
and Moon, which to the Vulgar are altogether Unforeknowable. And as Princes or
Statesmen, that are furnished with great Intelligence, Foreign and Domestic,
can presage more of War and Peace, either at home or abroad, and of the Events
of Kingdoms, than Ignorant Plebeians. And such were those Predictions, which
Democritus, though otherwise much addicted to Atheism, allowed of; Cicero
Writing thus of him, De Div. L. 1.
Plurimis Locis, gravis auct or Democritus, Praesensionem rerum futurarum
comprobat; Democritus a grave Writer, does in many places approve of the
Presention of Future Events. The reason whereof was, because he supposed
certain Understanding Beings Superior to men, called by him Idols, which
having a larger Comprehension of things, and other advantages of Knowledge,
could therefore foretell many Future Events that men were ignorant of. And
though perhaps it may be thought, that Democritus would not have entertained
this Opinion, of the Foreknowledge of Humane Events, had he not asserted the
Necessity of all humane Actions and Volitions, but held Liberty of Will, as
Epicurus afterward did; (as if this were Inconsistent with all manner of
Presage and Probable or Conjectural Foreknowledge;) yet is it certain, that
there is not so much Contingency in all Humane Actions, by reason of this
Liberty of Will, as heretofore was by Epicurus, and still is by many supposed;
it being plain, that men act according to an Appearance of Good, and that in
many cases and circumstances, it may be Foreknown, without any Divine
Revelation, what such or such persons would do. As for example, that a
voluptuous Person, having a strong Temptation to satisfy his Sensual Appetite,
and that without incurring any inconvenience of shame or punishment, would
readily close with the same. Besides which, such Invisible Spirits, as Angels
or Demons, may sometimes Predict also, what themselves Cause and Effect.

Secondly, there is another Sort of Predictions of Future Events, which cannot
be imputed to the Natural Presaging Faculty of any such Created Spirits, but
only to the Supernatural Prescience of God Almighty, or a Being Infinitely
Perfect. As when Events remotely distant in time, and of which there are yet no
immediate Causes actually in Being; which also depend upon many circumstances
and a long Series of things, any one of which being otherwise, would alter the
case; as likewise upon much Uncertainty of Humane Volitions, which are not
always necessarily linked and concatenated with what goes before, but often
loose and free; and upon that Contingency, that arises from the Indifferency or
Equality of Eligibility in Objects; Lastly, such things as do not at all depend
upon External Circumstances neither, nor are caused by things Natural
Anteceding, but by some Supernatural Power; I say, when such Future Events as
these, are foretold, and accordingly come to pass, this can be ascribed to no
other but such a Being, as Comprehends, Sways, and Governs all; and is by a
peculiar Privilege or Prerogative of its own Nature, Omniscient. Epicurus,
though really, he therefore rejected Divination, and Prediction of Future
Events, because he denied Providence; yet did he pretend this further reason
also against it, because it was a thing Absolutely Inconsistent with Liberty of
Will, and Destructive of the same; (...). Diog. Lacr^. (...) V. Epic.
Divination is a thing which has no Existence, nor possibility in nature: and
if there were such a thing, it would take away all Liberty of Will, and leave
nothing in men's own Power. Thus also Carneades in Cicero maintained, Ne
Apollinem quidem futura posse dicere, nisi ea quorum Causas Natura ita
contineret, ut ea fieri necesse esset. That Apollo himself, was not able to
foretell, any future Events, other than such as had Necessary Causes in Nature
antecedent. And some Christian Theists of latter times, have in like manner,
denied to God Almighty, all Foreknowledge of Humane Actions, upon the same
pretense, as being both Inconsistent with men's Liberty of Will, and Destructive
thereof. For say they, If men's Actions be Free then are they Vnforeknowable,
they having no Necessary Causes; and again, if there be any Foreknowledge of
them, then can they not be Free, they being ipso facto Necessitated thereby.
But as it is certain, that Prescience does not destroy the Liberty of man's
Will, or impose any Necessity upon it; men's Actions being not therefore Future,
because they are Foreknown; but therefore Foreknown because Future: and were a
thing never so Contingent, yet upon supposition that it will be Done, it must
needs have been Future from all Eternity: So is it extreme Arrogance for men,
because themselves can Naturally Foreknow nothing, but by some Causes
Antecedent, as an Eclipse of the Sun or Moon; therefore to presume to measure
the knowledge of God Almighty, according to the same Scantling, and to deny him
the Prescience of Humane Actions; not considering that as his Nature is
Incomprehensible, so his Knowledge may well be looked upon, by us, as such too;
that which is Past our finding out, and Too Wonderful for us. However it must
be acknowledged for an Undoubted Truth, that no Created Being, can Naturally
and Of it self, Foreknow any Future Events, otherwise, than in and by their
Causes Anteceding. If therefore we shall find, that there have been Predictions
of such Future Events, as had no Necessary Antecedent Causes; as we cannot but
grant, such Things therefore to be Foreknowable; So must we needs from thence
infer, the Existence of a God, that is, a Being Supernatural, Infinitely
Perfect, and Omniscient; since such Predictions as these could have proceeded
from no other Cause.

That there is Foreknowledge of Future Events, to men Naturally Unforeknowable,
has been all along the Persuasion of the Generality of Mankind. De Div. L. 1.
Thus Cicero, Vetus opinio est, jam usque ab Heroicis ducta temporibus, eaque
and Populi Romani, and omnium Gentium firmata consensu, Versari quandam inter
homines Divinationem, quam Graeci (...) appellant, id est Praesensionem and
Scientiam rerum Futurarum. This is an Old opinion derived down all along from
the Heroic times (or the Mythical Age) and not only entertained amongst the
Romans, but also confirmed by the consent of all Nations, that there is such a
thing as Divination, De N.D.L. 2. P. 239. Lamb.
and Presension or Foreknowledge of Future Events. And the same Writer
elsewhere in the Person of Balbus; Quamvis nihil tam irridet Epicurus, quam
Praedictionem rerum Futurarum, mihi videtur tamen vel maxim confirmare, Deorum
Providentia consuli rebus humanis. Est enim profecto Divinatio: quae multis
locis, rebus, temporibus apparet, cum in privatis tum maxim in publicis. Multa
cernunt Aruspices, multa Augures provident, multa Oraculis providentur, multa
Vaticinationibus, multa Somniis, multa portentis. Although Epicurus deride
nothing more, then the Prediction of Fature things, yet does this seem to me to
be a great confirmation of the Providence of the Gods over humane affairs.
Because there is certainly Divination, it appearing in many Places, Things, and
Times; and that not only Private but especially Public. Soothsayers foresee
many things, the Augurs many: many things are declared by Oracles, many by
Prophecies, many by Dreams, and many by Portents. And indeed that there were
even amongst the Pagans, Predictions of Future Events, not discoverable by any
Humane Sagacity, which accordingly came to pass, and therefore argue a
Knowledge superior to that of men, or that there are certain Invisible
understanding Beings or Spirits; seems to be undeniable from History. And that
the Augurs themselves were sometimes not Unassisted by these Officious Genii,
is plain from that of Attius Navius before mentioned, as the circumstances
thereof are related by Historians; that Tarquinius Priscus having a mind to try
what there was in this skill of Augury, Dixit ei se cogitare quiddam: id
possetne fieri consuluit. Ille augurio acto, posse respondet. Tarquinius autem
dixit se cogitasse cotem novacula posse praecidi; tum Attium jussisse experiri:
ita Cotem in Comitium illatam, inspectante and Rege and Populo, novacula esse
discissam; Told Navius, that he Thought of something, and he would would know
of him, Whether it could be done or no. Navius having performed his Augurating
Ceremonies, replied, that the thing might be done. Whereupon Priscus declared,
what his Thought was, namely, that a Whetstone might be cut in two with a
Razor. Navius willed them to make trial: wherefore a Whetstone being brought
immediately into the Court; it was in the sight of the King and all the People,
divided with a Razor. But the Predictions amongst those Pagans, were for the
most part only of the Former Kind, such as proceeded merely from the Natural
Presaging Faculty of these Demons; this appearing from hence, because their
Oracles were often expressed Ambiguously, so as that they might be taken either
way; those Demons themselves, it seems, being then not confident of the Event:
as also because they were sometimes plainly mistaken in the Events. And from
hence it was, that they seldom Ventured to foretell, any Events remotely
distant, but only what were nigh at hand, and shortly to come to pass; and
therefore might be Probably Conjectured of, from things then in being.
Notwithstanding which, we acknowledge, that there are some Few Instances of
Predictions amongst the Pagans, of the other Kind. Such as that intimated by
Cicero in his Book of Divination, where he declares the Doctrine of Diodorus
concerning Necessity and Contingency; non necesse fuisse Cypselum regnare
Corinthi, quanquam id Millesimo ante anno, Apollinis Oraculo editum esset, that
is was not Necessary, Cypselus the Tyrant, should reign at Corinth, though that
were a thing Predicted by Apollo 's Oracle, a thousand years before. As also
this recorded by Varro, of Vectius Valens, an Augur in the Time of Romulus, who
when Rome was a building, from the flying of Twelve Vultures, presaged that the
continuance of that City would be for Twelve Hundred years: which seems to have
been accordingly fulfilled, in the year of our Lord Four hundred fifty and
five, immediately after the death of the Third Valentinian (whom some make to be
the last Real Emperor of the West or Rome) when Gensericus the Vandal, took
the City the second time, and fired it. But above all, that of the Sibyls; of
whose Prophecies such things are recorded by Pagan Writers, as makes it very
suspicious, that they did foretell the coming of our Savior Christ, and the
times of Christianity; but were these and the like Pagan Prophecies, Real, then
must they needs have had some higher Original, than the Natural Presaging
Faculty of their Demons, especially those of the Sibyls; who for ought we know,
might be as well assisted Super-Naturally, to predict our Savior Christ,
amongst the Pagans in the West; as Balaam was in the East.

But here the Scripture triumphs over Paganism, and all its Oracles and
Divinations; there being contained in it so many unquestionable Predictions of
Events to follow a long time after, and such as can be imputed to nothing but
the Supernatural Foreknowledge and Omniscience of God Almighty. As for example,
those concerning the Messiah, or our Savior Christ, delivered by Jacob, Moses,
David, Isaias, Jeremy, Daniel, and most of the Prophets; foretelling sundry
particular circumstances of his coming, and that grand Event which followed
after, of the Gentiles or Pagans so general Reception and Entertainment of
Christianity; that is, the Belief of the Messiah, promised to the Jews;
together with the shaking off of their Gods and Idols. Amongst which Scripture
Prophecies, concerning our Savior Christ, we must needs reckon for one, and
none of the least considerable neither, that of Daniel's Weeks, or of Four
hundred and ninety years, to commence from the Going forth of the Word, or the
Decree made by Artaxerxes the Son of Xerxes, in the seventh year of his Reign,
for the return of the People of Israel, Priests and Levites to Jerusalem; and
to terminate in the Death of the Messiah, and the Preaching of the Gospel to
the Jews only: though we are not ignorant, how some learned men, both of former
and latter times, have stretched their wits, they sometimes using no small
violence, to divert this Prophecy another way. For that these Prophecies
concerning our Savior Christ, could have no other Original, than the immediate
Supernatural Revelation of God Almighty, is Evident from the thing it self; it
being such as depended on no Natural Causes, much less upon those
Constellations, of the Astrological Atheists, but only upon his own Secret
Will, and Counsel.

But besides these Prophecies concerning our Savior Christ, there are others
contained in the Scripture, concerning the Fates and Successions of the chief
Kingdoms, Empires, and Polities of the World; as of the Rise of the Persian
Monarchy; of its Fall and Conquest by the Macedonean Alexander; of the
Quadripartite Division of this Greekish Empire after Alexander's death; of the
Succession of the Seleucidae and Lagidae, a Prophetic History, so agreeable
with the Events, that it was by Porphyrius pretended to have been written after
them; and lastly of the Rise and Continuance of the Roman Empire. For
notwithstanding the endeavors of some, to pervert all those Scripture
Prophecies, that extend to the present times, it is clearly demonstrable, that
this was Daniel's Fourth, Ten horned Beast; or the Legs and Toes of
Nebuchadnezar's Statue, that Fourth Empire strong as Iron, which came at length
to be broken or divided, into Ten or many Principalities, called in the
Prophetic Language and according to the Eichon, Horns; amongst whom was to
start up, another Horn with Eyes, speaking great words against the most High,
and making War with the Saints and prevailing against them, for a Time, Times,
and Half a Time. Which Prophecy of Daniels, is the Groundwork of St. John's
Apocalypse, it being there further insisted upon, filled up, and enlarged, with
the addition of several particulars; so that both Daniel and John, have each of
them from their respective ages, set down a Prophetic Calendar of Times, in a
continued Series, (the former more Compendiously and Generally, the latter more
Copiously and Particularly) to the very end of the World.

And thus do we see plainly, that the Scripture-Prophecies Evince a Deity;
neither can these possibly be imputed by Atheists, as other things, to men's
Fear and Fancy, nor yet to the Fiction of Politicians. Nor do they only Evince
a Deity, but confirm Christianity also; partly as predicted by them in its
several circumstances, a grand one whereof was the Gentiles Reception of it;
and partly as it self predicting Future Events, this Spirit of Prophecy being
the Testimony of Jesus. Both which Scripture-Prophecies, Of Christ in the Old
Testament; and From him in the New, are of equal, if not greater force to us in
this present Age, for the Confirmation of our Faith, than the Miracles
themselves recorded in the Scripture, we having now certain knowledge our
selves, of many of those Events; and being no way able to suspect, but that the
Prophecies were written long before.

To conclude, all these Extraordinary Phenomenon, of Apparitions, Witchcraft,
Possessions, Miracles, and Prophecies, do Evince that Spirits, Angels or
Demons, though Invisible to us, are no Phancies, but Real and Substantial
Inhabitants of the World; which favors not the Atheistick Hypothesis; but some
of them, as the Higher kind of Miracles, and Predictions, do also immediately
enforce the acknowledgment of a Deity: a Being superior to Nature, which
therefore can check and control it; and which comprehending the whole,
fore-knows the most Remotely distant, and Contingent Events.

And now have we not only fully Answered and Confuted, all the Atheistick
Pretenses against the Idea of God, tending to disprove his Existence; but also
occasionally proposed, several Solid and Substantial Arguments for a Deity: as,
That all Successive things, the World, Motion, and Time, are in their own
Nature absolutely incapable of an Ante-Eternity, and therefore there must of
necessity, be something else of a Permanent Duration, that was Eternal without
Beginning; That no Atheist according to his Principles, can possibly give any
account of the Original of his own Soul or Mind; That the Phenomenon of Motion
cannot be Salved without an Incorporeal Principle, presiding over the whole;
That the (...), The Artificial, Regular, and Orderly Frame of things, together
with the Harmony of the whole, Demonstrate an Understanding and Intending Cause
of the World, that Ordered things for Ends and Good. Besides, that there are
several other Phenomenon, both Ordinary and Extraordinary, which Atheists being
no way able to Salve, are forced to deny.

True indeed, some of the ancient Theists, have themselves affirmed, that there
could be no Demonstration of a God, which Assertion of theirs, has been by
others misunderstood into this sense, as if there were therefore no Certainty
at all to be had of God's Existence, but only a Conjectural Probability; no
Knowledge or Science, but only Faith and Opinion. Whereas the true meaning of
those ancient Theists, who denied that there could be any Demonstration of a
God, was only this, that the Existence of a God could not be Demonstrated A
Priore, himself being the First Cause of all things. Thus does Alexander
Aphrodisius, in his Physical Doubts and Solutions, after he had propounded an
Argument for a God, according to Aristotelick Principles, from Motion, declare
himself; (...). L. 1. c. 1.
That this Argument or Proof of his was in way of Analysis only: it being not
Possible that there should be a Demonstration of the First Principle of all.
Wherefore (says he) we must here fetch our Beginning from things that are
After it, and manifest; and thence by way of Analysis, Ascend to the Proof of
that First Nature which was Before them. Strom. L. 5. p. 388.
And to the same purpose Clemens Alexandrinus, having first affirmed, (...).
That God is the most difficult thing of all to be discoursed of. Because since
the Principle of every thing is hard to find out, the First and most ancient
Principle of all, which was the Cause to all other things, of their being made,
must needs be the hardest of all to be declared or manifested; he afterward
subjoyns, (...). But neither can God be apprehended by any Demonstrative
Science. For such Science is from things Before in order of Nature, and More
Knowable; whereas nothing can exist Before that which is altogether Unmade. And
certain it is, that it implies a Contradiction, that God or a Perfect Being
should be thus Demonstrated, by any thing before him as his Cause. Nevertheless
it does not therefore follow, that there can be no Certainty at all had of the
Existence of a God, but only a Conjectural Probability; no Knowledge, but Faith
and Opinion only. For we may have a Certain Knowledge of things, the (...)
whereof cannot be Demonstrated A Priore, or from Antecedent Necessary Causes;
As for example, That there was something Eternal of it Self, without Beginning;
is not at all Demonstrable by any Antecedent Cause, it being Contradictious to
such a thing to have a Cause. Nevertheless upon supposition only, that
something does Exist, which no man can possibly make any doubt of, we may not
only have an Opinion, but also certain Knowledge, from the Necessity of
Irrefragable Reason, That there was never Nothing, but something or other did
Always Exist from Eternity, and without Beginning. In like manner, though the
Existence of a God or Perfect Being, cannot be Demonstrated A Priore, yet may
we notwithstanding, from Our very Selves (whose Existence we cannot doubt of)
and from what is contained in our own Minds, or otherwise consequent from him;
by undeniable Principles of Reason, Necessarily infer His Existence. And
whenever any thing is thus necessarily inferred, from what is undeniable and
indubitable, this is a Demonstration, though not of the (...), yet of the (...)
of it; That the thing is, though not Why it is. And many of the Geometrical
Demonstrations are no other.

It has been asserted by a late Eminent Philosopher, that there is no possible
Certainty to be had of any thing, before we be Certain of the Existence of a
God Essentially Good: because we can never otherwise free our minds from the
Importunity of that Suspicion, which with irresistible force may assault them;
That our selves might possibly be so made, either by Chance, or Fate, or by the
pleasure of some Evil Demon, or at least of an Arbitrary Omnipotent Deity, as
that we should be Deceived in all our most Clear and Evident Perceptions; and
therefore in Geometrical Theorems themselves, and even in our Common Notions.
But when we are once assured of the Existence of such a God as is Essentially
Good, who therefore neither will nor can Deceive; then and not before, will
this Suspicion utterly vanish, and Our selves become Certain, that our
Faculties of Reason and Understanding are not False and Imposturous, but
Rightly Made. From which Hypothesis it plainly follows, that all those Theists
who suppose, God to be a mere Arbitrary Being, whose Will is not determined by
any Nature of Goodness or Rule of Justice, but it self is the first Rule of
both, (they thinking this to be the Highest Perfection, Liberty, and Power) can
never be reasonably Certain, of the Truth of any thing, not so much as that Two
and Two are Four; because so long as they adhere to that persuasion; they can
never be assured, but that such an Arbitrary Omnipotent Deity, might designedly
make them such, as should be deceived in all their Clearest Perceptions.

Now though there be a Plausibility of Piety, in this Doctrine, as making the
knowledge of a God Essentially Good, so necessary a Precognitum to all other
Science, that there can be no Certainty of Truth at all without it, yet does
that very Supposition, that our Understanding Faculties might possibly be so
made, as to deceive us in all our Clearest Perceptions, (where soever it is
admitted) render it utterly Impossible, ever to arrive to any Certainty
concerning the Existence of a God Essentially Good; for as much as this cannot
be any otherwise proved, then by the use of our Faculties of Understanding,
Reason, and Discourse. For to say, that the Truth of our Understanding
Faculties, is put out of all Doubt and Question, as soon as ever we are assured
of the Existence of a God Essentially Good, who therefore cannot deceive;
whilst this Existence of a God, is in the mean time it self no otherwise
proved, than by by our Understanding Faculties; that is, at once to prove the
Truth of God's Existence from our Faculties; of Reason and Understanding, and
again to prove the Truth of those Faculties, from the Existence of a God
Essentially Good; this I say is plainly to move round in a Circle; and to prove
nothing at all: a gross oversight, which the forementioned Philosopher seems
plainly guilty of.

Wherefore according to this Hypothesis, we are of necessity condemned, to
Eternal Skepticism, both concerning the Existence of a God, when after all our
Arguments and Demonstrations for the same, we must at length gratify the
Atheists with this Confession, in the Conclusion, That it is Possible
notwithstanding, there may be None; but also concerning all other things, the
Certainty whereof is supposed to depend, upon the Certainty of the Existence of
such a God as cannot Deceive.

So that if we will pretend to any Certainty at all, concerning the Existence
of a God, we must of necessity explode this New Skeptical Hypothesis, of the
Possibility of our Understandings being so made, as to Deceive us in all our
Clearest Perceptions, by means whereof, we can be Certain of the Truth of
nothing, and to use our utmost endeavor to remove the same. In the First place
therefore we affirm, That no Power how great soever, and therefore not
Omnipotence it self, can make any thing to be indifferently either True or
False, this being plainly to take away the Nature both of Truth and Falsehood,
or to make them nothing but Words without any Signification. Truth is not
Factitious; it is a thing which cannot be Arbitrarily Made, but Is. The Divine
Will and Omnipotence it self (now supposed by us) has no Imperium upon the
Divine Understanding, for if God understood only by Will, he would not
understand at all. In the next place we add, that though the Truth of Singular
Contingent Propositions, depends upon the Things themselves Existing without,
as the Measure and Archetype thereof; yet as to the Universal and Abstract
Theorems of Science, the Terms whereof are those Reasons of Things, which Exist
no where but only in the Mind it Self (whose Noemata and Ideas they are) the
Measure and Rule of Truth concerning them, can be no Foreign or Extraneous
thing, Without the mind, but must be Native and Domestic to it, or contained
Within the mind it Self; and therefore can be nothing but its Clear and
Distinct Perception. In these Intelligible Ideas of the Mind, whatsoever is
Clearly Perceived to Be, Is; or which is all one, is True. Every Clear and
Distinct Perception is an Entity, or Truth; as that which is Repugnant to
Conception is a Nonentity or Falsehood. Nay, The very Essence of Truth here, is
this Clear Perceptibility or Intelligibility; and therefore can there not be
any Clear or Distinct Perception of Falsehood. Which must be acknowledged by all
those who though granting False Opinions, yet agree in this, that there can be
no False Knowledge. For the Knowledge of these Universal Abstract Truths, is
nothing but the Clear and Distinct Perception of the several Ideas of the mind,
and their Necessary Relations to one another; Wherefore to say that there can
be no False Knowledge, is all one as to say that there can be no Clear and
Distinct Per^eptions of the Ideas of the mind, False. In False Opinions, the
Perception of the Understanding Power it self, is not False, but only Obscure.
It is not the Understanding Power or Nature in us that Erreth, but it is We Our
Selves who Err, when we rashly and unwarily assent to things, not Clearly
Perceived by it. The upshot of all is this, that since no Power how great
soever, can make any thing indifferently to be True; and since the Essence of
Truth in Universal Abstract things, is nothing but Clear Perceptibility; it
follows, that Omnipotence cannot make any thing that is False to be clearly
Perceived to Be; or Create such Minds and Understanding Faculties, as shall
have as Clear Conceptions of Falsehoods, that is, of Non-Entities, as they have
of Truths or Entities. For example, no Rational Understanding Being that knows
what as Part is, and what a Whole, What a Cause and what an Effect, could
possibly be so made, as clearly to Conceive the Part to be greater than the
Whole, or the Effect to be before the Cause, or the like. Wherefore we may
presume with Reverence to Say, that there could not possibly be a world of
Rational Creatures made by God, either in the Moon, or in some other Planet, or
else where, that should Clearly and Distinctly Conceive, all things contrary to
what are clearly Perceived by us; nor could our Humane Faculties have been so
made, as that we should have as clear Conceptions of Falsehoods as of Truths.
Mind or Understanding Faculties, in Creatures may be made more or less, Weak,
Imperfect, and Obscure, but they could not be made False, or such as should
have Clear and Distinct Conceptions of that which Is not, because every Clear
Perception is an Entity, and though Omnipotence can make Something out of
Nothing, yet can it not make Something to be Nothing, nor Nothing Something.
All which is no more, than is generally acknowledged by Theologers, when they
affirm that God Almighty himself, cannot do things Contradictious; there being
no other reason for this assertion, but only this, because Contradictiousness
is Repugnant to Conception. So that Conception and Knowledge are hereby made to
be the Measure of all Power; even Omnipotence or Infinite Power it Self being
determined thereby; from whence it follows, that Power has no Dominion over
Understanding, Truth, and Knowledge, nor can Infinite Power make any thing
whatsoever to be Clearly Conceivable. For could it make Contradictious things
clearly Conceivable, then would it Self be able to Do them; because whatsoever
can be Clearly Conceived by any, may unquestionably be Done by Infinite Power.

It is true indeed, that Sense considered alone by it self, does not reach to
the Absoluteness either of the Natures, or of the Existence of things without
us, it being as such, nothing but Seeming, Appearance, and Fancy. And thus is
that Saying of some ancient Philosophers to be understood, that (...), Every
Fantasy is True; namely because Sense and Fancy reach not to the Absolute
Truth and Falsehood of things, but Contain themselves only within Seeming and
Appearance; and every Appearance must needs be a true Appearance.
Notwithstanding which, it is certain, that Sense often represents to us
Corporeal things, otherwise than indeed they are, which though it be not a
Formal, yet is it a Material Falsity. Wherefore Sense in the Nature of it, is
not Absolute, but (...), or (...), Relative to the Sentients. And by Sense
alone, without any mixture of Reason or Understanding, we can be certain of no
more, concerning the things without us, but only this, that they So Seem to us.
Hence was that of the ancient Atomick Philosophers, in Plato, Theat. p. 154.
(...). Neither you nor any man else can be certain, that every other man and
Brute Animal has all the very same Phantasms of Colors, that himself has.
Now were there no other Perception in us, but that of Sense, (as the old
Aetheistick Philosophers concluded Knowledge to be Sense,) then would all our
Humane Perceptions be merely Seeming, Fantastical and Relative; and none of
them reach to the Absolute Truth of things. Every one in Protagoras his
Language would then (...), Think or Opine only his Own things; all his Truths
being Private and Relative to himself. And that Protagorean Aphorism were to be
admitted also, in the Sense of that Philosopher, that, (...), Every man is the
Measure of all things to himself; and, That no one man's Opinion was righter
than another, but (...), That Which Seemed to Every one, was to him True, to
whom it Seemed; all Truth and Perception, being but Seeming, and Relative. But
here lies one main difference betwixt Understanding or Knowledge, and Sense;
that whereas the Latter is Fantastical and Relative only; the Former reaches
beyond Fancy and Appearance to the Absoluteness of Truth. For as it has been
already declared, whatsoever is clearly and distinctly Perceived in things
Abstract and Universal, by any one Rational Being in the whole world, is not a
Private thing, and True to Himself only that perceived it, but it is, as some
Stoics have called it, (...), a Public, Catholic, and Universal Truth: it
obtains every where, and as Empedocles sang of Natural Justice; -- (...)
(...).
It is extended throughout the Vast Ether, and through Infinite Light or
Space; and were there indeed Infinite Worlds, all thickly peopled with Rational
Animals; it would be alike True, to every one of them. Nor is it Conceivable,
that Omnipotence it self, could create any such Understanding Beings, as could
have Clear and Distinct Perceptions of the contrary, to all that is Perceived
by us, no more than it could Do things Contradictious. But in all Probability,
because Sense is indeed, but Seeming, Fantastical, and Relative, this is the
Reason that some have been so prone and inclinable, to suspect the like, of
Understanding, and all Mental Perception, too, that this also is but Seeming
and Relative; and that therefore men's Minds or Understandings might have been
so made, by an Arbitrary Omnipotent Deity, as clearly and distinctly to
Perceive, every thing that is False. But if notwithstanding all that has been
said, any will still sing over, the Old Song again; That all this, which has
been hitherto declared by us, is indeed True, If our Humane Faculties be True,
or Rightly Made; but we can go no further than our Faculties; and whether these
be True or no no man can ever be certain; We have no other Reply to make, but
that this is an over Stiff and Heavy Adherence to a Prejudice of their own
Minds; that not only Sense, but also Reason and Understanding, and all Humane
Perception, is merely Seeming, or Fantastical, and Relative to Faculties only,
but not reaching to the Absoluteness of any Truth; and that the Humane Mind,
has no Criterion of Truth at all within it self.

Nevertheless it will probably be here further Objected; That this is too great
an Arrogance, for Created Beings, to pretend to an Absolute Certainty of any
thing, it being the Sole Privilege and Prerogative of God Almighty, to be
Infallible, who is therefore Styled in Scripture, (...), The Only Wise; To
which we briefly answer; that the Deity is the first Original Fountain, of
Truth and Wisdom, which is said to be, The Brightness of the Everlasting Light,
the Unspotted Mirror of the Power of God, and the Image of his Goodness. The
Divine Word, is the Archetypal Pattern of all Truth; it is Ignorant of Nothing,
and knows all things Infallibly. But Created Beings, have but a Derivative
Participation hereof, their Understandings being Obscure, and they Erring in
many things, and being Ignorant of more. And it seems to be no Derogation from
Almighty God to suppose, that Created Minds by a Participation of the Divine
Mind, should be able to know Certainly; that Two and Two make Four; that Equals
added to Equals will make Equals; that a Whole is greater than the Part; and
the Cause before the Effect; and that nothing can be Made without a Cause; and
such like other Common Notions, which are the Principles from whence all their
knowledge is derived. And indeed were Rational Creatures, never able to be
Certain of any such thing as this at all; what would their Life be but a mere
Dream or Shadow? and themselves but a Ridiculous and Pompous Piece of
Fantastic Vanity? Besides it is no way Congruous to think, that God Almighty
should make Rational Creatures so as to be in an utter Impossibility, of ever
attaining to any Certainty of his own Existence; or of having more than an
Hypothetical Assurance thereof, If our Faculties be True (which possibly may be
otherwise,) then is there a God. We shall conclude this Discourse against the
Cartesian Skepticism, with that of Origens, (...), Knowledge is the only thing
in the World, which Creatures have, that is in its own Nature firm; they having
here something of Certainty, but no where else.

Wherefore we having now, that which Archimedes required, Some Firm Ground and
Footing to stand upon, such a Certainty of Truth in our Common Notions, as that
they cannot Possibly be False; without which nothing at all could be proved by
Reason; we shall in the next place endeavor, not to shake or dissettle any
thing thereby; (which was the Undertaking of that Geometrician) but to Confirm
and Establish the Truth of God's Existence, and that from the very Idea of him;
hitherto made good and defended, against all the Assaults of Atheists.

It is well known, that Cartesius has lately made a Pretense to do this, with
Mathematical Evidence and Certainty, and he dispatches the business briefly
after this manner; God or a Perfect Being, includes Necessary Existence in his
very Idea; and therefore he Is. But though the Inventor of this Argument, or
rather the Reviver of that which had been before used by some Scholasticks,
affirms it to be as Good a Demonstration, for the Existence of a God, from
His Idea, as that in Geometry, for a Triangles having Three Angles equal to Two
right, is from the Idea of a Triangle; yet nevertheless it is certain, that by
one means or other, this Argument has not hitherto proved so Fortunate and
Successful, there being many who cannot be made sensible of any Efficacy
therein, and not a few who Condemn it for a mere Sophism. As for our selves, we
neither have any mind, to quarrel with other men's Arguments Pro Deo, nor yet
would we be thought, to lay stress in this Cause, upon any thing which is not
every way Solid and Substantial. Wherefore we shall here endeavor, to set down
the Utmost that Possibly we can, both Against this Argument, and For it,
Impartially and Heartily; and then when we have done, leave the Intelligent
Readers, to make their own Judgment concerning the Same.

Against it in this manner; First: Because we can Frame an Idea in our own
minds, of an Absolutely Perfect Being, including Necessary Existence in it, it
will not at all follow from thence, that therefore there is such a Perfect
Being Really Existing without our minds; we being able to frame in our minds
the Ideas of many other things, that never were, nor will be. All that can be
certainly inferred from the Idea of a Perfect Being seems to be this, that if
it contain nothing which is Contradictious to it, then it is Not Impossible but
that there might be such a Being actually Existing. But the strength of this
Argument, not lying merely in this, that because we have an Idea of a Perfect
Being, therefore it is; but because we have such an Idea of it, as includes
Necessary Existence in it, which the Idea of Nothing else besides does;
therefore may it be here further Objected in this manner. That though it be
very true, that a Perfect Being does include Necessary Existence in it, because
that cannot be every way Perfect, whose Existence is not Necessary but
Contingent; yet will it not follow from hence, that therefore there is such a
Perfect Being Actually Existing; but all that can be deduced from it, will be
no more than this, That whatsoever has no Necessary and Eternal Existence, is
no Absolutely Perfect Being; and again, That If there be any Absolutely Perfect
Being, then was its Existence always Necessary and will be always such; that
is, it did both Exist Of it self, from all Eternity without Beginning, and must
needs Exist to Eternity Incorruptibly; it being never able to cease to be. It
seems indeed no more to follow, That because a Perfect Being includes necessary
Existence in its Idea, therefore there is such a Perfect Being Actually
Existing; than because a Perfect Being includes Necessary Omniscience and
Omnipotence in it, that therefore there is such a Perfect Omniscient and
Omnipotent Being: all that follows in both cases, being only this; that If
there be any Being Absolutely Perfect, then it is both Omniscient and
Omipotent, and it did Exist of It Self necessarily, and can never Cease to be.
Wherefore here lies a Fallacy in this Argumentation, when from the Necessity of
Existence affirmed only Hypothetically or upon a Supposition of a Perfect
Being, the Conclusion is made concerning it Absolutely. As some would prove the
Necessity of all humane Events, as for example of Adam's Sinning, in this
manner, that it always was True before, that either Adam would eat the
forbidden fruit, or not eat it, and If he would eat it, he would Certainly eat
it, and not Contingently; and again, If he would not eat it, then would he
Certainly and Necessarily not Eat it; wherefore whether he will eat it or not
eat it, he will do either, Necessarily and not Contingently. Where it is plain,
that an Absolute Necessity, is wrongly inferred in the Conclusion, from an
Hypothetical one in the Premises. In like manner, when upon supposition of an
Absolutely Perfect Being, it is affirmed of it, that its Existence must not be
Contingent but Necessary, and from thence the Conclusion is made Absolutely,
that there Is such a Perfect Being, this seems to be the very same Fallacy.
From the Idea of a Perfect Being, including Necessary Existence in it, it
follows undeniably, that If there be any Thing Absolutely Perfect, it Must
Exist Necessarily, and not Contingently, but it does not follow, that there
Must of Necessity Be such a Perfect Being Existing; these two Propositions
carrying a very different sense from one another. And the Latter of them, that
there must of Necessity be a God or Perfect Being Existing seems to be a thing
altogether Indemonstrable, it implying that the Existence of God or a Perfect
Being may be proved A Priori, or from some Antecedent Necessary Cause; which
was before declared to be a thing Contradictious and Impossible.

And now in Justice are we obliged, to plead the best we can also on the
Defensive side. Thus therefore; the Idea of God or an Absolutely Perfect Being
including in it, not an Impossible, nor a Contingent, but a Necessary Schesis
or Relation to Existence, it follows from thence, Absolutely and without any
Ifs and Ands, that he does Exist. For as of things Contradictious, having
therefore in the Idea of them, an Impossible Schesis to Existence, we can
confidently conclude that they never were nor will be; And as of other things
not Contradictious or Impossible, but Imperfect only, which therefore have a
Contingent Schesis to Existence, we can Pronounce also that Possibly they Might
be or might not be: in like manner, a Perfect Being including in the Idea of it
a Necessary Schesis to Existence or an Impossible one to Nonexistence, or
containing Existence in its very Essence; we may by Parity of reason conclude
concerning it, that it is neither Impossible to Be; nor yet Contingent to Be or
not to Be; but that it Certainly Is, and Cannot but Be; or that it is
Impossible it should Not Be. And indeed when we say of Imperfect Beings,
Implying no Contradiction in them, that they may Possibly either Be or not Be,
we herein tacitly suppose the Existence of a Perfect Being, because nothing
which is Not, could be Possible to be, were there not something actually in
Being, that has sufficient Power to Cause or Produce it. True indeed, we have
the Ideas of many things in our minds, that never were, nor will be; but these
are only such as include no Necessary but Contingent Existence in their Nature;
and it does not therefore follow, that a Perfect Being which includes Necessity
of Existence in its Idea, may notwithstanding Not Be. Wherefore this Necessity
of Existence or Impossibility of Nonexistence contained in the Idea of a
Perfect Being, must not be taken Hypothetically only or Consequentially, after
this manner, that If there be any Thing Absolutely Perfect, then its Existence
both was and will be Necessary; but Absolutely; that though Contradictious
things cannot Possibly Be, and things Imperfect may Possibly either Be or Not
Be, yet a Perfect Being cannot But Be; or it is Impossible that it should Not
Be. For otherwise were the force of the Argumentation merely Hypothetical, in
this manner, If there be a Perfect Being, then its Existence both was and will
be Necessary; this would plainly imply that a Perfect Being, notwithstanding
that Necessity of Existence included in its Nature, might either Be or Not Be;
or were Contingent to Existence, which is a manifest Contradiction, that the
same thing should Exist both Contingently and Necessarily. And this
Hypothetical Absurdity, will more plainly appear, if the Argument be expressed
in other words, as that Necessity of Existence, and Impossibility of
Nonexistence, and Actual Existence, belong to the very Essence of a Perfect
Being, since it would be then ridiculous to go about, to evade in this manner,
That If there be a Perfect Being, then, it Is, and cannot But Be. Which
Identical Proposition, is true of every thing, else but Absurd. Wherefore there
is something more to be Inferred from the Necessity of Existence included in
the Idea of A Perfect Being than so, which can be nothing else but this, that
it Absolutely and Actually Is. Moreover no Theists can be able to prove that
God or a Perfect Being (supposed by them to Exist) might not Happen by Chance
only to Be; if from the Necessity of Existence included in the Idea of God; it
cannot be inferred that he could not But Be. Notwithstanding which, here is no
endeavor, (as is pretended) to prove the Existence of a God or Perfect Being,
A Priori neither, or from any Necessary Cause Antecedent; but only from that
Necessity which is included within it self, or is Concomitant and Concurrent
with it; the Necessity of its own Perfect Nature. And now we shall leave the
Intelligent and Impartial Reader, to make his own Judgment concerning the
forementioned Cartesian Argument for a Deity, drawn from its Idea, as including
Necessity of Existence in it, that therefore It Is; Whether it be merely
Sophistical, or has something of Solidity and Reality in it. However it is not
very Probable, that many Atheists, will be convinced thereby, but that they
will rather be ready to say, that this is no Probation at all of a Deity, but
only an Affirmation of the thing in Dispute, and a mere Begging of the
Question; that therefore God Is, because he Is, or Cannot But be.

Wherefore we shall endeavor, to make out an Argument, or Demonstration, for
the Existence of a God, from his Idea, as including Necessary Existence in it,
some other ways. And First, we shall make an Offer toward it in this manner.
Though it will not follow from hence, because we can Frame an Idea of any thing
in our minds, that therefore such a thing Really Existeth; yet nevertheless,
whatsoever we can Frame an Idea of, Implying no manner of Contradiction in its
Conception, we may certainly conclude thus much of it, that such a thing was
not Impossible to be; there being nothing to us Impossible, but what is
Contradictious and Repugnant to Conception. Now the Idea of God or a Perfect
Being, can Imply no manner of Contradiction in it, because it is only the Idea
of such a thing as has all Possible and Conceivable Perfections in it; that
is, all Perfections which are neither Contradictious in themselves, nor to one
another. And they who will not allow of this Consequence, from the Idea of a
Perfect Being, including Necessity of Existence in it, that it does therefore
Actually Exist, yet cannot deny, but that this at least will follow, from its
implying no manner of Contradiction in it, that is therefore a thing Possible,
or not Impossible to be. For thus much being true of all other Contingent
things, whose Idea implies no Contradiction, that they are therefore Possible;
it must needs be granted of that, whose very Idea and Essence contains a
Necessity of Existence in it, as the Essence of nothing else but a Perfect
Being does. And this is the First Step, that we now make in way of
Argumentation, from the Idea of God or a Perfect Being, having nothing
Contradictious in it, That therefore God is at least Possible, or no way
Impossible to have been. In the next place as this particular Idea of that
which is Possible, includes Necessity of Existence in it; from these Two
things put together at least, the Possibility of such a Being, and its
Necessary Existence (if not from the Latter alone) will it according to Reason
follow, that He Actually Is. If God or a Perfect Being, in whose Essence is
contained Necessary Existence, be Possible, or no way Impossible to have been;
then He is; because upon supposition of his Nonexistence, it would be
Absolutely Impossible, that he should ever have been. It does not thus follow,
concerning Imperfect Beings, that are Contingently Possible, that if they be
Not, it was therefore Impossible for them ever to have been; for that which is
Contingent, though it be Not, yet might it for all that, Possibly Have been.
But a Perfect Necessarily Existent Being, upon the bare supposition of its
Nonexistence, could no more Possibly Have been, than it could Possibly
Hereafter be: because if it might Have been, though it be not, then would it
not be a Necessary Existent Being. The sum of all is this, A Necessary Existent
Being, if it be Possible, it Is; because upon supposition of its Non-Exist^nce,
it would be Impossible for it ever to have been. Wherefore God is either
Impossible to have been, or else He Is. For if God were Possible, and yet be
Not, then is he not a Necessary, but Contingent Being, which is contrary to the
Hypothesis.

But because this Argumentation may perhaps run the same Fate also with the
former, and by reason of its Subtlety, do but little Execution neither, if not
be accounted Sophistical too; men being generally prone to Distrust; the
Firmness and Solidity, of such Thin and Subtle Cobwebs, (as these and the like
may seem to be) or their Ability to Support the Weight of so Great a Truth; and
to suspect themselves to be Illaqueated and Circumvented in them; therefore
shall we lay no stress upon this neither, but proceed to something which is yet
more Plain and Downright, after this manner. Whatsoever we can frame an Idea of
in our minds, implying no manner of Contradiction, this either Actually Is, or
else If it be Not, it is Possible for it to Be. But if God be Not, He Is not
Possible hereafter to Be, therefore He Is. The Reason and Necessity of the
Minor is evident, because if God be not, and yet Possible hereafter to be, then
would he not be an Eternal and Necessarily Existent Being, which is
Contradictious to his Idea. And the Ground of the Major, upon which all the
weight lies, has been already declared, where we proved before, That If there
were no God or Perfect Being, we could never have had any Conception or Idea of
him in our Minds, because there can be no Positive Conception of an Absolute
Nothing, that which has neither Actual nor Possible Existence. Here the
Posture of the Argument is only Inverted; Because we have an Idea of God, or a
Perfect Being, implying no manner of Contradiction in it, therefore must it
needs have some kind of Entity or other, either an Actual or Possible One; but
God if he be Not, is not Possible to Be, therefore He does Actually Exist.

But perhaps this Argumentation also how firm and solid soever, may prove less
Convictive of the Existence of a God to the Generality: because whatever is
Received, is Received according to the Capacity of the Recipient: and though a
Demonstration be never so good in it self, yet is it more or less such to
Particular Persons, according to their ability to comprehend it; Therefore
shall we in the next place Form yet a Plainer Demonstration, for a God from the
Idea of him, including Necessary Existence in it. It being First Premised, That
unquestionably Something or other, did Exist from all Eternity without
beginning. For it is certain that Every thing could not be Made, because
Nothing could come from Nothing, or be Made by It self, and therefore if once
there had been Nothing, there could never have been Any thing. Whence it is
undeniable, that there was always Something, and consequently that there was
Something Unmade, which Existed of It self from all Eternity. Now all the
Question is, and indeed this is the only Question betwixt Theists and Atheists;
since Something did certainly Exist of It self from all Eternity, What that
thing is, whether it be a Perfect or an Imperfect Being? We say therefore, that
whatsoever Existed of It self, from Eternity, and without Beginning; did so
Exist Naturally and Necessarily, or by the Necessity of its own Nature. Now
nothing could Exist of It self from Eternity, Naturally and Necessarily, but
that which contains Necessary and Eternal Self Existence, in its own Nature.
But there is nothing which contains Necessary Eternal Existence, in its own
Nature or Essence, but only an Absolutely Perfect Being; all other Imperfect
things, being in their Nature, Contingently Possible, either to Be or Not be.
Wherefore since something or other, must and does Exist of it self Naturally
and Necessarily from Eternity Unmade, and nothing could do this but what
included Necessary Self Existence in its Nature or Essence, it is certain that
it was a Perfect Being, or God, who did Exist of Himself from Eternity, and
nothing else, all other Imperfect things which have no Necessary Self-Existence
in their Nature, deriving their Being from Him. Here therefore are the Atheists
Infinitely Absurd and Unreasonable, when they will not acknowledge, that which
contains Independent Self-Existence, or Necessity of Existence (which indeed
is the same with an Impossibility of Nonexistence) in its Nature and Essence,
that is, a Perfect Being, so much as to Exist at all; and yet in the mean time
assert, that which has no Necessity of Existence in its Nature, the most
Imperfect of all Beings, Inanimate Body and Matter, to have Existed of It self
Necessarily from all Eternity.

We might here add, as a farther Confirmation of this Argument, what has been
already proved, that no Temporary Successive Being (whose Duration is in a
Continual Flux, as if it were every moment Generated a new) and therefore
neither our Own Souls, nor the World, nor Matter Moving, could possibly have
Existed from Eternity, and Independently upon any other thing, but must have
had a Beginning, and been Caused by something else, namely by an Absolutely
Perfect Being, whose Duration therefore is Permanent, and without any
Successive Generation, or Flux.

But besides all these Arguments, we may otherwise from the Idea of God
(already declared) be able both exactly to state the Controversy betwixt
Theists and Atheists, and satisfactorily to decide the same. In order
whereunto, there is yet something again to be Premised; namely this, that as it
is certain Every thing was not Made, but Something Existed of it Self from
Eternity Unmade; so is it likewise certain, That Every thing was not Unmade
neither, nor Existed of It self from Eternity, but something was Made, and had
a Beginning. Where there is a full Agreement betwixt Theists and Atheists, as
to this one Point, no Atheist asserting every thing to have been Unmade, but
they all acknowledging themselves to have been Generated, and to have had a
Beginning; that is, their own Souls and Personalities, as likewise the Lives
and Souls of all other Men and Animals. Wherefore since Something certainly
Existed of It self from Eternity, but other things were Made, and had a
Beginning, (which therefore must needs derive their being from that which
Existed of It self Unmade,) here is the State of the Controversy betwixt
Theists and Atheists, Whether that which Existed of It self from all Eternity,
and was the Cause of all other things, were a Perfect Being and God, or the
most Imperfect of all things whatsoever, Inanimate and Senseless matter. The
Former is the Doctrine of Theists, Met. L. 12. c. 5.
as Aristotle affirms of those Ancients, who did not write Fabulously
Concerning the First Principles, (...), As namely, Pherecydes, and the Magi,
and Empedocles and Anaxagoras, and many others; that they agreed in this, That
the first Original of all things was the Best, and Most Perfect. Where by the
way we may observe also, that according to Aristotle, the Ancient Magi did not
acknowledge a Substantial Evil Principle, they making that which is the Best
and Most Perfect Being, alone by it self, to be the First Begetter of all. This
I say is the Hypothesis of Theists, that there is One Absolutely Perfect Being,
Existing of It self from all Eternity, from whence all other lesser
Perfections, or Imperfect Beings did gradually Descend, till at last they end
in Senseless Matter or Inanimate Body. But the Atheistick Hypothesis on the
contrary, makes Senseless Matter the most Imperfect thing, to be the First
Principle or the only Self-Existent Being, and the Cause of all other things,
and Consequently all Higher Degrees of Perfections, that are in the world, to
have Clombe up, or Emerged by way of Ascent from thence; as Life, Sense,
Understanding, and Reason, from that which is altogether Dead and Senseless.
Nay, as it was before observed, there has been amongst the ancient Pagans, a
certain kind of Religious Atheists, such as acknowledging Verbally a God, or
Soul of the world, presiding over the whole, supposed this notwithstanding to
have first Emerged also, out of Senseless Matter, Night and Chaos; and therefore
doubtless to be likewise Dissolvable again into the same. And of these is that
place in Aristotle to be understood, Met. l. 12. c. 4.
(...). They suppose, not the First things, as Night, and the Heaven, and
Chaos, and the Ocean, but Jupiter ( or God) to Rule and Govern all. Where it is
intimated, that the Heaven, Night, Chaos, and the Ocean, according to these,
were Seniors to Jupiter, or in Order of Nature before him; they apprehending,
that things did Ascend upward, from that which was most Imperfect, as Night and
Chaos, to the more Perfect, and at length to Jupiter himself; the Mundane Soul,
who governs the whole world, as our Soul does our Body. Which same Opinion is
afterward again taken notice of and reprehended by Aristotle in these words,
Met. L. 12. c 5. Du Vall.
(...) (...). Nor would he think rightly, who should resemble the Principles of
the Universe, to that of Animals and Plants: wherefrom Indeterminate and
Imperfect things (as Seeds) do always arise the more Perfect. For even here
also is the case otherwise, then they suppose; For it is a man, that generates
a man; nor is the Seed the First.

The Controversy being thus clearly Stated betwixt Theists and Atheists, it
may now with great ease, and to the full Conviction of all Minds Unprejudiced,
and Unprepossessed with false Principles, be determined. It being on the one
hand, undenyably evident, that Lesser Perfections may Naturally Descend from
Greater, or at least from that which is Absolutely Perfect, and which Vertually
contains all: but on the other hand utterly Impossible, that Greater
Perfections and Higher Degrees of Being, should Rise and Ascend out of Lesser
and Lower, so as that which is the most Absolutely Imperfect of all things,
should be the First Fountain and Original of All. Since no Effect can possibly
transcend the Power of its Cause. Wherefore it is certain that in the Universe,
things did not thus Ascend and Mount, or Climb up from Lower Perfection to
Higher, but on the contrary, Descend and Slide down from Higher to Lower, so
that the first Original of all things, was not the most Imperfect, but the most
Perfect Being. But to speak more particularly, it is certain, notwithstanding
all the vain pretenses of Lucretius and other Atheists, or Semi-Atheists, to
the contrary; that Life and Sense could never possibly spring, out of Dead and
Senseless Matter, as its only Original, either in the way of Atoms, (no
Composition of Magnitudes, Figures, Sites and Motions, being ever able to
produce Cogitation) or in the way of Qualities, since Life and Perception can
no more result from any Mixture of Elements, or Combinations of Qualities of
Heat and Cold, Moist and Dry, etc. than from Unqualified Atoms. This being
undeniably Demonstrable, from that very Principle of Reason, which the Atheists
are so fond of, but, misunderstanding abuse, (as shall be manifested afterward)
that Nothing can come from Nothing. Much less could Understanding and Reason in
men, ever have Emerged out of Stupid Matter, devoid of all manner of Life.
Wherefore we must needs here freely declare, against the Darkn^ss of that
Philosophy, which has been Sometimes unwarily entertained by such as were no
Atheists, That Sense may Rise from a certain Modification, Mixture, or
Organization, of Dead and Senseless Matter; as also that Understanding and
Reason, may result from Sense: the plain consequence of both which is, that
Senseless Matter may prove the Original of all things, and the only Numen. Which
Doctrine therefore is doubtless, a main piece of the Philosophy of the Kingdom
of Darkness. But this Darkness has been of late in great measure dispelled, by
the Light of the Atomick Philosophy restored, as it was in its first Genuine
and Virgin State, Undeflowred as yet by Atheists, this clearly Showing how far
Body and Mechanism can go, and that Life and Cogitation can never Emerge out
from thence; it being built upon that Fundamental Principle, as we have made it
evident in the first Chapter, that Nothing can come from Nothing. And Strato
and the Hylozoick Atheists, were so well aware and so sensible of this, that
all Life and Understanding could not possibly be Generated or Made, but that
there must be some Fundamental and Substantial or Eternal Unmade Life and
Knowledge; that they therefore have thought necessary, to attribute Life, and
Perception, (or Understanding,) with Appetite, and Self-moving Power, to all
Matter as such, that so it might be thereby fitly Qualified to be the Original
of all things. Than which Opinion as nothing can be more Monstrous; so shall we
else where Evince the Impossibility thereof. In the mean time, we doubt not to
averr, that the Argument proposed, is a Sufficient Demonstration of the
Impossibility of Atheism; which will be further manifested in our Answer to the
Second Atheistick Objection against a Divine Creation, because Nothing can come
from Nothing.

But this Controversy betwixt Theists and Atheists, may be yet more
Particularly Stated, from the Idea of God, as including Mind or Understanding
in it Essentially, Viz. Whether Mind be Eternal and Unmade, as being the Maker
of all; or else Whether all Mind were it self Made or Generated, and that out
of Senseless Matter? For according to the Doctrine of the Pagan Theists, Mind
was (...), The Oldest of all things, Senior to the World and Elements; and by
Nature has a Princely and Lordly Dominion over all. But according to those
Atheists, who make Matter or Body devoid of all Life and Understanding, to be
the First Principle, Mind must be (...), A Post-Nate thing, Younger than the
world; a Weak, Umbratil, and Evanid Image, and next to Nothing.

And the Controversy as thus Stated, may be also Clearly and Satisfactorily
decided. For First, we say, That as it is certainly True, That If there had
been once Nothing at all, there could never have been Any thing; So is it true
likewise, that If once there had been no Life, in the whole Universe, but all
had been Dead, then could there never have been any Life or Motion in it; and
If once there had been no Mind, Understanding or Knowledge, then could there
never have been any Mind or Understanding produced. Because, to suppose Life
and Understanding, to rise and spring up, out of that which is altogether Dead
and Senseless, as its only Original, is plainly to Suppose, Something to come
out of Nothing. It cannot be said so of other things, as of Corporeal World and
Matter, that If once they had not been, they could never Possibly have been;
because though there had been no World nor Matter, yet might these have been
produced, from a Perfect Omnipotent Incorporeal Being, which in it self
Eminently contains all things. Dead and Senseless Matter could never have
Created or Generated Mind and Understanding, but a Perfect Omnipotent Mind,
could Create Matter. Wherefore because there is Mind, we are certain, that
there was some Mind or other from Eternity without Beginning; though not
because there is Body, that therefore there was Body or Matter from Eternity
Unmade. Now these Imperfect Minds of ours, were by no means Themselves Eternal
or without Beginning, but from an Antecedent Nonexistence brought forth into
Being; but since no Mind could spring out of Dead and Senseless Matter, and all
Minds could not Possibly be Made, nor one produced from another Infinitely;
there must of necessity be an Eternal Unmade Mind, from whence those Imperfect
Minds of ours were derived. Which Perfect Omnipotent Mind, was as well the
Cause of all other things, as of humane Souls.

But before we proceed to any further Argumentation, we must needs take notice
here, that the Atheists suppose no small part of their strength, to lie in this
very thing, namely their disproving a God, from the Nature of Understanding and
Knowledge; nor do they indeed swagger in any thing more than this. We have
already set it for the Eleventh Atheistick Argument, That Knowledge being the
Information of the Things themselves Known, and all Conception the Action of
that which is Conceived, and the Passion of the Conceiver; the World and all
Sensible things, must needs be before there could be any Knowledge or
Conception of them, and no Knowledge or Conception before the World as its
Cause. Or more briefly thus, The world could not be made by Knowledge and
Understanding, because there could be no Knowledge or Understanding of the
world, or of any thing in it, before it was made. For according to these
Atheists, Things made Knowledge, and not Knowledge Things; they meaning by
Things here, such only as are Sensible and Corporeal. So that Mind and
Understanding, could not be the Creator of the world and these Sensible things,
it self being the Creature of them; a Secondary, Derivative, Result from them,
or a Fantastic Image of them: the Youngest and most Creaturely thing in the
whole world. Whence it follows, that to Suppose Mind and Understanding, to be
the Maker of all things, would be no better Sense, that if one should suppose,
the Images in Ponds and Rivers, to be the Makers of the Sun, Moon and Stars,
and other things represented in them. And upon such a Ground as this, does
Modern Writer presume to determine, that Knowledge and Understanding, are not
to be attributed to God Almighty, because they Imply Imperfection, and
Dependence upon Corporeal things without; Quoniam Scientia and Intellectus in
nobis nihil aliud sunt, De Cive Rel. c. 15. Sect. 14^
quam suscitatus a Rebus Externis Organa prementibus Animi Tumultus, non est
putandum aliquid tale accidere Deo. Signum enim est Potentiae ab alio
dependentis. Lev. cap. 31.
Which is again Englished thus; Knowledge and Understanding, being in us
nothing else but a Tumult in the Mind, raised by External things, that press
the Organical parts of man's Body; there is no such thing in God, nor can they
be attributed to him, they being things which depend upon Natural Causes. Where
this Writer thus denying Knowledge and Understanding to God, upon pretense that
it speaks Imperfection and Dependence upon External Corporeal things, (it being
nothing but a Tumult raised by the Motions and Pressures of them) he must needs
Absolutely deny the First Principle of all things, to be any Knowing
Understanding Nature; unless he had asserted some other kind of Knowledge,
distinct from that of men, and clearly attributed the Same to God Almighty.
Hitherto the sense of Atheists.

Now we shall for the present, only so far forth concern our selves in
Confuting this Atheistick Doctrine, as to lay a Foundation thereby, for the
Demostration of the Contrary, Namely the Existence of a God, or a Mind Before
the World, from the Nature of Knowledge and Understanding. First, therefore it
is a Sottish Conceit of these Atheists, proceeding from their not attending to
their own Cogitations; that not only Sense but also Knowledge and Understanding
in Men, is but a Tumult, raised from Corporeal things without, pressing upon
the Organs of their Body; or else as they declare themselves more distinctly,
nothing but the Activity of Sensible Objects upon them, and their Passion from
them. For if this were true, then would every thing that Suffered and Reacted
Motion, especially Polite Bodies, as Looking-Glasses, have something both of
Sense and of Understanding in them. It is plain that there comes nothing to us,
from Bodies without us, but only Local Motion and Pressure. Neither is Sense it
self, the mere Passion of those Motions, but the Perception of their Passions,
in a way of Fancy. But Sensible things themselves (as for example, Light and
Colors) are not Known or Understood either by the Passion, or the Fancy of
Sense; not by any thing merely Foreign and Adventitious, but by Intelligible
Ideas Exerted from the Mind it self, that is, by something Native and Domestic
to it: nothing being more true, than this of Boethius, that, Omne quod Scitur,
non ex Sua, sed ex Comprehendentium Natura, Vi, and Facultate Cognoscitur,
Whatsoever is Known, is Known not by own Force and Power, but by the Force and
Power, the Vigor and Activity of that thing it self which Knows or Comprehends
it. Wherefore besides the Phantasms of Singular Bodies, or of Sensible things
Existing without us, (which are not mere Passions neither) it is plain that our
Humane Mind has other Cogitations or Conceptions in it, namely the Ideas of
the Intelligible Natures and Essences of things, which are Universal, and by
and under which it understands Singulars. It is a Ridiculous Conceit of a
Modern Atheistick Writer, that Vniversals are nothing else but Names,
attributed to many Singular Bodies, because whatsoever Is is Singular. For
though whatsoever Exist without the Mind, be Singular, yet is it plain, that
there are Conceptions in our Minds, Objectively Universal. Which Universal
Objects of our Mind, though they Exist not as such any where without it, yet
are they not therefore Nothing, but have an Intelligible Entity for this very
reason, because they are Conceivable, for since Nonentity is not Conceivable,
whatsoever is Conceivable, and an Object of the Mind is therefore Something.
And as for Axiomatical Truths, in which something is affirmed or denied, as
these are not all Passions from Bodies without us, (for what Local Motions
could Impress this Common Notion, upon our Minds, That Things which agree in
one Third, agree amongst themselves, or any other?) so neither are these things
only gathered by Induction from repeated and reiterated Sensations, we clearly
apprehending at once, that it is Impossible they should be otherwise. Thus
Aristotle Ingeniously; (...). It is evident that there is no knowledge (of the
Universal Theorems of Geometry) by Sense. For if we could perceive by Sense,
that the Three Angles of a Triangle, were equal to Two Right; yet should we not
rest satisfied in this, as having therefore a sufficient Knowledge hereof; but
would seek further after a Demonstration of it: Sense reaching only to
Singulars, but Knowledge to Vniversals. When from the Universal Idea of a
Triangle, which is neither here, nor there, nor any where, without our Mind,
but yet has an Intelligible Entity; we see a plain necessity that its Three
Angles must be Equal to two Right, then do we know the Truth of this Universal
Theorem, and not before: as also we Understand, that every Singular Triangle,
(so far as it is true) has this Property in it. Wherefore the Knowledge of
this and the like Truths, is not derived from Singulars, nor do we arrive to
them in way of Ascent, from Singulars to Vniversals, but on the contrary having
first found them in the Vniversals, we afterward Descending apply them to
Singulars: so that our Knowledge here is not After Singular Bodies, and
Secundarily or Derivatively From them; but in order of Nature, Before them, and
Proleptical to them.

Now these Universal Conceptions, some of which are also Abstract (as Life,
Sense, Reason, Knowledge, and the like) many of them are of such things, whose
Singulars do not at all fall under Sense, which therefore could never possibly
be Impressed upon us, from Singular Bodies by Local Motion: and again some
such, as though they belong to Corporeal and Sensible things; yet, as their
Accuracy cannot be reached to by Sense, so neither did they ever Exist in that
Matter of this lower world which here encompasseth us, and therefore could not
be stamped upon us from without; as for example the Ideas of a Perfect Strait
Line, and a Plain Superficies, or of an exact Triangle, Circle, Sphere, or
Cube; no Material thing here amongst us being terminated in so Strait Lines,
but that even by Microscopes there may be discovered much Irregularity and
Deformity in them; and very probable it is, that there are no Perfectly Strait
Lines, no such Triangles, Circles, Spheres, or Cubes, as answer to the
Exactness of our Conceptions, in any part of the whole Material Universe, nor
never will be. Notwithstanding which, they are not Absolute Non-Entities, since
we can Demonstrate things concerning them, and though they never were nor will
be, yet are they Possible to Exist, since nothing can be Conceived, but it
either Is, or else is Possible to be. The Humane Mind therefore has a Power of
framing Ideas and Conceptions, not only of what Actually Is, but also of things
which never were, nor perhaps will be, they being only Possible to be. But when
from our Conceptions, we conclude of some things, that though they are Not, yet
they are Possible to be; since nothing that Is not, can be Possible to be,
unless there be something Actually in Being, which has sufficient Power to
produce it; we do Implicitly suppose, the Existence of a God or Omnipotent
Being thereby, which can make whatsoever is Conceivable, though it yet be not,
to Exist; and therefore Material Triangles, Circles, Spheres, Cubes,
Mathematically Exact.

The Result of what we have hitherto said is this, that Since Singular Bodies,
are not the only Objects of our Mind and Cogitation, it having also Universal
and Abstract Ideas, of the Intelligible Natures or Essences of things; (some of
which are such, whose Singulars do not at all fall under Sense; others though
they belong to Bodies, yet Sense can never reach to them, nor were they ever in
Matter) moreover since our Mind can conceive, of things which no where Actually
Exist, but are only Possible; and can have such a Demonstrative Science of
Universal Truths, as Sense can never ascend to: That therefore Humane Knowledge
and Understanding it self, is not the mere Image and Creature of Singular
Bodies only; and so Derivative, or Ectypal from them, and in order of Nature
Junior to them; but that as it were hovering aloft over all the Corporeal
Universe, it is a thing Independent upon Singular Bodies, or Proleptical to
them, and in Order of Nature, Before them.

But what Account can we then Possibly give, of Knowledge and Understanding,
their Nature and Original? Since there must be (...), That which is
Intelligible, in order of Nature, before (...), or Intellection? Certainly no
other than this, that the First Original Knowledge, is that of a Perfect Being,
Infinitely Good and Powerful, Comprehending it self; and the utmost Extent of
its own Fecundity and Power, that is, the Possibilities of all things; their
Ideas, with their several Relations to one another; all Necessary and Immutable
Truths. Here therefore is there a Knowledge before the world, and all Sensible
things, that was Archetypal and Paradigmatical to the same. Of which one
Perfect Mind and Knowledge, all other Imperfect Minds (being Derived from it)
have a certain Participation; whereby they are enabled to Frame Intelligible
Ideas, not only of Whatsoever does actually Exist, but also of such thing, as
never Were, nor Will be, but are Only Possible; or Objects of Divine Power.

Wherefore since it is certain, that even Humane Knowledge and Understanding it
self, is not a mere Passion from Sensible Things and Singular Bodies Existing
without (which is the only Foundation of that forementioned Atheistick
Argument, that Things Made Knowledge, and not Knowledge Things) and
consequently it must needs have some other Original: moreover since Knowledge
and Understanding, apprehend things Proleptically to their Existence, ( Mind
being able to frame Conceptions of all Possible Entities, and Modifications)
and therefore in their Nature, do plainly Suppose the Actual Existence of a
Perfect Being, which is Infinitely Fecund and Powerful, and could produce all
things Possible or Conceivable; the First Original Knowledge or Mind, from
whence all other Knowledges and Minds are derived, being that of an Absolutely
Perfect and Omnipotent Being, Comprehending It Self, and the Extent of its own
Power, or of its Communicability, that is, the Ideas of all Possibilities of
things, that may be Produced by it, together with their Relations to one
another, and their Necessary Immutable Truths; Wisd. c. 7.
accordingly as Wisdom and Understanding are described to be, (...), The Breath
(or Vapor) of the Power of God, and an Efflux (or Emanation) from the Glory of
the Almighty, a clear Mirror (or Looking Glass) of his Active Energy or
Virtue, and the Image of his Goodness: I say, the Result of all is this, that
the Nature of Knowledge and Understanding, is so far from being a Ground of
disproving a Deity (as the Atheists ignorantly pretend) that it affords a
Firm Demonstration to us on the contrary, of the Existence of a God, a Perfect
Omnipotent Being Comprehending It self, and the Extent of its own Power, or all
Possibilities of Things: a Mind Before the world, and Senior to All Things, no
Ectypal, but Archetypal thing, which comprehended in it, as a kind of
Intellectual World, the Paradigm or Platform, according to which this Sensible
World was made.

And this may be Further confirmed, from what is generally acknowledged, and
indeed cannot reasonably be denied by any, viz. That there are Eternal
Verities, such as were never Made, and had no Beginning, nor can ever be
Destroyed or Cease to be: as for Example, such Common Notions as these, That
Equals added to Equals, make Equals; That the Cause is in order of Nature
before the Effect, etc. together with all Geometrical Theorems; as Aristotle
himself declares, he writing in his Ethics after this manner, (...).
Concerning Eternal (and Immutable) Things, no man does consult; as for Example,
concerning the Diameter or Diagonial of a Square, whether it should be
Incommensurable to the Sides or no. Where he plainly affirms, this
Geometrical Theorem, that the Diameter or Diagonial of a Square, is
Incommensurable to the Sides, to be an Eternal Truth. Neither are there such
Eternal Truths as these only in Mathematics, and concerning Quantity, but also
in Ethics concerning Morality; there being here (...), as Justin Martyr calls
them, Things Eternally Just, which were not Made such at some certain times, by
Law and Arbitrary Command, but being such in their own Nature Immutably, were
from Everlasting to Everlasting, and (as it is said of that Eternal Word which
comprehends all Truth) the Same Yesterday, to Day, and For ever. For of these
is that famous Passage of Sophocles in his Antigona, (...)
(...).
These are not things of to Day, or Yesterday, but they ever Live, and no man
knows their Date, or from whence they came. No man can declare the time when
all Common Notions, and Geometrical Truths were first Made and Generated out of
Nothing, or brought out of antecedent Nonexistence into Being. Certain it is,
that such Truths as these, that the Diameter and Sides of a Square are
Incommensurable, or that the Power of the Hypotenuse in a Rectangular Triangle
is Equal to the Powers of both the Sides, were not made by any Man's Thinking,
or by those first Geometricians who Discovered or Demonstrated the same, they
Discovering and Demonstrating only, that which Was. Wherefore these Truths were
before there was any man to Think of them, and they would continue still to be,
though all the men in the World should be Annihilated: Nay, though there were
no Material Squares and Triangles any where in the whole world neither, no nor
any Matter at all: for they were, ever without beginning before the world, and
would of necessity be ever after it, should it cease to be.

Now if there be Eternal Truths, which were never Made, and could not But Be,
then must the Rations Rerum, the Simple Reasons of things also, Or their
Intelligible Natures and Essences, out of which those Truths are compounded, be
of Neccesity Eternal likewise. For how can this be an Eternal Truth, that the
Diameter of a Square is Incommensurable with the Sides, if the Rations, the
Reasons of a Square, Diameter, and Sides, or their Intelligible Essences, were
not themselves Eternal? These are therefore called by Plato (a man of much
Meditation, and no Contemptible Philosopher) not only, (...), Things which are
always the same, and Unchangeable, but also, (...), Things which were never
Made, but always Are, and sometimes (...), Things that were neither Made nor
can be Destroyed, sometimes (...), Things Ingenerable and Incorruptible. Of
which Cicero thus, Haec Plato negat Gigni, sed Semper Esse, and Ratione and
Intelligentia Contineri. These things Plato affirms to have been never Made,
but always to Be, and to be contained in Reason and Understanding. And though
perhaps it may seem strange, even Aristotle himself also, notwithstanding his
so often clashing with Plato's Ideas, here Really agrees in the main, that the
Forms and Species, or the Universal Intelligible Essences of Things, which are
the proper and immediate Objects of Science, were Eternal and never Made. Thus
in his Metaphysics, (...), No man makes the Form, or Species of a thing, nor
was it ever Generated; and again, (...), There is no Generation of the Essence
of a Sphere; and, (...), The Forms or Species of things are without any
Generation or Corruption. And he sometimes calls these Objects of Science,
(...) or (...), An Immutable Essence or Nature. Lastly, where he writes
against the Heracliticks, and those other Scepticks, who denied all Certainty
of Science; he first discovers the Ground of their Error herein to have been
this, that they supposed Singular Bodies, or Sensibles existing Without, Met.
L. 4. c.
to be the Only Things or Objects of the Mind, or Knowledge, (...) -- (...)^
The Original of these men's mistake was this, because Truth is to be looked for
in Things, and they conceived the only things to be Sensibles, in which it is
certain there is much of the Indeterminate Nature. Wherefore they perceiving
all the Nature of Sensibles, to be Moveable, or in perpetual Flux and Mutation,
since nothing can possibly be verified or constantly affirmed concerning that
which is not the same but Changeable, concluded that there could be no Truth at
all nor Certainty of Science; those Things which are the only Objects of it,
never continuing the same. And then he subjoyns in way of Opposition to this
Skeptical Doctrine of theirs, and the forementioned Ground thereof, (...). We
would have these men therefore to know, that there is another kind ^f Essence
of Things, besides that of Sensibles, to which belongs neither Motion, nor
Corruption, nor any Generation at all. By which Essences of things, that have
no Generation nor Corruption, he could understand nothing else, but those
Intelligible Natures, Species, and Ideas which are the Standing and Immutable
Objects of Science. And certain it is, that there could be no constant and
Immutable Science at all, were there no other Objects of the Mind, but
Singulars and Sensibles, because these are all Mutable. Wherefore the Proper
and Immediate Objects of the Geometrical Science, are no Singular and Material
Triangles, Squares, Spheres and Cubes, etc. not only because none of these are
found Mathematically Exact, and because Geometricians in all the Several
distant ages and places of the world, could not have the same Singular Bodies
before them, but also because they do none of them continue Immutably the Same:
all Corporeal things, being more or less in perpetual Motion and Mutation;
Whereas that of which any Geometrical Theorem is Verified and Demonstrated,
must be Immutably and Vnalterably the Same. The Triangles and Circles, Spheres
and Cubes of Euclid, Archimedes, Pappus, Appollonius, and all other Ancient and
Modern Geometricians, in all the distant places and Times of the World, were
both Indivisibly One and the Same, and also perfectly Immutable and
Incorruptible, the Science of Geometry being such. For which Cause it is
affirmed also, of these Mathematical Things, by the forementioned Aristotle,
that they are No Where as in a Place; Met. L. 12. c. 5.
as all Singular Bodies are, (...). It is absurd to make Mathematical Things to
be in a Place, as Solid Bodies are, for Place belongs only to Singulars,
which are therefore separable from one another by Place: but Mathematical
things are not Any where. Because they being Universal and Abstract, are only
in Minds: nevertheless for the same Reason are they also Every Where, they
being in every Mind that apprehends them. Lastly, these Intelligible Essences
and Ideas of Things, are called also by Philo, (...), The Most Necessary
Essences, as being not only Eternal, but having likewise Necessary Existence
belonging to them: for though there be no Absolute Necessity that there should
be Matter or Body, yet is there an Absolute Necessity that there should be
Truth.

If therefore there be Eternal Intelligibles or Ideas, and Eternal Truths; and
Necessary Existence do belong to them; then must there be an Eternal Mind
Necessarily Existing, since these Truths and Intelligible Essences of Things
cannot possibly be any where but in a Mind. For by the Essences of things, when
they are said to be Eternal, must not be meant their very Substances, as if
every thing were in it self Eternal and Uncreated; or that God in Creation, did
only as a Modern Writer abusively Expresses it, Sartoris instar, vestire,
Essentias rerum nova Existentia, Cloth the antecedent Essences of things, with
a new Garment of Existence; but only their Esse Cognitum, their Possible and
Intelligible Natures, as they were Objects of Infinite Power, and
Understanding, before they were Made. There must be a Mind Senior to the world,
and all Sensible Things, and such as at once Comprehends in it, the Ideas of
all Intelligibles, their Necessary Scheses and Relations to one another, and
all their Immutable Truths: a Mind, which does not (...), (as Aristotle writes
of it) sometimes Understand and sometimes not Understand, as if it were
sometimes Awake and sometimes Asleep, or like an Eye sometimes Open and
sometimes Shut, but (...), Such a Mind as is Essentially Act and Energy; and
has no Defect in it. And this as we have already declared can be no other than
the Mind of an Omnipotent, and Infinitely Pepfect Being, Comprehending It Self
and the Extent of its own Power, or how far it self is Communicable, that is,
all the Possibilities of things, that may be made by it, and their respective
Truths; Mind and Knowledge in the very Nature of it, supposing the Actual
Existence of an Omnipotent or Infinitely Powerful Being, as its (...) or
Intelligible; It being nothing but the Comprehension of the Extent of Infinite
or Divine Power, and the Measure of the same.

And from hence it is Evident also, that there can be but One only Original
Mind, or no more than One Understanding Being Self Existent; all other Minds
whatsoever Partaking of one Original Mind; and being as it were Stamped with
the Impression or Signature of one and the same Seal. From whence it comes to
pass, that all Minds in the several Places and Ages of the World, have Ideas or
Notions of Things, Exactly Alike, and Truths Indivisibly the Same. Truths are
not multiplied, by the Diversity of Minds that apprehend them; because they are
all but Ectypal Participations of one and the same Original or Archetypal Mind,
and Truth. As the same Face may be Reflected in several Glasses; and the Image
of the same Sun may be in a thousand Eyes at once beholding it; and One and the
same Voice may be in a thousand Ears listening to it; so when Innumerable
Created Minds, have the same Ideas of Things, and Understand the Same Truths;
it is but One and the same Eternal Light, that is Reflected in them all; ( that
Light which enlighteneth Every man, that comes into the World;) or the same
Voice of that One Everlasting Word, that is never Silent, Reechoed by them.
Thus was it concluded by Themistius, that one man by Teaching, could not
Possibly beget in the Mind of another, the very same Notions, Conceptions and
Knowledges, which himself had in his own Mind, (...), Were not the Minds both
of the Teacher and of the Learner as it were Printed and Stamped alike. As also
that men could not Possibly so confer together as they do, presently
apprehending one another meaning, and raising up the very Same senses in their
Minds, and that merely by Occasion of Words and Sounds, (...), Were there not
some One Mind which all men did Partake of. As for that Anti-Monarchical
Opinion, of Many Understanding Beings, or Minds, Self Originated, and
Independent, (none of which therefore could be Omnipotent) it is neither
Conceivable, how such should all agree in the same Truths, there being no
Common Measure of Truth betwixt them, no more than any Common Rule of their
Wills; nor indeed how they should have any Knowledge or Understanding at all,
properly so called, that being the Comprehension of the Possibilities of
things, or of the Extent of Infinite Power, whereas according to this
Hypothesis, there is no Infinite Power at all, the Power of each of those Many
supposed Principles or Deities, being Limited and Finite, and therefore indeed
not Creative of any thing neither, since that which could Create one thing,
could Create all, and consequently would have all depending upon it. We
conclude therefore, That from the Nature of Mind and Knowledge, it is
Demonstrable, That there can be but One Original and Self-Existent Mind, or
Understanding Being, from which all other Minds were derived. And now have we,
more Copiously than we designed, Confuted the First Atheistick Argument, we
having not only asserted the Idea of God, and fully Answered and refelled all
the Atheistick Pretenses against the same; but also from this very Idea of God,
or a Perfect Being, Demonstrated his Existence. We shall dispatch the following
Atheistick Objections with more brevity.

WE come in the next place, to the Achilles of the Atheists; their Invincible
Argument, against a Divine Creation and Omnipotence; because Nothing could come
from Nothing. It being concluded from hence, that whatsoever Substantially or
Really Is, was from all Eternity Of It Self, Unmade or Uncreated by any Deity.
Or else thus; By God is always Understood, a Creator of some Real Entity or
other out of Nothing; but it is an Undoubted Principle of Reason and
Philosophy, an Undeniable Common Notion, That Nothing can be made out of
Nothing, and therefore there can be no such Creative Power as this. And here we
shall perform these Three Things; First, we shall show That in some Senses,
this is indeed an Unquestionable Truth, and Common Notion, That Nothing can
come from Nothing, and what those Senses are. Secondly, We shall make it
evident, that in the Sense of this Atheistick Objection, it is Absolutely
False, That Nothing can come from Nothing, or be made out of Nothing; and that
a Divine Creation and Omnipotence, can be no way Impugned from the
forementioned Principle rightly Understood. Thirdly and Lastly, We shall prove,
That as from this Principle or Common Notion, Nothing out of Nothing, there can
be no Execution at all done against Theism, or a Divine Creation; so from the
very Same rightly Understood, the Impossibility of all Atheism may be
Demonstratively Proved, it bringing Something out of Nothing in an Impossible
Sense; as also the Existence of a God Evinced.

We grant therefore in the First place, that this is in some Sense an Undoubted
Principle of Reason, or an Undeniable Common Notion, that Nothing can come from
Nothing. For First, it is Unquestionably True, That Nothing which once was not,
could ever Of It self come into Being; or That Nothing could bring it Self out
of Nonexistence into Being; That Nothing can take Beginning of Existence from
it Self; or That Nothing can be Made or Produced without an Efficient Cause.
And from hence, as has been already Intimated, is it Demonstratively Certain,
that every thing was not Made, but that there is something Necessarily Self
Existent, and which could not But Be. For had every thing been Made, then must
something of Necessity, have been Made out of Nothing by It Self; which is
Impossible.

Again, As Nothing which was Not, could ever Of It self come into Being, or be
Made, without an Efficient Cause, so is it certain likewise, that Nothing can
be Efficiently Caused or Produced, by that which has not in it at least Equal,
(if not Greater) Perfection, as also Sufficient Power to Produce the same. We
say Nothing which was not, could ever be brought into Being, by that which has
not Formally, Equal Perfection in it; because Nothing can Give what it has
not, and therefore so much of the Perfection or Entity of the Effect, as is
greater than that of the supposed Cause; so much thereof must needs come from
Nothing, or be made without a Cause. Moreover whatsoever has Equal Perfection
to another thing, could not therefore Cause or Produce that other thing,
because it might either have no Active Power at all, as Matter has not, it
being merely Passive, or else no Sufficient Active and Productive Power. As for
Example, though it be not Impossible, That Motion which once was not, should be
Produced; yet is it Impossible, that it should be ever Produced, without a
Sufficient Cause. Wherefore if there were once no Motion at all in the whole
world, nor no Life or Self Active Power in any thing, but all were Dead; then
is it certain, that there could never possibly arise, any Motion or Mutation in
it to all Eternity. There being no Sufficient Cause, to Produce the Same; since
nothing can produce Motion, but that which has Life or Self- Activity in it;
and if Motion or any thing else, should begin to be, without a Sufficient
Cause, then must it needs be Caused by It Self, or Of It Self come into Being;
which is a thing Impossible. Now no Imperfect Being whatsoever, has a
Sufficient Emanative Power to Create any other Substance, or Produce it out of
Nothing; the utmost that can be done by Imperfect Beings, is only to Produce
new Accidents and Modifications: as Humane Souls can Produce new Cogitations in
themselves, and new Local Motion in Bodies. No Imperfect Being is Substantially
Emanative, or can Produce another Substance out of Nonexistence. Therefore for
any Substance, to be brought into Being, by an Imperfect Substance, which has
not Sufficient Emanative or Creative Power, is a thing plainly Impossible; it
being all one as to say, That a Substance might Of It self, come out of Nothing
into Being. And thus is it granted, that no Substance could be Created, or
brought out of Nonexistence, into Being, but by the sole Efficiency of an
Absolutely Perfect Being, which has both Greater Perfection, (it Eminently
Containing all things in it) and also a Sufficient Emanative or Creative Power.

And now have we given an Account, of Two Senses, wherein it is Impossible, For
Any thing to come from Nothing; One, For a thing which was not, to bring it
Self into Being, or to be Made without an Efficient Cause. Another, For a thing
to be Efficiently Caused, by that which has not at least Equal Perfection in
it, or a Sufficient Emanative or Productive Power. Both which Senses of this
Axiom respect the Efficient Cause, and thus was it frequently understood by
diverse of the Ancients, and particularly by Cicero. We shall now propound a
Third Sense, wherein this Axiom is also Verified, That Nothing can be Made out
of Nothing, respecting chiefly the Material Cause. For since no Imperfect,
Natural Being, has any Creative Power, or can Efficiently produce any New
Substance or Real Entity, which was not before, into Being, but only act upon
Pre-existing Matter, by Motion, and Modifie the same; and since Matter, as
such, being merely Passive, cannot Cause any thing, that was not before, or
will not result from the Composition or Modification of it; it follows
undeniably, that in all Natural Generations and Productions out of Preexistent
Matter, (without a Divine Creation) there can never be any New Substance or
Real Entity brought out of Nonexistence into Being. And this was that very
thing, and no other, which the Ancient Physiologers meant, when (as Aristotle
tells us) they so much insisted upon this Principle, (...), That it was
Impossible that any Real Entity, should be (Naturally) Made or Generated out of
Nothing; Or, as it is also otherwise expressed, (...), That no Real Entity was
either Generated or Corrupted. That is, That in Natural Generations,
Corruptions, and Alterations, (where God is supposed not Miraculously to
interpose) there is no Creation of any New Substance or Real Entity out of
Nothing, nor Annihilation, or Destruction of any into Nothing.

We are not ignorant, that the Generality of Modern Writers, have interpreted
this Doctrine, of the Old Physiologers in Aristotle, into quite different
Sense; as designing therein to take away all Divine Creation out of Nothing;
(or Non- Existence) they making all things to have sprung out of Matter
(existing Of it self from Eternity) either Without a God; or else rather
(because Parmenides and Empedocles, and other Asserters of this Doctrine, were
undoubted Theists) With Him. So that God could not Create any New Entity out of
Nothing, but only make things out of Preexisting Unmade Matter, as a Carpenter
does a House, or a Weaver a Piece of Cloth. And thus is it Commonly taken for
granted, that no Pagan Philosopher ever went so far, as to acknowledge a Divine
Creation of any thing out of Nothing, in the Sense of Christian Theologers. And
here we grant indeed that besides the Stoics, there have been some other
Philosophic Theists amongst the Pagans, of this Persuasion; That Nothing was
nor could be made by God, otherwise, then out of Something Prae-Existing: as
Plutarchus Chaeronensis for one, who in a place already Cited positively
affirms, (...). That though the world were indeed made by God, yet the
Substance or Matter, out of which it was Made* wus not Made. And then he
subjoyns this very Reason for it, (...). Because there can be no Making of any
thing out of Nothing, but only out of Something Prae Existing, not rightly
Ordered or Sufficiently disposed; as in a House, Garment, or Statue. From which
conceit of Plutarch's, though he were otherwise Ingenious, it may well be
supposed, that the Dull Boeotick Air had too much Effect upon him. However
neither Plutarch nor the Stoics, as we conceive, are for this to be accounted
Absolute and Downright Atheists, but only Imperfect, Mungrel, and Spurious
Theists. And therefore were Atheists never so much able to prove, that there
could be no Creation out of Nothing Prae-Existing, which they cannot at all do,
yet would not this overthrow Theism in general, there being a Latitude therein.
Nevertheless it will undeniably appear, from what shall follow, that those
Ancient Italicks and Pythagoricks, were so far from intending here any such
thing, to deduce all things out of Matter, either Without, or With a God; as
that they plainly designed the very Contrary; namely to prove that no New Real
Entity could be Made out of Matter, and particularly that Souls could not be
Generated out of the same; which therefore of necessity, must, according to
them, have another Divine Original, and be Made by God, not out of Matter, but
out of Nothing Prae-Existing: since it could not be supposed by any, that all
Souls Existed Of Themselves from Eternity Unmade. And indeed all those Pagan
Philosophers who asserted the Incorporiety of Souls, must of necessity in like
manner, suppose them not to have been Made, out of Prae-Existing Matter, but by
God out of Nothing. Plutarch being only here to be excepted, by reason of a
certain odd Hypothesis which he had, that was peculiarly his own; of a Third
Principle, besides God and Matter, a Disorderly Soul, or Evil Demon
Self-Existent, who therefore seems to have supposed all Particular Humane
Souls, to have been made, neither out of Nothing, nor yet out of Matter or Body
Prae-Existing, but out of a certain strange Commixture, of the Substance of
that Evil Soul, and God, blended together: upon which account, does he affirm
Souls to be, not so much (...) as (...), not so much, the work of God, as a
Part of him. And now let any one Judge, whether upon Plutarch's account, there
be not yet further reason, to complain of this Boeotick Air. Wherefore we
conclude, that those old Physiologers in Aristotle, who insisted so much upon
that Principle, That no Real Entity could be Made or Generated out of Nothing,
acted only as Physiologers therein, and not as Theologers or Metaphysicians,
they not opposing a Divine Creation out of Nothing Prae-Existing, but only
contending that no New Entity could be made out of Matter, and that in Natural
Generations and Corruptions there was no Creation or Annihilation of any thing.

But what the true scope and meaning of these Physiologers indeed was, will
more plainly appear, from that Use or Improvement, which themselves made of
this Philosophic Principle, and this was Twofold. For First, It is certain
that upon this Foundation, they all of them Endeavored to Establish, a
Peculiar kind of Physiology, and some Atomology or other, either an Homoeomery,
or an Anomoeomery, a Similar or Dissimilar Atomology. For Anaxagoras looking
upon this Maxim of the Italick Philosophers, That Nothing could be Physically
made out of Nothing, or no Real Entity Generated or Corrupted, as an Undoubted
Principle of Reason, and being also not able to Conceive otherwise, of the
Forms and Qualities of Bodies than that they were Real Entities, distinct from
the Substance of Matter, or its Modifications; concluded that therefore in
Generations, Corruptions and Alterations, these were not created out of
Nothing, and Annihilated into Nothing, but that every thing was Naturally made,
(...), out of Prae-Existent and In Existent Things, and consequently that there
were in all things, Dissimilar Atoms and Particles of every Kind, though by
reason of their Parvitude Insensible to us, and every thing seemed to be, only
that, which was most Predominant and Conspicuous in it. To wit, That Bone was
made out of Bony Atoms, and Flesh out of Fleshy, Hot things out of Hot Atoms,
and Cold things out of Cold, Black out of Black, and White out of White, etc.
and Nothing out of Nothing, but every thing out of Prae-Existing Similar Atoms.
Thus was the sense of Anaxagoras plainly declared by Aristotle, That because
Contraries were made out of one another, they were therefore before
In-Existent. For since every thing must of necessity be made, either out of
Something, or out of Nothing, and all Physiologers agree, That it is
Impossible, for any thing to be made out of Nothing; it follows unavoidably,
that whatsoever is Generated must be Generated out of things Prae Existing and
In-Existing, though by reason of their Parvitude Insensible to us; That is, out
of Similar or Homogenial Atoms, of which there are some of all kinds in Every
thing; every thing being mingled in every thing. Here therefore have we, the
Anaxagorean Homoeomery, or Similar Atomology, built upon this Principle of
Reason, as its Foundation, That Nothing can Naturally be Made or Generated out
of Nothing.

But the Italicks or Pythagoricks, as well before Anaxagoras as after him,
(with whom also hitherto concurred, Leucippus, Democritus, and Epicurus, those
Atheizers of the Italick Physiology) did with much better Reason, from the same
Fundamental Principle conclude, that since these Forms and Qualities of Bodies,
were unquestionably Generated and Corrupted, they were therefore no Entities
Really Distinct from the Substance of Matter, or its Modifications, but only
different Dispositions or Modifications of the Insensible Parts thereof,
Causing in us Different Phantasms: and this was the First Original of the
Dissimilar Atomology. In Matter or Body, therefore as such, there was nothing
else to these Philosophers conceivable, but only Magnitude of Parts, Figure,
Site, and Motion, or Rest: and these were those few Elements, out of which
In-Existing, and variously Combined together, they supposed all those Forms and
Qualities of Bodies, (commonly so called) in Generations to result, without the
Production of any New Real Entity out of Nothing. For as out of a few Letters
in the Alphabet of every Language, Differently placed and Combined, do Result
innumerable Syllables, Words, and Sounds, signifying all the several things, in
Heaven and Earth; and sometimes from all the very same Letters, neither more
nor fewer, but only Transposed, are begotten very Different Phantasms of Sounds
in us; but without the Production of any New Real Entity out of Nothing: in the
very same manner, from those Fewer Letters in the Alphabet of the Corporeal
Nature, Variously combined, or from the different Modifications of Matter, in
respect of Magnitude of Parts, Figure, Site, and Motion, are Made up and
Spelled out, all those Syllables of Things that are in the whole World, without
the Production of any New Real Entity. Many times the very same Numerical
Matter, neither more nor less, only different Modified, Causing very different
Phantasms in us, which are therefore vulgarly supposed to be Forms and
Qualities in the Things; as when the same water, is successively changed and
transformed into Vapor, Snow, Hail, and Ice. And to this very purpose is the
forementioned Similitude elegantly pursued by the Epicurean Poet, in these
following Verses, Quin etiam refert nostris in Versibus ipsis, L. 2. p. 191*
Lamb.

Cum quibus and quali sint Ordine quaeque locata.
Namque eadem Coelum, Mare, Terras, Flumina, Solemn,
Significant, eadem Fruges, Arbusta, Animantes.
Sic ipsis in rebus item jam Materiai
Concursus, Motus, Ordo, Positura, Figurae,
Cum permutantur, mutari Res quoque debent.
For were those supposed Forms and Qualities, produced in Generations and
Alterations, Entities Really distinct from the Substance of Matter, or its
different Modifications, in respect of the Magnitude, Figure, Site, and Motion
of Parts; (there being no such things before In-Existing as Anaxagoras
supposed,) then would they Materially proceed from Nothing, which is a thing
Impossible. And this Dissimilar Atomology of the ancient Italicks, so far as to
these Material Forms and Qualities, Seems to be Undoubtedly the only true
Physiology, it being built upon this sure Principle of Reason, That because
Nothing can give what it has not, therefore no New Substance or Real Entity,
can be Materially produced, in the Generations and Alterations of Nature, as
such; but only Modifications. As when an Architect builds a House, or a Weaver
makes a piece of Cloth, there is only a different Modification of the
Prae-Existent Matter.

This is the First Improvement, which the Ancient Italick Philosophers made, of
this Principle, That Nothing can be (Physically and Materially) Generated out
of Nothing; or that no Real Entity is Naturally Generated or Corrupted; That
therefore the Forms and Qualities of Bodies, were no Real Entities, but only
Different Modifications. But besides this, there was also another thing, which
these Philosophers principally Aimed at herein, as a Corollary deducible from
the same Principle, concerning Souls; that since the Souls of Animals,
Especially Humane, are unquestionably Entities Really distinct from Matter, and
all its Modifications; (no Magnitudes, Figures, Sites and Motions, being ever
able to beget Cogitation or Consciousness, much less a Power of Understanding
Eternal Verities) that therefore these could not be Generated out of Matter,
nor Corrupted into the same. Because Forms and Qualities are Continually
Generated and Corrupted, made out of Nothing, and Reduced to Nothing again;
therefore are they no Entities Really distinct from Matter, and its different
Modifications: but because Souls, at least Humane, are unquestionably Entities
Really distinct from Matter, and all its Modifications; therefore can they not
possibly be Generated out of Matter, nor Corrupted into the same. For if Humane
Souls were Generated out of Matter, then must some Real Entity be Materially
produced out of Nothing, there being Nothing of Life and Cogitation in Matter;
which is a Thing Absolutely Impossible. Wherefore these Philosophers concluded
concerning Souls, that being not Generated out of Matter, they were Insinuated
or Introduced into Bodies, in Generations. And this was always a Great
Controversy, betwixt Theists and Atheists, concerning the Humane Soul, as
Lucretius expresses it; Nata sit, an contra Nascentibus Insinuetur, Whether it
were Made or Generated out of Matter, (that is indeed out of Nothing) or else
were (...), From Without, Insinuated into Bodies in Generations? Which latter
Opinion of theirs, supposes Souls as well to have Existed Before the
Generations of all Animals, as to Exist After their Deaths and Corruptions;
there being properly Nothing of them Generated but only their Union with those
particular Bodies. So that the Generations, and Corruptions or Deaths of
Animals, according to this Hypothesis, are nothing but an Anagrammatical
Transposition of Things in the Universe, Prae and Post-Existent Souls, being
sometimes united to one Body, and sometimes to another. But it does not
therefore follow, because these Ancient Philosophers held Souls to be thus
Ingenerable, and to have Pre-Existed before the Generation of Animals; that
therefore they supposed all Souls to have Existed Of Themselves from Eternity
Unmade: this being a Thing which was never asserted, any more by Theist than
Atheist; since even those Philosophic Theists, who maintained Aeternitatem
Animorum, The Eternity of Humane Minds and Souls, together with the Worlds, did
notwithstanding, assert their Essential Dependence upon the Deity, like that of
the Lights upon the Sun; as if they were a kind of Eternal Effulgency,
Emanation or Eradiation from an Eternal Sun. Even Proclus himself, that Great
Champion for the Eternity of the World and Souls, in this very Case, when he
writes against Plutarch's Self-Existent Evil Soul, expressly declaring, that
(...), There is no Self Existent Soul; but every Soul whatsoever is the Work
Effect and Production of God. Wherefore when they affirmed Souls to be
Ingenerable, their meaning was no more than this, that they were not mere
Accidental Things as Forms and Qualities are, nor any more Generated out of
Matter, than Matter it self is Generated out of Something else; upon which
account, as Aristotle informs us, Souls were called also by them, (...),
Principles, as well as Matter, they being both of them Substances in the
Universe alike Original; that is neither of them Made out of the other. But
they did not suppose them to be (...), Ingenerate or Unmade in the other Sense,
as if they had been Self-Originated, and Independent, as Plutarch's Second and
Third Principles; his Evil Soul, and Matter were by him Imagined to be: but so
doubtless as that if the World had had any beginning, they should then have
been all Created together with it, out of Nothing Prae-Existing. But as for the
perpetual Creation of new Souls, in the Successive Generations of Animals, this
indeed is a thing which those Philosophers were extremely abhorrent from, as
thinking it Incongruous, that Souls which are in Order of Nature, Senior to
Bodies, should be in Order of Time, Juniors to them; as also not Reasonable,
that Divine Creation, (as it were Prostituted) should without end, perpetually
attend and wait upon Natural Generations, and be Intermingled with them.

But as for this Prae-Existence of Souls, we have already declared our own
sense concerning it, in the First Chapter. Though we cannot deny, but that
besides Origin, several others of the Ancient Fathers, before the Fifth
Council, seem either to have Espoused it, or at least to have had a favor and
kindness for it; insomuch that St. Austine himself, is sometimes Staggering in
this Point, and thinks it to be a Great Secret, whether men's Souls Existed
before their Generations or no; and some where concludes it to be a matter of
Indifferency, wherein every one may have, his Liberty of opining, either way,
without offense. Wherefore all that can be certainly affirmed in this Case, is,
that Humane Souls could not possibly be Generated out of Matter, but were some
time or other Created by God Almighty, out of Nothing Prae-Existing, either In
Generations or Before them. Lastly, as for Brute Animals, we must confess, that
If they be not mere Machines or Automata, as some seem inclinable to believe,
but Conscious and Thinking Beings, then from the same Principle of Reason, it
will likewise follow, that they cannot be Generated out of Matter neither, and
therefore must be Derived from the Fountain of all Life, and Created out of
Nothing by him: who since he can, as easily Annihilate, as Create; and does all
for the Best; no man need at all to trouble himself, about their Permanency, or
Immortality.

And now have we given, a Full and Particular Account, of all the Several
Senses, wherein this Axiom must be acknowledged to be Undeniably True, That
Nothing can possibly be Made out of Nothing, or Come from Nothing; namely these
Three. First, That Nothing which was Not, could ever bring it self into Being,
or Efficiently Produce it self. Or, That Nothing can possibly be Made, without
an Efficient Cause. Secondly, that Nothing which was Not, could be Produced or
brought into Being, by any other Efficient Cause, then such, as has at least,
Equal Perfection in it, and a Sufficient Active or Productive Power. For if any
thing were made by that, which has not Equal Perfection, then must so much of
the Effect as Transcendeth the Cause, be indeed Made without a Cause, (since,
Nothing can Give what it has not) or be Caused by it self, or by Nothing.
Again, to suppose a thing to be Produced by that which has no Sufficient
Productive Power, is Really to suppose it also, to be Produced from It self
without a Cause, or From Nothing. Where it is acknowledged by us, That no
Natural, Imperfect, Created Being, can Create, or Emanatively Produce, a New
Substance which was not Before, and give it, its Whole Being. Hitherto, is the
Axiom Verified in Respect of the Efficient Cause. But in the Third Place, it is
also True, in respect of the Material likewise. Not, That Nothing could
Possibly be ever Made, by any Power whatsoever, but only out of Pre-Existent
Matter; and Consequently, that Matter it self could be never Made, but was
Self-Existent. For the falsity of this, is sufficiently evident, from what has
been already declared, concerning Humane Souls, their being undoubtedly
Substances Incorporeal, which therefore could never be Generated out of Matter;
and it will be further manifested afterward. But the Third and Last Sense is
this; That Nothing which is Materially Made out of things Prae-Existing, (as
some are) can have any other Real Entity, then what was either before contained
in, or resulteth from the Things themselves so Modified. Or, That there can be
no New Entities or Substances, Naturally Generated out of Matter; and therefore
that all Natural Generations, are really Nothing else, but Mixtures or New
Modifications of Things Prae-Existing.

These, I say, are all the Senses, wherein it is Impossible, That any thing
should be Made out of Nothing, or Come from Nothing; and they may be all
reduced to this One General Sense, That Nothing can be Made out of Nothing,
Causally; Or, That, Nothing cannot Cause Any thing, either Efficiently or
Materially. Which as it is undeniably True; So is it so far from making any
thing, against a Divine Creation, or the Existence of a God, that the same may
be Demonstratively Proved, and Evinced from it, as shall be showed afterward.

But there is another Sense, wherein things may be said to be Made (...), Or,
Out of Nothing, when those words are not taken Causally, but only so as to
signify the Terminus A quo, or Term from which, they are Made, to wit, an
Antecedent Nonexistence. And then the Meaning of this Proposition, That
Nothing can possibly be Made out of Nothing, will be this, That Nothing which
once was Not, could by any Power whatsoever, be afterward brought into Being.
And this is the Sense insisted on, in this Second Atheistick Argumentation,
framed according to the Principles, of the Democritick or Epicurean Atheism.
That no Real Entity which once was not, could by any Power whatsoever, be Made,
or brought out of Nonexistence into Being; and consequently, that no Creative
Power out of Nothing, can possibly belong to any thing, though supposed never
so Perfect.

In Answer whereunto; we shall perform these Two Things. First, we shall make
it appear, that Nothing out of Nothing, taken in this Sense declared, is so far
from being a Common Notion, that it is not at all True. And Secondly, we shall
prove, that If it were True, yet would it of the Two, make more against
Atheism, then it does against Theism, and therefore ought by no means to be
used by Atheists, as an Argument against a Deity. First therefore, it is
unquestionably certain, That this cannot be Universally True, That Nothing
which once was not, could possibly be Made, or brought out of Nonexistence
into Being, because If it were, then could there be no such thing as Making or
Causing at all; no Action nor Motion, and consequently no Generation nor
Mutation in the Corporeal Universe, but the whole world would be like a Stiff
Immovable Adamantine Rock: and this would doubtless be a better Argument
against Motion, then any of Zeno's was. But we have all experience within our
selves, of a Power of Producing New Cogitations, in our own Minds, new
Intellectual and Moral Habits, as also New Local Motion in our Bodies, or at
least New Determinations thereof, and of Causing thereby N^w Modifications in
Bodies without us. And therefore are the Atheists forced to Restrain the Sense
of this Proposition to Substantial Things only, that though there may be New
Accidents, and Modifications, Produced out of Nothing, yet there can be no New
Substanc^s Made; however they be not able in the mean time to give any Reason
why One of those should be in it self more Impossible than the other, or why no
Substance should be Makeable. But that some are so staggered with the Seeming
Plausibility of this Argument, is chiefly upon these following Accounts. First,
by reason of the Confusion of their own Conceptions; for because it is certain,
That Nothing can possibly be made out of Nothing, in one Sense, to wit
Causally; they not distinguishing Senses, nor being aware of the Equivocation
that is in this (...), Out of Nothing, inadvertently give their assent, to
those Words in a Wrong Sense; that no Substance (as Matter) could possibly be
brought out of Nonexistence into Being. Secondly, by reason of their Unskilful
Arguing from Artificial Things; When because Nothing can be Artificially Made
but out of Pre-Existing Matter, as a House or Garment, and the like, (there
being nothing done in the Production of these Things, but only a New
Modification, of what before Substantially was) they over hastily conclude,
that no Power whatsoever could produce any thing otherwise, then out of
Pre-Existing Matter, and that Matter it self therefore could not possibly be
Made. In which Conceit they are again further confirmed from hence, because the
Old Physiologers maintained the same thing concerning Natural Generations
likewise, That nothing was in them produced (...), Out of Nothing, neither; or
that there was no New Substance or Entity Made in them, really distinct from
the Pre-Existing Matter and its Modifications; they Unwarily Exten^ing this,
beyond the Bounds of Physics into Metaphysics; and unduly measuring or
limiting Infinite Power accordingly. Lastly, because it is undeniably certain,
concerning Our Selves and all Imperfect Created Beings, that none of these can
Create any New Substance, which was not before; men are therefore apt to
measure all things by their own scantling, and to suppose it Universally
Impossible, according to Humane Reason, for any Power whatsoever, thus to
Create; whence it follows that Theology must in this be acknowledged to be
Contradictious to the Principles of Natural Light and Understanding. But since
it is certain, that Imperfect Created Beings can themselves Produce Some Things
out of Nothing Pre-Existing, as New Cogitations, and New Local Motion, New
Modifications and Transformations of things Corporeal, it is very reasonable to
think, that an Absolutely Perfect Being could do something more; that is,
Create New Substances out of Nothing, or give them their Whole Being. And it
may well be thought to be as Easy, for God, or an Omnipotent Being, to Make a
Whole World, Matter and all, (...), Out of Nothing, as it is for us to Create a
Thought, or to Move a Finger, or for the Sun to send out Rays, or a Candle
Light, or lastly, for any Opake Body, to produce the Image of it self in
Glasses or Water, or to project a Shadow; all these Imperfect Things being but
the (...) the contrary, we shall make it manifest, That this very Principle,
made use of by the Atheists, is in Truth and Reality Contradictious to all
manner of Atheism, and destructive of the same; the Atheists Universally
Generating and Corrupting Real Entities, and Substantial things, that is,
Producing them out of Nothing or Nonexistence, and reducing them to Nothing
again: for as much as they make all things whatsoever, the bare Substance of
Matter only excepted, (which to them is either no Determinate Thing, or else
nothing but mere Bulk, or Resisting and Divisible Magnitude) to come out of
Nothing, and to go to Nothing. Thus does Aristotle in a place before cited,
declare the Atheistick Sense, (...); There are Certain men, who affirm, that
Nothing is Unmade, but All things Generated or Made. Whose Sense is afterward
more distinctly thus proposed by him, (...). That all other things are
Generated and Flow, and none of them firmly Is, (they being perpetually Educed
out of Nothing, and Reduced to Nothing) but that there is only One thing which
remains; namely that, out of which all the other are Made, by the
Transformation thereof. Which One thing, (to wit Matter) as the same Aristotle
further adds, they affirmed to be the Only Substance, and from Eternity Unmade,
but all other things whatsoever, being but (...), Passions, Affections, and
Dispositions thereof, (...), To be Generated and Corrupted Infinitely; that is,
to be Produced out of Nothing or Nonexistence, and Reduced again to Nothing,
without end. And doubtless this is the True meaning of that Passage in Plato's
Tenth De Legibus, not understood by the Latin Interpreters; where being to
represent the Atheistick Hypothesis of the System of the Universe; he
discovers their Grand Arcanum, and that which they accounted, (...), The
wisest and most mysterious of all Doctrines; after this manner; (...). Certain
men affirm, that All things are Made, and Have been Made, and will be Made;
some by Nature, and some by Art, and some by Fortune or Chance. For
unquestionably here, Plato's (...), Certain men affirm that All things are
Generated or Made, etc. is the very same with Aristotle's, (...), Certain men
affirm, that there is Nothing Unmade, but that All things are Made or
Generated. And perhaps this of Aristotle's, was taken out of that of Plato's:
Which yet nevertheless is so to be understood, as it is afterward explained by
Aristotle; All things whatsoever, the bare Substance of Matter only excepted.
Wherefore it is certain that either there is no Real Entity in the Whole World,
besides the Bare Substance of Matter; that is, besides Divisible and Separable
Extension, or Resisting Magnitude, and Consequently that Life and Cogitation,
Sense and Consciousness, Reason and Understanding, all our own Minds, and
Personalities, are no Real Entities; or else, that there are, according to the
Atheistick Hypothesis, Real Entities Produced out of Nothing, and Reduced to
Nothing again. Whereas Thei^t^ suppose, all the Greatest Perfections in the
Universe, as Life and Understanding, to have been Eternal and Unmade, in a
Perfect Being, the Deity, and neither brought out of Nothing or Non Existence,
nor Reduc^ble to Nothing; only Imperfect Beings to have been Made out of
Nothing* or Produced out of Non Existence, by this one Perfect Being or Deity:
the Atheists on the contrary, supposing the Lowest and most Imperf^ct of all
Beings, Matter, Bulk, or Divisible and Resisting Extension, to be the Only
Self-Existent and Unmade Thing; conclude all the Greatest Perfections in the
Universe, Life, Cogitation, and Understanding, to be Made out of Nothing, or
Nonexistence, as also to be reduced to Nothing again. Indeed the Hylozoick
Atheists, being Sensible somewhat of this Inconvenience, of making all Life and
Understanding Out of Nothing, and that there must of Necessity be some
Fundamental Life and Perception, which is not Accidental but Substantial, and
which was never Generated and cannot be Corrupted; h^ve therefore attributed a
kind of Life and Perception to all Matter as such. Notwi^hstanding which, even
these also, for as much as they deny to M^tter, Animal Sense, and
Consciousness, suppose all Animal Life or Sense, and Conscious Understanding,
to be Generated and Corrupted, ^roduced out of Nothing and Reduced to Nothing
again. Neither can Life, Cogitation, and Understanding, be reckon^d amongst the
M^des of M^tter, that is of M^gnitude or Divisible and Ant^typous Extension,
since they may be Conceived without the same: whereas Modes cannot be conceived
without their Substance. Standing, Sitting, and Walking, cannot be Conceived
without a Body, and that fi^ly Organiz^d too, and therefore are they Nothing
but different Modes of such a Body. When that Humane Body, which before did
Stand does afterward Sit, or Walk, no man can think that there is the
Mira^ulous Production of any New Real Entity out of Nothing: nor when the same
Matter which was Square or Cubical, is made Spherical or Cylindrical. B^t when
there is Life and Vnderst^nding which was not before, then is there
unquestionably a new Real Entity Produced. But the D^mocritick and Epicurean
Atheists themselves, according to the Tenor of the Atomick Physiology,
acknowledge no other Modes of Matter or Body, but only more or less Magnitude
of Parts, Figure, Site, Motion or Rest. And upon this very account do they
explode Qualities, considered as Entities really distinct from these Modes;
because in the Generation and Alteration of them, there would be Real Entities
m^de Out of Nothing, or without a Cause; whereupon they Resolve these Qualities
into Mechanism and Fancy. But Life, Cogitation, and Understanding, are things
which have more Real Entity in them* and can no way be Salved by Mechanism and
Fancy; wherefore undoubtedly they are no Modes of Matter or Body, but
Attributes of another kind of Substance, Incorporeal. All Cogitative Beings,
especially Humane Souls, and Personalities, are unquestionably Substantial
Things, and yet do the Atheists bring these, and consequently Themselves, out
of Nothing or Nonexistence, and Reduce them to Nothing again. The Conclusion
is; that these very Atheists, who contend against Theists, that Nothing can be
Made out of Nothing, do themselves bring All things out of Nothing or Non
Existence, and perpetually Reduce them to Nothing again; according to whose
Principles, as once there was no Life, nor Understanding at all in the
Universe, so may there be none again. They who deny a God, because there can be
no Creative Power belonging to Any Thing, do themselves notwithstanding
attribute to Matter (though a mere Passive, Sluggish, and Vnactive thing) a
Creative Power of Things Substantial, (as Humane Souls and Persona-ities) out
of Nothing. And thus is that Formidable Argument of the Atheists, that there
can be no God, because Nothing can be made out of Nothing; not only proved to
be False, but also Retorted upon these Atheists themselves, they bringing all
things besides Senseless and Vnqualified Matter, out of Nothing.

We have now declared, First, in what sense this Proposition is unquestionably
True, that Nothing can be Made out of Nothing, or Come from Nothing, viz.
Causally, That Nothing which before was Not, could afterward be Made, without a
Cause, and a Sufficient Cause. Or more Particularly, these Three ways; First,
that Nothing which before was Not, could afterward be brought into Being by It
self, or without an Efficient Cause. Secondly, that Nothing which once was Not,
could be Made or Produced Efficiently by any thing, which had not at least
Equal Perfection in it, and ^ Sufficient Active or Productive Power; and
Consequently that no New Substance can be Made, but by a Perfect Being, which
only is Substantially Emanative. Thirdly and Lastly, that when things are Made
out of Pre-Existing Matter, as in Artificial Productions, and Natural
Generations, there can be no new Real Entity Produced, but only different
Modifications, of what before Substantially was; the Material Cause as such,
Efficiently Producing Nothing. And thus was this Axiom Understood by Cicero,
That Nothing could be Made out of Nothing, viz. Causally; in his Book De Fato,
where he reprehendeth Epicurus for endeavoring to avoid Fate and to Establish
Liberty of Will, by that Absurd Figment, of Atoms Declining Uncertainly from
the Perpendicular. Nec cum haec ita sint, est causa, cur Epicurus Fatum
extimescat, and ab Atomis petat praesidium, easque De Via deducat; and uno
tempore suscipiat res duas inenodabiles, Vnam ut sine Causa fiat aliquid, ex
quo existet, ut De Nihilo quippiam fiat; quod nec ipsi, nec cuiquam Physico
placet. Nor is there for all that, any Reason, why Epicurus should be so much
afraid of Fate, and seek Refuge in Atoms, he supposing them in their Infinite
Descents, to Decline Uncertainly from the Perpendicular, and laying this as a
Foundation for Liberty of Will; whereby he plunged himself at once, into Two
inextricable difficulties, the First whereof was, the supposing of Something to
be made without a Cause, or which is all one, out of Nothing; a thing that will
neither be allowed be any Physiologer, nor could Epicurus himself be Pleased or
Satisfied therewith. The reason whereof is, because it was a Fundamental
Principle of the Atomick Philosophy, That Nothing, (in this Sense) could be
Made out of Nothing. Moreover we have in the next place declared, in what other
Sense, this Proposition, that Nothing can be Made out of Nothing, is False,
namely when this Out of Nothing, is not taken Causally, but so as to signify
the Terminus From which; that Nothing can be Made, out of an Antecedent
Nonexistence: that no Real Entity or Substance which before was not, could by
any Power whatsoever be afterward brought into being: Or That Nothing can
possibly be Made, but out of Something Pre-Existing, by the new Modification
thereof. And it appears from that of Cicero, that the True and Genuine Sense of
this Proposition, De Nihilo nihil fit; (according to the Mind of those Ancient
Physiologers, who laid so great stress thereupon) was not, that Nothing could
by any Power whatsoever, be brought out of Nonexistence into Being; but only
that Nothing could be made without a Cause. Nor did they here by Cause mean,
the Material only; in this sense, as if Nothing could Possibly be Made, but out
of Prae-Existing Matter; Epicurus being taxed by Cicero, for introducing that
his Third Motion of Atoms, or Clinamen Principiorum, out of Nothing, or Without
an Efficient Cause; as indeed all Motion also was, to those Atomick Atheists,
in this Sense, from Nothing. Nevertheless, we have also showed, That if this
Proposi^ion, Nothing out of Nothing, in that Atheistick Sense, (as levelled
against a Deity) were, True; yet would it of the Two more impugn Atheism it
self, than it does Theism, the Atheists Generating and Corrupting All Things,
the Substance of Matter only excepted, all Life, Sense, and Understanding,
Humane Souls, Minds and Personalities, they Producing these, and consequently
Themselves, out of Nothing, and resolving them all to Nothing again. We shall
now in the Third and Last place, make it manifest, that the Atheists do not
only bring Real Entities and Substantial things out of Nothing in the Second
sense, that is out of an Antecedent Non Existence, (which yet is a thing
Possible only to God, or a Perfect Being) but also that they bring them out of
Nothing, in the Absolutely Impossible Sense; that is, suppose them to be Made
without a Cause, or Nothing to be the Cause of Something.

But we must prepare the way hereunto, by setting down, First, a Brief and
Compendious Sum of the whole Atheistick Hypothesis. The Atheists therefore who
contend, that Nothing can be Made but only New Accidents or Modifications of
Pre-Existing Substance; Taking it for granted, that there is no other Substance
besides Body or Matter, do conclude accordingly, that Nothing can be Made, but
out of Pre-Existing Matter or Body. And then they add hereunto, That Matter
being the only Substance, the only Unmade Self-Existent thing, whatsoever else
is in the world, besides, the bare Substance of this Matter, was Made out of it
or Produced by it. So that there are these Three Things contained, in the
Atheistick Hypothesis; First, that No Substance can be Made or Caused by any
thing else, but only new Modifications. Secondly, that Matter or Body is the
Only Substance, and therefore whatsoever is made is Made out of Pre Existing
Matter; Thirdly and Lastly, That whatsoever there is else in the whole world,
besides the Substance of Matter, it is Made or Generated out of Matter. And now
we shall demonstrate the Absolute Impossibility of this Atheistick Hypothesis,
from that very Principle of the Ancient Physiologers, that Nothing can be Made
out of Nothing, in the True Sense thereof: it not only bringing Real Entities
and Substantial Things, out of an Antecedent Nonexistence, (though nothing but
an Infinitely Perfect Being neither can thus Create) but also Producing them
without A Cause.

First therefore, when they affirm, Matter to be the Only Substance, and all
things else whatsoever to be Made out of that alone, they hereby plainly
Suppose, all things to be Made, without an Efficient Cause, which is to bring
them out of Nothing, in an Impossible Sense. For though it be not True, that
Nothing can be Made but out of Pre-Existing Matter (and consequently that God
himself supposed to Exist, could in this respect do no more, than a Carpenter
or Tailor does;) I say, though it be not Universally True, That every thing
that is Made, must have a Material Cause (so that the Quaternio of Causes in
Logic, is not to be Extended, to all things Caused whatsoever;) yet is it
certain, that Nothing, which once was not, could Possibly be Made without an
Efficient Cause. Wherefore if there be any thing Made, which was not before,
there must of Necessity besides Matter, be some other Substance Existing, as
the Efficient Cause thereof; for as much as Matter alone, Could not Make any
thing; as Marble cannot make a Statue, nor Timber and Stones a House, nor Cloth
a Garment. This is our First Demonstration of the Impossibility of the
Atheistick Hypothesis: it supposing all things besides the bare Substance of
Matter, to be Made out of Matter alone, without any other Active Principle or
Deity, or to be Made without an Efficient Cause, which is to bring them from
Nothing, in an Impossible Sense. To which may be added by way of Appendix, that
whereas the Democritick and Epicurean Atheists, admit of no other Efficient
Causality in Nature, then only Local Motion, and allow to Matter or Body, their
only Substance, no Self-Moving Power, they hereby make all the Motion, that is
in the whole world, to be without a Cause, and from Nothing; Action without any
Subject, or Agent, and the Efficiency of all things, without an Efficient.

In the next place, should we be so liberal, as to grant to the Atomick
Atheists, Motion without a Cause, or permit Strato and the Hylozoick Atheists,
to attribute to Matter a Self-Moving Power, yet do we affirm, that this Matter
and Motion both together, could not Possibly Produce any new Real Entity, which
was not before; Matter as such Efficiently Causing Nothing, and Motion only
changing the Modifications of Matter, as Figure, Place, Site, and Disposition
of Parts. Wherefore if Matter as such, have no Animal Sense and Conscious
Understanding, Essentially belonging to it, (which no Atheists as yet have had
the Impudence to assert) then can no Motion or Modification of Matter, no
Contexture of Atoms, Possibly beget Sense and Understanding, Soul and Mind;
because this would be to bring Something out of Nothing, in the Impossible
Sense, or to suppose Something to be Made by It self without a Cause. Which may
Serve also for a Confutation of those Imperfect and Spurious Theists, who will
not allow to God Almighty, (whether supposed by them to be Corporeal or
Incorporeal) a Power of Making any thing, but only out of Pre-Existent Matter,
by the new Modifying thereof: as a Carpenter makes a House out of Pre-Existing
Timber and Stone, and a Tailor a Garment out of Pre-Existing Cloth. For since
Animal Life, and Understanding, are not by them supposed to belong at all to
Matter as such, and since they cannot result from any Modifications or
Contextures thereof, it would plainly follow from hence, that God could not
Possibly make Animals, or Produce Sense and Understanding, Souls, and Minds,
which nevertheless these Theists suppose him to have done; and therefore ought
in reason to acknowledge him, not only to be the Maker of New Modifications of
Matter, (and one who Built the world only as a Carpenter does a House) but also
of Real Entities distinct from the same.

And this was the very Doctrine (as we have already declared) of the most
Ancient Atomick Physiologers; not That every thing whatsoever might be Made out
of Pre-Existing Matter; but on the contrary, that in all Natural Generations,
there is no Real Entity Produced out of the Matter, which was not before in it,
but only New Modifications; and Consequently that Souls and Minds, being not
mere Modifications of Matter; in respect of Magnitude, Figure, Site, and
Motion, could never be Produced out of it, because they must then of necessity,
Come from Nothing; that is, be Made either by Themselves, without a Cause, or
without a Sufficient Cause. It has also been before noted out of Aristotle,
how the Old Atheistick Materialists, being assaulted by those Italick
Philosophers after that manner, that Nothing which was not before, in Matter,
besides its Modifications, could Possibly be Produced out of it, because
Nothing can Come out of Nothing, and consequently that in all Natural
Generations and Corruptions, there is no Real Entity Made or Destroyed;
endeavored without denying the words of that Proposition, to Evade after this
manner, (...), etc. That there is indeed Nothing Generated or Corrupted (in
some Sense) for as much as the same Substance of Matter, always remains, it
being never Made nor Destroyed. For as men do not say, that Socrates is Made,
when he is Made Musical or Handsome, nor Destroyed, when he loses these
Dispositions, because the subject Socrates, was before and still remains; so
neither is any Substantial thing or Real Entity in the world Made or Destroyed
in this sense; because Matter which is the Substance of all, perpetually
remains, and all other things whatsoever, are but (...), Passions and
Affections and Dispositions thereof, as Musicalness and Unmusicalness, in
respect of Socrates. Which is all one as if they should say, that all things
whatsoever besides Matter, being but Accidents thereof, are Generated out of it
and Corruptible into it, without the Production of any Real Entity out of
Nothing, or the Reduction of any into Nothing, so long as the Substance of
Matter which is the only Real Entity, remains always the same. Wherefore though
Life, Sense, and Understanding, all Souls and Minds, be Generated out of
Matter, yet does it not follow from thence, that therefore there is any Real
Entity Made or Produced, because these are Nothing but Accidents and
Modifications of Matter. This was the Subterfuge of the Old Hylopathian
Atheists.

Now it is true indeed, that whatsoever is in the Universe, is either Substance
or Accidents, and that the Accidents of any Substance, may be Generated and
Corrupted, without the Producing of any Real Entity out of Nothing, and
Reducing of any into Nothing; for as much as the Substance still remains
entirely the same. But the Atheists, taking it for granted, that there is no
other Substance besides Body or Matter, do therefore falsely suppose, that which
is really Incorporeal Substance, or else the Attributes, Properties, and Modes
thereof, to be the mere Accidents of Matter, and Consequently conclude these to
be Generable out of it, without the Production of any Real Entity out of
Nothing. We say therefore, that it does not at all follow, because the same
Numerical Matter, (as for example a Piece of Wax) may be Successively made
Spherical, Cubical, Cylindrical, Pyramidal, or of any other Figure; and the
same man may Successively, Stand, Sit, Kneel and Walk; both, without the
Production of Anything out of Nothing; or because, a heap of Stones, Bricks,
Mortar, and Timber, lying altogether disorderly and confusedly, may be made
into a Stately Palace; and that without the Miraculous Creation of any Real
Entity out of Nothing; that therefore the same may be affirmed likewise, of
every thing else, besides the bare Substance of Matter, as namely Life and
Understanding, Soul and Mind, that though there be No such thing in Matter it
self, yet the Production of them out of Matter, would be no Production; of
Something out of Nothing. One Ground of which mistake has been, from men's not
rightly considering what the Accidents of a Substance are, and that they are
indeed Nothing but the Modes thereof. Now a Mode is such a thing, as cannot
Possibly be conceived, without that whereof it is a Mode; as Standing, Sitting,
Kneeling and Walking, cannot be conceived without a Body Organized, and
therefore are but Modes thereof; but Life and Cogitation, may be clearly
apprehended without Body, or any thing of Extension; nor indeed can a Thought
Be conceived, to be of such a Length, Breadth and Thickness, or to be Hewed and
Sliced out, into many Pieces, all which laid together, as so many Small Chips
thereof, would make up again, the entireness of that whole Thought. From whence
it ought to be concluded, that Cogitation is no Accident, or Mode of Matter, or
Bulky Extension, but a Mode or Attribute of another Substance, Really distinct
from Matter, or Incorporeal. There is indeed Nothing else clearly conceivable
by us in Body or Bulky Extension, but only more or less Magnitude of Parts,
Figures, Site, Motion, or Rest; and all the Different Bodies that are in the
whole World, are but several Combinations or Syllables, made up out of these
few Letters: but no Magnitudes, Figures, Sites, and Motions, can Possibly Spell
or Compound, Life and Sense, Cogitation and Understanding, as the Syllables
thereof; and therefore to suppose these to be Generated out of Matter, is
plainly to suppose some Real Entity to be brought out of Nothing, or Something
to be made without a Cause, which is Impossible.

But that which has principally confirmed men in this Error is the business
of Sensible Qualities and Forms, as they are vulgarly conceived, to be distinct
Entities, from those forementioned Modifications of Matter, in respect of
Magnitude of Parts, Figure, Site, Motion, or Rest. For since these Qualities
and Forms, are unquestionably Generated and Corrupted, there seems to be no
Reason, why the same might not be as well acknowledged, of Life, Sense,
Cogitation, and Understanding, that these are but Qualities or Accidents of
Matter also, (though of another Kind) and consequently may be Generated out of
it, without the Making of any Real thing out of Nothing. But the Democritick
and Epicurean Atheists themselves, have from the Principles of the Atomick
Philosophy, sufficiently Confuted and Rectified this mistake, concerning
Sensible Qualities, they exploding and banishing them all, as conceived to be
Entities Really distinct from the forementioned Modifications of Matter, and
that for this very reason; Because the Generation of them, would upon this
supposition, be the Production of Something out of Nothing, or without a Cause:
and concluding them therefore, to be Really Nothing else, but Mechanism, or
different Modifications of Matter, in respect of the Magnitude of Parts,
Figure, Site and Motion or Rest; they only Causing different Phancies and
Apparitions in us. And in very truth, this vulgar opinion of Real Qualities of
Bodies, seems to have no other Original at all, than men's mistaking their own
Phancies, Passions, and Affections, for things Really Existing in the Objects
without them. For as Sensible Qualities, are conceived to be things distinct
from the forementioned ^odifications of Matter* so are they Really, Nothing but
our own Phancies, Passions and Affections; and Consequently no Accidents or
Modifications of Matter, but Accidents and Modifications of our own Souls,
which are Substances Incorporeal. Now if these Democritick and Epicurean
Atheists themselves, concluded that Real Qualities, considered as distinct from
the Modifications of Matter, could not possibly be Generated out of it, because
this would be the Production of Something out of Nothng; they ought certainly
much more to have acknowledged the same, concerning Life and Cogitation, Sense
and Understanding, that the Generation of these out of senseless Matter would be
an Impossible Production of Something out of Nothing, and consequently, that
these are therefore no Corporeal Things, but the Attributes, Properties, or
Modes, of Substance Incorporeal; since they can no way be Resolved into
Mechanism and Fancy, or the Modifications of Matter, as the Vulgar Sensible
Qualities may, and ought to be. For though the Democriticks and Epicureans did
indeed, suppose, all humane Cogitations to be Caused or Produced, by the
Incursion of Corporeal Atoms upon the Thinker; yet did never any of them arrive
to such a degree, either of Sottishness or Impudence, as a Modern Writer has
done, to maintain, that Cogitation, Intellection, and Volition, are themselves
really Nothing else, but Local Motion or Mechanism, in the inward Parts of the
Brain and Heart, or, that Men's nihil aliud praeterquam Motus, in partibus
quibusdam Corporis Organici, that Mind it self, is Nothing but Motion, in some
parts of the Organized Body; who therefore as if Cartesius had not been
sufficiently Paradoxical, in making Brute Animals, (though supposed by him to
be devoid of all Cogitation) Nothing but mere Machines; and not contented
herewith, has advanced much further, in making this Prodigious Conclusion,
that all Cogitative Beings and Men themselves, are Really Nothing else, but
Machines and Automata; whereas he might as well have affirmed Heaven to be
Earth, Color to be Sound, Number to be Figure, or any thing else in the world
to be any thing, as Cogitation and Local Motion to be very self same thing.
Nevertheless, so strong was the Atheistick Intoxication, in those Old
Democriticks and Epicureans, that though denying Real Qualities of Bodies, for
this very reason, because Nothing could be Produced our of Nothing, they
Notwithstanding contradicting themselves, would make Sense, Life, and
Understanding, to be Qualities of Matter, and therefore Generable out of it,
and so Unquestionably, Produced Real Entities out of Nothing, or Without a
Cause.

Moreover it is observable, that Epicurus having a mind to assert Contingent
Liberty in men, in way of opposition to that Necessity of all Humane Actions,
which had been before maintained by Democritus and his Followers, plainly
acknowledges, that he could not Possibly do this, according to the Grounds of
his own Philosophy, without supposing something of Contingency, in the First
Principles, that is in the Motion of those Atoms, out of which men and other
Animals are Made, L. 2. p. 134. Lamb.
-- Si semper motus connectitur omnis.
Et Vetere exoritur semper Novus Ordine Certo,
Nec Declinando faciunt Primor dia Motus
Principium quoddam quod Fati foedera rumpat,
Ex Infinito ne Causam Causa sequatur;
Libera per Terras unde haec Animantibus extat,
Vnde est haec, inquam, Fatis Avolsa Voluntas?
The reason for which, is afterward thus expressed by him, Quoniam De Nihilo
Nil fit, because Nothing can be Made out of Nothing. Upon which account he
therefore ridiculously Feigned, besides his Two other Motions of Atoms, from
Pondus and Plagae, Weight and Strokes, a Third Motion of them, which he calls,
Clinamen Principiorum, a Contingent and Uncertain Declination, every way from
the Perpendicular; out of Design, to salve this Phenomenon of Free Will in
men; Without bringing Something out of Nothing, according as he thus
subjoyneth, Quare in Seminibus quoque idem fateare necesse est,
Esse aliam praeter Plagas and Pondera causam
Motibus, unde haec est nobis Innata Potestas;
De NIHILO quoniam FIERI NIL posse videmus.
Pondus enim prohibet ne Plagis omnia fiant
Externa quasi Vi. Sed ne Men's ipsa Necessum
Intestinum habeat cunctis in rebus agendis,
Et devicta quasi cogatur Far Patique,
Id facit Exiguum CEINAMEN PRINCIPIORVM,
Nec ratione loci certa, nec tempore certo.
Now if Epicurus himself, conceived, that Liberty of Will, could not possibly
be Generated, in Men out of Matter or Atoms, they having no such thing at all
in them (that is no Contingent Uncertainty in their Motion) without bringing of
Something out of Nothing; which was contrary to the Fundamental Principles of
the Atomick Philosophy, (though this were intolerably absurd in him, thus to
suppose Contingency, and a Kind of Free Will, in the Motions of Senseless Atoms,
so that indeed he brought his Liberty of Will, out of Nothing) certainly Sense,
and Understanding, Soul and Mind in Animals and Men, could not Possibly be
Generated out of Atoms or Matter, devoid of all Sense and Understanding: For
the very same Reason, Quoniam De Nihilo Nil fit, Because Nothing can be Made
out of Nothing. For unquestionably, were all Life and Understanding, all Souls
and Minds Generated out of Dead and Senseless Matter; and were there no
Substantial or Essential Life and Understanding in the whole Universe; then
must it of Necessity, be all Made out of Nothing, or without a Cause, and
consequently Real Entities and Substantial things be Made out of Nothing, which
is absolutely Impossible. For though we do not say, that Life and Cogitation,
Sense and Understanding, abstractly considered, are Substances; yet do we
affirm them to be Entities Really distinct from Matter, and no Modifications or
Accidents thereof, but either Accidents and Modifications, or rather Essential
Attributes of Substance Incorporeal: as also that Souls and Minds, which are
the Subjects of them, are indeed Substantial Things. Wherefore We cannot but
here again condemn, the Darkness of that Philosophy, which Educes not only
species Visible and Audible (Entities Perfectly Unintelligible) and Real
Qualities, distinct from all the Modes of Body, and even Substantial Forms too,
(as they call them) but also Sensitive Souls themselves, both in men and
brutes; Ex Potentia Materiae, Out of the Power of the Matter; that is, indeed
Out of Nothing. For as much as this prepares a direct way to Atheism; because
if Life and Sense, Cogitation and Consciousness, may be Generated out of Dead
and Senseless Matter, then might this well be supposed the first Original of All
things; nor could there Reasonably be any Stop made, at Rational Souls;
especially by these men, who also conclude them, to be Rasae Tabulae, mere
White Sheets of Paper, that have nothing at all in them, but what is Scribbled
upon them, by Corporeal Objects from without: there being nothing in the
Understanding or Mind of Man, which was not before in Sense: so that Sense is
the First Original Knowledge; and Understanding, but a Secondary and Derivative
thing from it, more Vmbratile and Evanide.

Hitherto have we Demonstrated that all things whatsoever, could not possibly
be Made out of Matter, and particularly that Life and Sense, Mind and
Understanding, being no Accidents or Modes of Matter, could not by Motion be
Generated out of it, without the Production of Real Entities out of Nothing.
But because some may Possibly Imagine, that Matter might otherwise than thus by
Motion, by a Miraculous Efficiency, Produce Souls and Minds, we shall add in
the last place, that Nothing can Efficiently Produce any Real Entity or
Substantial thing, that was not before; unless it have at least equal
Perfection to it, and a Substantially Emanative, or Creative Power. But
scarcely any man can be so sottish, as to Imagine, that every Atom of Dust,
has Equal Perfection in it to that of the Rational Soul in man, or to
Attribute a Creative Power to all Matter, (which is but a Passive thing) whilst
this is in the mean time denied by him, to a Perfect Being: both these
Assertions also, in like manner as the Former, Producing Real Entities out of
Nothing Causally. And thus have we Demonstrated the Impossibility and Nonsense
of all Atheism, from this very Principle, by which the Atheists would assault
Theism, in the true Sense thereof, that No thing can be Made without a Cause,
or that Nothing cannot be the Cause of Any thing.

Now if there be no Middle betwixt Atheism and Theism, and all things must of
Necessity either spring from Senseless Matter, or else from a Perfect
Understanding Being, then is this Demonstration of the Impossibility of
Atheism, a Sufficient Establishment of the Truth of Theism; it being such a
Demonstration of a God, as the Geometricians call, a Deduction Ad Impossible,
which they allow of for good and frequently make use of. Thus; Either there is
a God, or else Matter, must needs be acknowledged, to be the only Self-Existent
thing, and all things else whatsoever, to be Made out of it; But it is
Impossible that all things should be made out of Senseless Matter: Therefore is
there a God. Nevertheless we shall here for further satisfaction, show how the
Existence of a God, may be Directly Demonstrated also, from this very
Principle, which the Atheists endeavor to take Sanctuary in, and from thence
to impugn Theism, De Nihilo Nihil, that Nothing can be Made out of Nothing
Causally, or That Nothing cannot be the Cause of Any thing.

In the first place therefore, we shall fetch our Beginning, from what has
been already often declared, That it is Mathematically Certain, that Something
or other, did Exist Of It Self from all Eternity, or without beginning, and
Unmade by any thing else. The Certainty of which Proposition depends upon
this very Principle, as its Foundation, That Nothing can come from Nothing, or
be Made out of Nothing, or That Nothing which once was not, can of it self come
into Being without a Cause; it following unavoidably from thence, That if there
had been once Nothing, there could never have been Any thing. And having thus
laid the Foundation, we shall in the next place make this further
Superstructure, that because Something did certainly Exist of it Self from
Eternity Unmade, therefore is there also Actually, a Necessarily Existent
Being. For to suppose, that any thing did Exist Of It Self from Eternity, by
its own Free Will and Choice, and therefore not Necessarily but Contingently,
since it might have Willed otherwise; this is to suppose it to have Existed
before it Was, and so Positively to have been the Cause of it self, which is
Impossible, as has been already declared. When a thing therefore is said to be
Of It Self, or the Cause of It self, this is to be understood no otherwise,
than either in a Negative Sense, as having Nothing else for its Cause; or
because, its Necessary Eternal Existence, is Essential to the Perfection of its
own Nature. That therefore which Existed Of It self from Eternity,
Independently upon any thing else, did not so Exist Contingently but
Necessarily; so that there is undoubtedly, something Actually in Being, whose
Existence is and always was Necessary. In the next place it is certain also,
that Nothing could Exist Necessarily Of it Self, but what included N^cessity of
Existence in its own Nature. For to suppose any thing to Exist Of it self
Necessarily, which has no Necessity of Existence in its own Nature, is plainly
to suppose that Necessary Existence of it, to Come from Nothing, since it could
neither proceed from that Thing it self, nor yet from any thing else. Lastly,
there is Nothing which includes Nec^ssity of Existence in its very Nature and
Essence, but only an Absolutely Perfect Being. The Result of all which is, that
God or a Perfect Being, does certainly Exist, and that there is Nothing else
which Existed Of it self from Eternity, Necessarily and Independ^ntly; but all
other things whatsoever derived their Being from him, or were Caused by him;
Matter or Body it self not excepted.

That which has Staggered some Theists here, and made them so inclinable and
prone to believe, that Matter also Existed from Eternity Unmade, is partly (as
has been already intimated) an Idiotical Conceit, that because Nothing can be
Artificially made by men, otherwise than out of Pre-Existing Matter, as Houses
and Garments, Puddings, and Pyes, therefore there could be no other making of
any thing by any Power whatsoever: though even men themselves, can produce
Something out of no Pre-Existent Matter, as Cogitations and Local Motion. And
the same partly proceeds also, from certain False Opinions entertained,
concerning Matter. For first some Theists have supposed (...), an Incorporeal
First Matter; out of which Incorporeal Matter. Together with an Incorporeal
Form, Joined to it, they conceived the Essence of Body to have been Compounded,
and Made up. And no wonder if these same Fanciful Philosophers, have further
added also hereunto, that from this Incorporeal Matter, by an Incorporeal Form,
were begotten likewise Incorporeal Qualities of Body. Now it is not
Conceivable, what else should be meant, by this Incorporeal Hyle or Matter, but
only a Metaphysical Notion, of the Potentiality or Possibility of things,
respectively to the Deity; which because it is indeed Eternal, and as much
Unmade as God himself is, it being Nothing but the Divine Power considered
Passively, or the Reverse of it; therefore in all probability, were these
Philosophers so prone to think, the Physical Matter, of this Corporeal
Universe, to have been Eternal and Unmade. Neither was this Incorporeal Hyle,
or Matter, a Novel Opinion, entertained only by Some Junior Platonists, but
older than Aristotle himself; as appears plainly, L. 1. c. 6. Thus Porphyr.
(...), etc. Materiae Proprietates secundum Veteres, hae sunt; Quod sit
Incorporea, etc.
from these following words of his in his Metaphysics, (...), Some speak of
the Principle as Matter; whither they suppose this Matter to be Body, or to be
Incorporeal. But this Incorporeal Matter in Physiology can be accounted no
better than a kind of Metaphysical Nonsense. Again others seem to have been
the more prone to think, Matter or Body, to have been Self Existent and Unmade,
because they both conceived it to be Really the same thing with Space, and also
took it for granted, that Space was Infinite, and Eternal, and Consequently
Necessarily Existent. In answer whereunto we reply First, That though Space and
Distance* should be granted to be Positively Infinite, or to have no Bounds nor
Limits at all, as also to have been Eternal, yet according to the Opinion of
some, would it not follow from thence, that Matter was Infinite, Eternal and
Necessarily Existent; not as if Space or Distance, could Exist alone by it
Self, an Accident without a Substance, it being plainly Impossible, that
Nothing should have any Accidents, Modifications, and Attributes; or be
Mensurable by Yards and Poles; but because this Space is by them supposed, not
to be the Extension of Body, but the Infinite and Unbounded Extension of the
Deity. But in the next place; If Space be concluded to be certainly Nothing
else, but the Extension and Distance of Body or Matter, considered in General,
(without respect to this or that particular Body) and Abstractly; in order to
the Conception of Motion, and the Mensuration of things; (For Space thus
considered, is Necessarily Immovable, as to the Parts thereof respectively; as
the Two Extremes of a Yard Distance, can never possibly come nearer to One
another) then do we say, that there appears no sufficient Ground for this
Positive Infinity of Space, we being certain of no more than this, that be the
World, or any Figurate Body, never so Great, it is not Impossible, but that it
might be still Greater and Greater, without end. Which Indefinite
Encreasablenass of Body and Space, seems to be mistaken for a Positive Infinity
thereof. Whereas for this very Reason, because it can never be so Great, but
that more Magnitude may still be added to it, therefore can it never be
Positively Infinite. Nor is there perhaps so great an Absurdity in this, That
Another World could not Possibly be made, a Mile Distant from this; for as much
as there being Nothing between them, they must needs Touch; or That this Finite
World could have no Mountains and Valleys, in the Exterior Surface of it,
since it might be either Spherical, Cubical or Cylindrical, or of any other
Regular Figure, whatsoever the Maker pleased to form it in. To conclude
therefore, by Space without the Finite World, is to be Understood, Nothing but
the Possibility of Body, Further and Further without End, yet so as never to
reach to Infinity; and such a Space as this was there also, before this World
was Created, a Possibility of so much Body to be Produced. But Space and Actual
Distance, as really Mensurable by Yards and Poles, though it may be Greater and
Greater without end, yet can it not be Positively Infinite, so as that there
could be no more added to it; and therefore there can be no Argument from
hence, to prove the Necessary Existence of Matter.

Moreover the Existence of a Deity might be further Demonstrated, from this
Common Notion, That Nothing can come from Nothing Causally, because if there
were no God, as we could not have had any Idea of him, or a Perfect Being,
since it must have Come from Nothing, and have been the Idea or Conception of
Nothing; So neither could there have been indeed any Knowledge or Understanding
at all. For Singular Bodies Existing without us, cannot enter into us, and put
Understanding in us, nor is there any thing but Local Motions propagated from
them to our Organs of Sense. The Mind must have its Immediate Intelligibles,
within it self, for otherwise it could not possibly Understand any thing; which
Intelligibles and their Relations to one another, or Verities, are (as was said
before) Eternal. Moreover, the Mind can frame Ideas or Conceptions, not only of
things Actually Existing, but also of all Possibilities; which plainly Implies
and supposes the Actual Existence of a Being Infinitely Powerful, that could
Produce them. So that the proper Object, of Mind and Understanding, is a
Perfect Being, and all the Extent of its Power; which Perfect Being,
Comprehending it self and the Extent of its own Power, or the Possibities of
all things, is the First Original Mind, of which all other Minds partake.
Wherefore were there no Perfect Omnipotent Being, Comprehending it self, and
its own Power or all the Possibilities of things; the Intelligible Objects of
the Mind and Ideas, must have come from Nothing.

However it has been already proved from this Principle, Nothing from Nothing,
that the Powers of Sense and Understanding, or the Entities of Soul and Mind,
could never have Resulted, from any Modifications of Senseless Matter
whatsoever. Wherefore since it is Mathematically certain, that our Humane Souls
and Persons, could not Possibly have been Generated out of Matter; one of these
Two things will undeniably follow; That Either they must all have Existed Of
Themselves from Eternity Unmade, or Else have been Created (...), out of an
Antecedent Nonexistence, by a Perfect Understanding Being Unmade, or atleast
have Derived their whole Substance from it. So that it is, altogether as
certain, that there is a God, as that our Humane Souls and Persons, did not all
Exist from Eternity Of Themselves. And that there must be some Eternal Unmade
Mind, has been already Demonstrated also, from the same Principle, Nothing out
of Nothing. Thus have We abundantly Confuted, the Second Atheistick
Argumentation, that there can be no Omnipotence nor Divine Creation, because
Nothing can be Made out of Nothing; we having plainly showed that this very
Principle, in the True Sense thereof, affords a Demonstration for the
Contrary.

THe Six following Atheistick Argumentations, driving at these Two things,
First, the Disproving of an Incorporeal, and then of a Corporeal Deity; (From
both which, the Atheists conceive it must follow of necessity, that there can
be none at all) we shall take them all together, and in order to the
Confutation of them, perform these Three Things. First, we shall Answer the
Atheistick Argumentations, against an Incorporeal Deity, (contained in the
Third and Fourth Heads.) Secondly, we shall show, that from the very Principles
of the Atheistick Corporealism, (as represented in the Fifth and Sixth Heads)
Incorporeal Substance is Demonstrable. And Lastly, That there being undeniably
Incorporeal Substance, the Two following Atheistick Argumentations also,
against a Corporeal Deity, (in the Seventh and Eighth Sections) prove
altogether Insignificant.

We begin with the First of these; To show the Invalidity of the Atheistick
Argumentations, against an Incorporeal Deity. It has been already observed,
That though all Corporealists, be not therefore of necessity Atheists; yet
Atheists universally have been Corporealists, this being always their First and
Grand Postulatum, That there is no other Substance besides Body. Thus Plato
long ago, declared Concerning them; Soph. p. 172. Fic.
(...). They contend strongly, that that only really Is, which is Tangible or
Can Resist their Touch; concluding Body and Substance, to be one and the
self-same thing And if any one should affirm, that there is any thing
Incorporeal, they will presently cry him down, and not hear a word more from
him. For there can be no doubt, but that the Persons here intended by Plato,
were those very Atheists, which himself spoke of afterward, in the same
Dialogue; (...); Whether shall we assent, to that Opinion n^w adays entertained
by so many, That Nature Generateth all things from a certain Fortuitous Cause,
without the direction of any Mind or Understanding? or rather, that it
produces them, according to Reason, and Knowledge, proceeding from God? Indeed
the Philosopher there tells us, that some of these Atheistick Persons, began
then to be somewhat ashamed of making Prudence, and Justice, and other Moral
Virtues, Corporeal Things, or Bodies, (...). Though they affirm concerning the
Soul it self, that this seems to them to be Corporeal; yet concerning Prudence,
and those other Virtues mentioned, some have now scarcely the Confidence to
maintain, these to be either Bodies or Nothing. But this (says he) was indeed
no less than the quite Giving up of the Cause of Atheism; (...), because if it
be but once granted, that there is never so little Incorporeal, this will be
sufficient, to overthrow the Atheistiek Foundation. Wherefore he concludes,
that such as these, were but Mongrel and Imperfect Atheists, (...), For they
who are thorough-paced, and Genuine Atheists indeed, will bogle at neither of
those forementioned things, but contend that whatsoever, they cannot grasp with
their hands, is altogether Nothing. That is, that there is no other Substance
nor Entity in the World, but only Body, that which is Tangible, or Resists the
Touch. Aristotle also, represents the Atheistick Hypothesis after the same
manner, (...)^ They affirm that Matter or Body, is all the Substance that is,
and that all other things, are but the Passions and Affections thereof. And
again in his Metaphysics, Met. L. 1. c. 7.
(...), These men maintain All to be One, and that there is but one Only
Nature, as the Matter of all things, and this Corporeal, or endued with
Magnitude. And now we see plainly, that the ancient Atheists, were of the very
same mind, with these in our Days, that Body, or that which is Tangible and
Divisible, is the Only Substantial Thing, from whence it follows, that an
Incorporeal Substance would be the same with an Incorporeal Body, i. e. an
Impossibility, and that there can be no Incorporeal Deity.

But in the Management of this Cause, there has been some Disagreement amongst
the Atheists themselves. For First, the Democriticks and Epicureans, though
consenting with all the other Atheists in this, That whatsoever was Vnextended,
and devoid of Magnitude, was therefore Nothing; (so that there could neither
be, any Substance, nor Accident or Mode of any Substance, Vnextended) did
notwithstanding distinguish concerning a Double Nature. First, That which is so
Extended, as to be Impenetrable, and Tangible, or Resist the Touch, which is
Body. And Secondly, That which is Extended also, but Penetrably and Intangibly,
which is Space or Vacuum: a Nature, according to them, really distinct from
Body, and the only Incorporeal Thing that is. Now since this Space which is the
only Incorporeal, can neither Do nor Suffer any thing, but only give Place or
Room to Bodies to Subsist in, or Pass thorough, therefore can there not be any
Active, Understanding, Incorporeal Deity. This is the Argumentation of the
Democritick Atheists.

To which we Reply; That if Space be indeed a Nature distinct from Body, and a
Thing Really Incorporeal, as they pretend, then will it undeniably follow from
this very Principle of theirs, that there must be Incorporeal Substance; and
(this Space being supposed by them also to be Infinite) an Infinite Incorporeal
Deity. Because if Space be not the Extension of Body, nor an Affection thereof;
then must it of necessity be, either an Accident Existing alone by it self,
without a Substance, which is Impossible; or else the Extension or Affection,
of some other Incorporeal Substance, that is Infinite. But here will Gassendus
step in, to help out his good Friends, the Democriticks and Epicureans, at a
dead Lift; and undertake to maintain, that though Space be indeed an
Incorporeal Thing, yet it would neither follow of necessity from thence, that
it is an Incorporeal Substance or Affection thereof, nor yet that it is an
Accident, Existing alone by it self without a Substance; because this Space is
really, neither Accident, nor Substance, but a certain Middle Nature or Essence
betwixt both. To which Subterfuge of his, that we may not quarrel about Words,
we shall make this Reply; That unquestionably, Whatsoever Is, or has any kind
of Entity, does either Subsist by it self, or else is an Attribute, Affection,
or Mode, of something that does Subsist by it self. For It is Certain, That
there can be no Mode, Accident, or Affection, of Nothing; and consequently,
that Nothing cannot be Extended, nor Mensurable. But if Space be neither the
Extension of Body, nor yet of Substance Incorporeal, then must it of necessity
be, the Extension of Nothing, and the Affection of Nothing; and Nothing must be
Mensurable by Yards and Poles. We conclude therefore, That from this very
Hypothesis of the Democritick and Epicurean Atheists, that Space is a Nature
distinct from Body and Positively Infinite, it follows undeniably, that there
must be some Incorporeal Substance, whose Affection its Extension is; and
because there can be nothing Infinite, but only the Deity, that it is the
Infinite Extension of an Incorporeal Deity; just as some Learned Theists and
Incorporealists have asserted. And thus is the Argument of these Democritick
and Epicurean Atheists, against an Incorporeal Deity, abundantly confuted; we
having made it manifest, that from that very Principle of their own, by which
they would disprove the same, it is against themselves Demonstrable.

To which it might be here further added, that Epicurus who professedly opposed
Plato's Incorporeal God, as an Impossibility, did notwithstanding, manifestly
Contradict himself, when he asserted such a Democracy of Monogrammous Gods, as
were not Compounded of Atoms and Vacuum, (though according to him, the only
Principles of Body) that so they might be Incorruptible; nor yet could Touch or
be Touched, but were Penetrable, as is declared in those Verses of Lucretius,
Tenvis enim Natura Deum, longeque remota,
Sensibus a nostris, Animi vix mente videtur.
Quae quoniam manuum Tactum, suffugit and Ictum,
Tactile nil nobis quod sit, contingere debet.
Tangere enim non quit, quod Tangi non licet ipsum.
(Though Tangibility and Impenetrability, were elsewhere made by him, the very
Essence of Body) and Lastly, such as had not Corpus but Quasi-Corpus, and
therefore must needs be Really Incorporeal. Though there is no doubt to be
made, but that Epicurus Colluded in all this; himself not Believing a jot of
it, nor any such Gods at all.

But other Atheists there were, who concluding likewise, That whatsoever was
Vnextended was Nothing, were sensible of the Inconvenience of making Space thus
to be a thing really distinct from Body, (from whence it would follow
unavoidably, that it was an Affection, of Incorporeal Substance;) and therefore
acknowledged, not Two Natures of Extended Things, but as we had it before in
Aristotle, (...), One only Nature, and that Bodily; Space being therefore to
them, either a mere Imaginary Thing, that has no Reality without our Minds,
but only a Phantasm of our own, and in their Modern Language, a kind of Ghost,
Apparition, or Spectre of a Body; or else indeed, the very Extension of Body it
self, considered in General, and Abstractly from this or that Singular Body,
Moveable. And these men therefore framed their Argumentation against an
Incorporeal Deity after this manner. Nothing truly Is, but what is Extended, or
has a Certain Magnitude, (because that which is Vnextended and has no
Magnitude, is Nowhere, and consequently Nothing.) But whatsoever is Extended,
and in a Place, is Body. Therefore is there no other Substance besides Body;
and Consequently there can be no Incorporeal Deity. Or else to put the Argument
into a more Approveable Syllogistick Form, Whatsoever is Extended, is Body, or
Corporeal; But Whatsoever Is, is Extended. Therefore Whatsoever Is, is Body, or
Corporeal. And by Consequence there can be no Incorporeal Deity.

To which Argumentation, the Assertors of Incorporeal Substance, have Replied
Two manner of ways. For First, the Generality of the ancient Incorporealists,
taking it for granted, that whatsoever was Extended in Magnitude, and had Parts
one without another, was Divisible, as also probably, Impenetrable by any thing
else Extended, because there can be no Penetration of Dimensions; and therefore
no One Magnitude, can be Imbibed or Swallowed up into another, but must of
necessity stand without it, adding so much to the Quantity thereof: They
readily gave their Assent to that Proposition, That Whatsoever is Extended,
into Longitude, Latitude, and Profundity, is Body. But being strongly persuaded
of the Existence of some other Substance besides Body; they denied that Other
Proposition of theirs, That Whatsoever Is, is Extended; or What is Vnextended
is Nothing: maintaining that besides Body, or Extended Substance, there was
another Substance Incorporeal, which therefore was (...), and (...), and (...),
and (...), and (...), Vnextended, and devoid of Quantity and Magnitude, without
Parts, and Indivisible. That Plato himself Philosophized after this manner,
might be proved from sundry Passages of his Writings, as that in his Tenth De
Legibus, where he affirms, that the Soul it self, and those things which
belong to it, as Cogitative, are (...), in Order of Nature, before the
Longitude, and Latitude, and Profundity of Bodies. Where doubtless his meaning
was not; as if there were a Longitude, Latitude, and Profundity in Souls, but
of a different kind from that Longitude, Latitude, and Profundity of Bodies,
and before it: but that Longitude, Latitude, and Profundity, being the
Essential Properties of Body only; Soul and Cogitation, as devoid of these, was
in order of Nature Before them. Again from that in his Timaeus, where speaking
of Place, Space, and Matter, he condemns this for a Vulgar Error, That
Whatsoever Is, must of necessity be in some Place or other, and what is in No
Place, is Nothing. (...) -- (...)^ The Third Kind, is that of Space, which
gives room to all things that are Generated. And when we look upon this, we
dreamingly affirm, That every thing that Is, must of necessity be in some
Place, and possess a certain Room and Space, and that whatsoever is not
Somewhere, either in Earth or in Heaven, is Nothing. Which Drowsy or Dreaming
Imagination, (says he, like a Ghost) continually haunteth and possesses men,
and that even then, when they think of that True and Awakened Nature of the
Deity. Whereas this Philosopher himself, discoursing elsewhere of God, under
the Title of (...), The Vast Sea of Pulcritude, describes him after this
manner, (...), As that which is not Any where, either in Earth, or in Heaven,
but it self alone by It self, and With It self, all other Beautiful things
Partaking of it. And as for Aristotle's Sense in this Particular; that he here
departed not, as he did in some other things, from his Master Plato, may appear
from that Whole Chapter or Section, at the End of his Physics, Spent upon this
very Subject, to prove, (...), That his First Immovable Mover (which is God
Almighty) must of necessity be devoid of Parts, or Indivisible, and have no
Magnitude at all. The Conclusion of which Section, and his whole Book of
Physics is this, (...). These things being thus determined; It is manifestly
Impossible, that the first Mover should have any Magnitude. For if it has
Magnitude, that must of necessity be either Finite or Infinite. But that there
can be no Infinite Magnitude, was before demonstrated in the Physics; and that
nothing which has a Finite Magnitude, can have Infinite Power, has been now
Proved. Wherefore it is plain, that the First Mover is Indivisible, and devoid
of Parts, and has no Magnitude at all. Which same Doctrine is again Taught and
Asserted by Aristotle in his Metaphysics, P. 14. c. 7.
(...). From what has been declared, it is manifest, that there is an Eternal
and Immovable Substance, Separate from Sensibles; as also that this Substance
cannot possibly have any Magnitude, but is devoid of Parts, and Indivisible.
Because no Finite thing can have Infinite Power, and there is no such thing
possible as Infinite Magnitude. Neither does Aristotle appropriate this to the
Supreme Deity; To be thus devoid of Magnitude and of Parts, and consequently
Indivisible; he some where attributing the same also to all other Immaterial or
Incorporeal things, and particularly to the Humane Mind, (...), Every thing
that is devoid of Matter, is Indivisible, as the Humane Mind. And the like,
does he assert, at once, both concerning the Mundane, and the Humane Soul, that
they are no Magnitudes, though ridiculously (after his manner) imputing the
Contrary Opinion to Plato, (...). De An. L. 1. c. 3.
It is not rightly affirmed either of the Mundane, or Rational Soul, that they
are Magnitudes. For the Intellect is One and Continuous, as Intellection is,
which is the same with the Intelligibles. But these are one, not as Magnitudes,
but as Numbers. Wherefore the Intellect is not so Continuous, but either devoid
of Parts, or not Continuous as Magnitude. For how, being Magnitude, could it
understand with any of its Parts, whether Conceived as Points, or as lesser
Magnitudes; since either way, there would be an innumerable company of
Intellections? Moreover how can it conceive any thing that is Indivisible, by
what is Divisible? Furthermore in this same Book De Anima, Aristotle stiffly
denies, Souls in general, either to be in a Place, or to be Locally Moved,
otherwise than by Accident, as they are said to be Moved, together with the
Motion of the Body. Thus Simplicius, (...), See how Aristotle does every where
remove, or exclude from the Soul, Corporeal (or Local) Motions. Fol. 6.
And again (...), Aristotle will by no means allow any Incorporeal things
whatsoever, whether of the First, Second or Lowest rank, (they being all the
Causes of motion) themselves to be moved. Philoponus likewise, (...). You see
how Aristotle, respecting Corporeal Motions, pronounces of the Soul, that it is
Immovable. For whatsoever is in a Place (and moveable) is Body. Lastly, in
that Passage before cited, Aristotle plainly makes, the Essence of Corporeal
Substance, as opposed to Incorporeal, to consist in Magnitude.

Besides Plato and Aristotle, we might here instance in sundry other, of the
ancient Incorporealists, who clearly maintained the same Doctrine. Philo does
not only assert in general, a Double Essence or Substance, (...), and (...), a
Distant, and Indistant one, but somewhere writes thus concerning the Deity, De
Confus. Ling. p. 339.
(...), etc. All things are filled with God, as Containing them, but not as
being Contained by them, or in them; to whom alone it belongs to be, both
Every where and No where. No where because himself Created Space and Place,
together with Bodies, and it is not Lawful to include the Creator, within any
of his Creatures. And Every where, because he extends his Virtues and Powers,
throughout Earth and Water, Air and Heaven, and leaves no Part of the World
destitute thereof, but collecting all things together under himself, has bound
them fast with Invisible Bonds. But none has more industriously pursued this
business then Plotinus who every where asserts, Body and Magnitude, to be one
and the same thing; and that besides this, there is another Substance
Incorporeal, which consequently is (...) and (...) and (...), devoid of
Quantity, and of Magnitude, and of Parts, locally distant from one another;
(...), it having in its Nature transcended, the Imperfection of Quantity. And
Who has also written, Two Whole Books upon this very Subject, (...), That one
and the self same Numerical thing, may be all of it, entirely Every where.
Wherein his Principal design was to Prove, that the Deity, is not Part of it
here, and part of it there; and so much thereof in one place, and so much in
another (as if the very Substance of it were Mensurable by Yards and Poles) but
the whole Undivided Deity, every where, (...) (says he) God is before all
things that are in ^ Place. P. 667.
And (...), It is not at all to be wondered at, that God being not in a Place,
should be present to every thing that is in a Place, wholly and entirely:
Reason pronouncing, that he having no place, must therefore of necessity be
(...), all of him Indivisibly Present, to whatsoever he is Present. Neither is
this, says he, a thing only deduced by Reason, but that which is before
Reason, suggested, by the Instincts of Mankind; (...), That one and the same
Numerical Substance (to wit of the Deity) is at once entirely every where, is
agreeable to the Common Notions, Sentiments of Mankind, when we do so often by
the Instincts of Nature, speak of that God, who is in Every one of us; as
supposing him to be one and the same in all. Where the Philosopher subjoyns,
(...), etc. And this is the Firmest of all Principles, that which our Souls do,
as it were, Naturally and of themselves Speak; and which is not Collected by
Reason, but comes forth from them, before Ratiocination. Moreover he often
affirms of the humane Soul, or rather takes it as a thing for granted, that
this is, the Whole or All of it, in every part of the Body, P. 644.
that is Undividedly; (...), As for the humane Soul, it is one and the same
Numerically, in the Hand and in the Foot. And again, (...), Since we commonly
suppose, our own Soul to be the same, both in our foot and in our hand; why
should we not in like manner, acknowledge, that of the Mundane Soul or Deity,
which is in one part of the Universe, to be the same with that in another? In
like manner Simplicius, proving that Body is not the first Principle, because
there must of necessity be Something Self-moving, and what is so, P. 649.
must needs be Incorporeal, writes thus, (...). Because what is such, must of
necessity be Indivisible, and Indistant, for were it Divisible, and Distant, it
could not all of it be conjoined with its whole self; so that the whole should
both actively move, and be moved. Which same thing seems further Evident, in
the Souls being All Conscious of It Self, and Reflexive upon its whole Self,
which could not be, were one part of it Distant from another. Again the same
Philosopher, expressly denies, the Soul though a Self-moving Substance, to be
at all Locally Moved, otherwise then by accident in respect of the Body, which
is moved by it, (...), The Soul being not Moved by Corporeal or Local Motions
(for in respect of these it is Immovable) but by Cogitative ones only* (the
names whereof are Consultation, and Deliberation, etc.) by these Moves Bodies
Locally. And that this was Really Plato's meaning, also, when he determined the
Soul to be a Self-moving Substance and the Cause of all Bodily Motion; that
moving it self in a way of Cogitation it moved Bodies Locally (Notwithstanding
that Aristotle would not take notice of it) sufficiently appears from his own
words, and is acknowledged by the Greek Scholiasts themselves, upon Aristotle's
De Anima. Thus again Simplicius elsewhere, (...), Since the Soul is not in a
place, it is not capable of any Local Motion.

We should omit the Testimonies of any more Philosophers, were it not, that we
find Porphyrius so full and express herein; who makes this the very beginning
of his (...), his Manuduction to Intelligibles; (...), That though Every Body
be in a Place, yet Nothing that is properly Incorporeal, is in a Place: and who
afterward further pursues it in this manner, (...), P. 229, 230.
Neither does that which is Incorporeal move Locally by Will. Place being
Relative only to Magnitude and Bulk. But that which is devoid of Bulk and
Magnitude, is likewise devoid of Local Motion. Wherefore it is only present by
a certain Disposition and Inclination of it, to one thing more than another,
nor is its presence there discernible otherwise, than by its operations and
Effects. Again concerning the Three Divine Hypostases, he writes thus, (...),
P. 231.
etc. The Supreme God, is therefore Every where, because he is Nowhere; and the
same is true also of the Second and Third Divine Hypostasis, Nous and Psyche.
The Supreme God is Every where and No where, in respect of those things which
are after him, and only his own and in himself. Nous or Intellect is in the
Supreme God; Every where and No where as to those things that are after him.
Psyche or the Mundane Soul is both in Intellect and the Supreme God, and Every
where and No where as to Bodies. Lastly, Body, is both in the Soul of the
World, and in God. Where he denies, God to be Locally in the Corporeal World,
and thinks it more proper to say that the Corporeal World is in God, then God
in it; because the World is held and contained in the Divine Power, but the
Deity is not in the Locality of the World. Moreover he further declares his
Sense after this manner; (...), Nor if there were conceived to be, such an
Incorporeal Space or Vacuum (as Democritus and Epicurus supposed) could Mind or
God, possibly Exist in this Empty Space, (as Co-extended with the same) for
this would be only Receptive of Bodies, but it could not receive the Energie of
Mind or Intellect, nor give any Place or Room to that, that being no Bulkie
thing. And again, (...) (...), The Corporeal World is Distantly present, to the
Intelligible, (or the Deity;) and that is Indivisibly and Indistantly present,
with the World. But when that which is Indistant and Vnextended, is present
with that which is Distant and Extended; then is the Whole of the Former, one
and the same Numerically, in Every part of the Latter. That is, it is
Indivisibly and Vnmultipliedly, and Illocally, there (according to its own
Nature) present with that, which is naturally Divisible, and Multipliable, and
in a Place. Lastly, he affirms the same likewise of the Humane Soul, that
this is also (...), A Substance devoid of Magnitude, and which is not Locally
present, to this or that Body, but by Disposition and Energie, and therefore
the Whole of it in every part thereof Vndividedly.

And as for Christian Writers, besides Origin, who was so famous an Asserter of
Incorporeal Substance, that (as Socrates records) the Egyptian Monks and
Anthropomorphites, threatened death to Theophilus the Alexandrian Bishop, unless
he would at once execrate and renounce the Writings of Origin, and profess the
Belief of a Corporeal God, of Humane Form; and who also maintained Incorporeal
Substance to be Vnextended, as might be proved from Sundry Passages, both of
his Book against Celsus, and that Peri Archon; we say (besides Origin and
others of the Greeks) St. Austine amongst the Latins, clearly asserted the
same, he maintaining in his Book, De Quantitate Animae, and else where,
concerning the Humane Soul, that being Incorporeal, it has no Dimensions of
Length, Breadth and Profundity, and is Illocabilis, No where as in a Place. We
shall conclude, with the Testimony of Boethius, who was both a Philosopher and a
Christian, Quaedam sunt (says he) Communes Animi Conceptiones, per se notae,
apud Sapientes tantum; Vt Incorporalia non esse In Loco; There are certain
Common Conceptions, or Notions of the Mind, which are known by themselves
amongst wise men only; as this for example, That Incorporeals are in No Place.
From whence it is manifest, that the generality of reputed Wise men, were not
formerly of this opinion, Quod Nusquam est nihil est, That what is No where, or
in no certain Place, is Nothing; and that this was not looked upon by them as a
Common Notion, but only as a Vulgar Error.

By this time we have made it unquestionably Evident, that this Opinion of
Incorporeal Substance being Vnextended, Indistant, and Devoid of Magnitude, is
no Novel or Recent thing, nor first started in the Scholastic Age, but that it
was the general Persuasion, of the most ancient and learned Asserters of
Incorporeal Substance; especially, that the Deity was not Part of it Here, and
Part of it There, nor the Substance thereof Mensurable by Yards and Poles, as
if there were so much of it contained in one Room, and so much and no more in
another, according to their several Dimensions; but that the whole Undivided
Deity, was at once in Every Part of the world, and consequently No where
Locally after the manner of Bodies. But because this opinion, seems so Strange
and Paradoxical, and lies under so great Prejudices, we shall in the next place
show, how these ancient Incorporealists, endeavored to acquit themselves in
repelling the several Efforts and Plausibilities made against it. The First
whereof is this, That to suppose Incorporeal Substances, Vnextended and
Indivisible, is to make them Absolute Parvitudes, and by means of that, to
render them all, (even the Deity it self) contemptible; since they must of
necessity, be either Physical Minimums, that cannot Actually be Divided further
by reason of their Littleness, (if there be any such thing) or else mere
Mathematical Points, which are not so much as Mentally Divisible: so that
Thousands of these Incorporeal Substances, or Spirits, might Dance together at
once upon a Needles Point. P. 656.
To which it was long since thus Replied by Plotinus, (...), God and all other
Incorporeal Substances, are not so Indivisible, as if they were Parvitudes, or
Little things, as Physical points; for so would they still be Mathematically
Divisible; nor yet, as if they were Mathematical Points neither, which indeed
are no Bodies nor Substances, but only The Termini of a Line. And neither of
these ways, could the Deity Congruere, with the world; nor Souls with their
respective Bodies, so as to be all present with the whole of them. Again he
writes particularly concerning the Deity thus, (...)^ P. 764.
-- (...). God is not so Indivisible as if he were the Smallest or Least of
things, for he is the Greatest of all, not in respect of Magnitude, but of
Power. Moreover as he is Indivisible, so is he also to be acknowledged
Infinite, not as if he were either a Magnitude or a Number, which could never
be past thorough; but because his Power is Incomprehensible. Moreover the same
Philosopher, condemns this for a Vulgar Error, proceeding from Sense and
Imagination, that whatsoever is Vnextended and Indistant, must therefore needs
be Little, he affirming on the contrary the Vulgar to be much mistaken, as to
True Greatness and Littleness, (...), P. 645.
We commonly looking upon this Sensible world as Great, wonder how that
(Indivisible and Unextended) Nature of the Deity, can every where comply and be
present with it. Whereas that which is Vulgarly called Great, is indeed Little,
and that which is thus Imagined to be Little, is indeed Great. For as much as
the whole of This diffuseth it self through every part of the other; Sent. p.
243.
or rather this whole Corporeal Universe, in every one of its parts, finds
that Whole and Entire; and therefore Greater than it self. To the same purpose
also Porphyrius, (...) (...), The Deity, which is the only true Being, is
neither Great nor Little, (For as much as Great and Little properly belong to
Corporeal Bulk or Magnitude) but it exceeds both the Greatness of every thing
that is Great, and the Littleness of whatsoever is Little (it being more
Indivisible and more One with it self, than any thing that is Little, and more
Powerful than any thing that is Great) So that it is above both the Greatest,
and the Least; it being found, all one and the same, by every Greatest and
every Smallest thing, participating thereof. Wherefore you must neither look
upon God, as the Greatest thing, (that is in a way of Quantity) for then you
may well doubt, how being the Greatest, He can be all of him present with every
Least thing, neither diminished nor contracted: nor yet must you Look upon him,
as the Least thing neither; for if you do so, then will you be at a loss again,
how being the Least thing, he can be present, with all the Greatest Bulks,
neither Multiplied nor Augmented. In a word, the Sum of their Answer amounts to
this, that an Incorporeal Vnextended Deity is neither a Physical Point, because
this has Distance in it, and is Mentally Divisible; nor yet a Mathematical
One; because This though having neither Magnitude nor Substance in it, has
notwithstanding Site and Position, a Point being according to Aristotle, a
Monad having Site and Position. It is not to be conceived as a Parvitude or
very Little thing, because then it could not Congruere, with all the Greatest
things; nor yet as a Great thing, in a way of Quantity and Extension, because
then it could not be All of it Present, to every Least thing. Nor does True
Greatness consist, in a way of Bulk or Magnitude, all Magnitude being but
Little, since there can be no Infinite Magnitude, and no Finite Magnitude can
have Infinite Power, as Aristotle before urged. And to conclude, though some
who are far from Atheists, may make themselves merry, with that Conceit, of
Thousands of Spirits, dancing at once upon a Needles Point, and though the
Atheists, may endeavor, to Rogue and Ridicule, all Incorporeal Substance in
that manner; yet does this run upon a clear Mistake of the Hypothesis, and make
nothing at all against it; for as much as an Vnextended Substance, is neither
any Parvitude, as is here supposed (because it has no Magnitude at all) nor
has it any Place, or Site, or Local Motion, properly belonging to it; and
therefore can neither Dance upon a Needles Point, nor any where else.

But in the next place, it is further Objected; That What is neither Great nor
Little, what possesses no Space, and has no Place nor Site amongst Bodies,
must therefore needs be an Absolute Nonentity, for as much as Magnitude or
Extension, are the very Essence of Being or Entity, as such; so that there can
be neither Substance nor Accident Unextended. Now since whatsoever is Extended,
is Bodily, there can therefore be no other Substance besides Body, nor any
thing Incorporeal, otherwise then as that word may be taken, for a Thin and
Subtle Body, in which Sense Fire was by some in Aristotle, said to be, (...);
The most Incorporeal of all the Elements; and Aristotle himself uses the word
in the same manner, when he affirms, that all Philosophers did define the
Soul, by Three things, Motion, Sense, and Incorporiety; several of those there
mentioned by him, understanding the Soul to be no otherwise Incorporeal, than
as (...), A Thin and Subtle Body. In answer to which Objection; we may remember
that Plato in the passage before cited, declares this to be but a Vulgar
Error, that whatsoever does not take up Space, and is in no Place, is Nothing.
He Intimateing the Original hereof, to have sprung, from men's adhering too
much to those Lower Faculties, of Sense and Imagination, which are able to
conceive Nothing, but what is Corporeal. P. 656.
And accordingly Plotinus; (...). Sense indeed, which we attending to,
disbelieve these things, tells us of Here and There; but Reason dictates, that
Here and There, is so to be understood of the Deity, not as if it were
Extendedly Here and There, but because every Extended thing, and the several
Parts of the World, partake every where of that, being Indistant and
Vnextended. To the same purpose Porphyrius, (...). p. 2^2.
(...), We ought therefore, in our Disquisitions concerning Corporeal and
Incorporeal Beings, to conserve the Property of each, and not to confound their
Natures. But especially to take heed, that our Fancy and Imagination, do not
so far impose upon our judgments, as to make us attribute to Incorporeals, what
properly belongs to Bodies only. For we are all accustomed to Bodies, but as
for Incorporeals, scarcely any one reaches to the knowledge of them; men
always fluctuating about them and diffiding them, so long as they are held
under the Power of their Imagination. Where afterward he propounds a Form
for this, How we should think of Incorporeals, so as not to Confound their
Natures with Corporeals; (...). That the Indistant and Vnextended Deity, is the
Whole of it present in Infinite Parts of the Distant World, neither Divided, as
applying part to part; nor yet Multiplied into many Wholes, according to the
multiplicity of those things that partake thereof. But the whole of it (One and
the same in Number) is present to all the Parts of the Bulkie World, and to
every one of those many things in it, Vndividedly and Vnmultipliedly; that in
the mean time partaking thereof Dividedly. It was granted therefore by these
Ancients, that this Vnextended and Indistant Nature, of Incorporeals, is (...),
a thing altogether Vnimaginable; and this was concluded by them, to be the only
Reason, why so many have pronounced it to be Impossible, because they attended
only to Sense and Imagination, and made them the only Measure of Things and
Truth; it having been accordingly maintained by diverse of them, (as Porphyrius
tells us) that Imagination and Intellection, are but Two different Names, P.
224. (...).
for one and the same thing; (...), There is a difference of Names only and no
more, betwixt Mind and Fancy. Fancy and Imagination in Rational Animals,
seeming to be the same thing with Intellection. But there are many things,
which no man can have any Phantasm or Imagination of, and yet are they
notwithstanding by all Unquestionably acknowledged for Entities or Realities;
from whence it is plain, that we must have some other Faculties in us, which
Extend beyond Fancy and Imagination. Reason indeed dictates, that whatsoever
can either Do or Suffer any thing, must therefore be undoubtedly Something: but
that whatsoever is Vnextended, and has no Distant Parts, one without another,
must therefore needs be Nothing, is no Common Notion, but the Spurious
Suggestion of Imagination only, and a Vulgar Error. There need to be no fear
at all, Lest a Being Infinitely Wise and Powerful, which Acts upon the whole
world; and all the Parts thereof, in Framing and Governing the same, should
prove a Nonentity, merely for want of Bulk and Extension, or because it Swells
not out into Space and Distance as Bodies do, therefore Vanish into Nothing.
Nor does Active Force and Power, as such, depend upon Bulk and Extension,
because then, whatsoever had the greater Bulk, would have the greater Activity.
There are therefore, Two kinds of Substances in the Universe, the First
Corporeal, which are Nothing but (...), Bulks, or Tumors, devoid of all
Self-Active Power; the Second Incorporeal, which are (...), Substantial Powers,
Vigours, and Activities; which though they act upon Bulk and Extension, yet are
themselves Vnbulkie and devoid of Quantity and Dimensions; however they have a
certain (...) in them in another sense, In Ar. Phys. p. 3.
an Essential Profundity, according to this of Simplicius, (...), All Corporeal
Substance, is simply Divisible, some Parts of it being here and some there, but
Intellectual Substance, is Indivisible, and without Dimensions, though it has
much of Depth and Profundity in it in another Sense. But that there is some
thing (...) Vnimaginable even in Body it self, is evident, whether you will
suppose it to be Infinitely Divisible or Not, as you must of necessity suppose,
one or other of these. And that we ought not always to pronounce of Corporeal
Things themselves, according to Imagination, is manifest from hence; because
though Astronomical Reasons, assure us, that the Sun is really more than a
Hundred Times bigger than the whole Earth, yet can we not possibly for all
that, Imagine the Sun of such a Bigness, nor indeed the Earth it self; half so
big as we know it to be. The reason whereof is, partly because we never had a
Sense or Sight of any such Vast Bigness at once, as that of either of them, and
partly because our Sense always representing the Sun to us, but (...), as of a
Foot Diameter, and we being accustomed always to Imagine the same according to
the Appearance of Sense, are not able to frame any Imagination of it, as very
much Bigger. Wherefore if Imagination be not to be Trusted, nor made the
Criterion or Measure of Truth, as to Sensible things themselves, much less
ought it to be, as to Things Insensible. Besides all which, the Ancient
Incorporealists, argued after this manner, that it is, as Difficult for us to
conceive, a Substance whose Duration is Vnextended or Vnstretched out in Time,
into Past, Present and Future, and therefore without Beginning; as that which
is Vnextended as to Parts, Place or Space, in Length, Breadth and Thickness;
yet does Reason pronounce, that there must needs be, not only a Duration
without Beginning, but also (...), a Timeless Eternity, or a Permanent
Duration, differing from that Successive Flux of Time; (which is one of Plato's
(...), Things Generated, or that had a Beginning) This Parity of Reason is by
Plotinus thus insisted on, P. 669.
(...), For the same reason, that we deny Local Extension, to the Deity, must
we also deny Temporal Distance to the same: and affirm that God is not in Time,
but above Time, in Eternity. For as much as Time, is always Scattered and
Stretched out in Length, and Distance, one moment following after another; but
Eternity remains in the same, without any Flux, and yet nevertheless outgoeth
Time, and transcendeth the Flux thereof, though seeming to be stretched and
spun out more into Length. Now the reason why we cannot frame a Conception of
such a Timeless Eternity, is only because our selves are Essentially Involved
in Time, and accordingly are our Conceptions Chained, Fettered, and Confined,
to that narrow and dark Dungeon, that our selves are Imprisoned in;
Notwithstanding which, our Freer Faculties, assuring us of the Existence of a
Being, which far transcendeth our selves, to wit, one that is Infinitely
Perfect; we have by means hereof, (...), a certain Vaticination, of such a
Standing Timeless Eternity, as its Duration.

But as for that Conceit, of Immaterial or Incorporeal Bodies; or, that God,
and Humane Souls, are no otherwise Incorporeal, then as (...), a Thin and
Subtle Body; such as Wind or Vapor, Air, or Ether; it is certain, that
according to the Principles of the most ancient Atomick Philosophy, (before it
was Atheized) there being no such Real Quality of Subtlety or Tenuity, (because
this is altogether Unintelligible) but this Difference arising wholly, from
Motion, Dividing the Insensible Parts, and every way Agitating the same,
together with a certain Contexture of those Parts; it is not Impossible but
that the Finest and most Subtle Body that is, might become as Gross, Hard,
Heavy, and Opake, as Flesh, Earth, Stones, Lead, or Iron; and again that the
Grossest of these Bodies, by Motion and a Different Contexture of Parts, might
not only be Crystalized, but also become as Thin, Soft, and Fluid as the Finest
Ether. So that there is no Specific Difference, betwixt a Thick and Thin, a
Gross and Fine, an Opake and Pellucide, and Hard and Soft Body, but Accidental
only; and therefore is there no reason, why Life and Understanding, should be
thought to belong to the one, rather than to the other of them. Besides which,
the Reasons of the ancient Incorporealists, (afterward to be produced) will
Evince that the Humane Soul and Mind, cannot possibly be any Body whatsoever,
though never so Fine, Thin, and Subtle; whose Parts are by Motion Dividable and
Separable from one another.

But it is further Objected against this Vnextended Nature, of Incorporeal
Substances, as they are said to be All in the Whole, and all in every Part of
that Body, which they are united to, or Act upon; that this is an Absolute
Contradiction and Impossibility; because if the Whole of the Deity, be in this
One Point of Matter, then can there be Nothing at all of it, in the Next
adjoining; but that must needs be another Whole, and Nothing the same with the
former. In like manner, if the whole Humane Soul, be in this one Part of the
Organized Body, then can there be none at all of it, in any other Part thereof;
and so not the Whole in the Whole, To which Objection, the ancient
Incorporealists, made this Twofold Reply. First, in way of Concession, That
this is indeed an Absolute Contradiction, for an Extended Substance, or Body,
to be All of it in every one Part or Point of that Space, En. 4. L. 7. p. 460.
which the whole occupies. Thus Plotinus; (...), It is Impossible for a Body,
or Extended Substance, to be one and the same, All of it in every Part of that
Space, which it possesses; and for every Part thereof, to be the same with the
Whole. But Secondly, as for an Vnextended and Indistant Substance, which has
no Parts one without another, it is so far from Being a Contradiction, that it
should be All of it in every Part of that Body, which it Acts upon; that it is
Impossible it should be otherwise, only a Part in a Part thereof; so that an
Equal Quantity of both, should Co-Exist together, because this is to suppose an
Vnextended Substance to be Extended. We say it is Contradictious to the Nature
of that Substance, which is supposed to be, (...), Devoid of Magnitude, and of
Quantity, and of Parts, Indistant, and Indivisible; that it should be otherwise
United to, or Conjoined with, an Extended Body, then after this way, which is
looked upon as such Conjuring; namely, that the Whole of it should be present
with, and Act upon every Part thereof. P. 662.
Thus Plotinus, (...), This Form of Doctrine, concerning Incorporeals, is
necessarily taken from the thing it self, (Viz. the nature of them as
Vnextended) and has Nothing in it Aliene from that Essence, as confounding the
Corporeal Nature therewith. Whatsoever is Vnextended and Indistant, cannot
possibly Co-Exist, with an Extended Substance, Point by Point, and Part by
Part, but it must of necessity be, (...), All of it, one and the same
Numerically; that is, (like it self) Vndividedly, in every Part of that, which
it Acts upon. Wherefore the word (...), in this Form, when it is said, that the
Whole Deity, is in every Part of the World, and the Whole Soul in every Part of
the Body, is not to be taken in a Positive sense, for a Whole consisting of
Parts, one without another, but in a Negative only, for (...), An Whole
Undivided; so that the meaning thereof is no more than this, that the Deity is
not Dividedly, in the World, nor the Soul Dividedly in the Body, a Part here,
and a Part There; but The (...), P. 662.
is (...), Every where, All of it, Vndividedly. Thus again Plotinus, (...)
(...). If therefore, God be every where: it cannot possibly be, that he should
be so Dividedly; because then himself would not be every where, but only a Part
of him Here, and a Part of him There, throughout the whole World; himself being
not one Undivided Thing. Moreover, this would be all one, as if a Magnitude
were Cut and Divided into many Parts, every one of which Parts, could not be,
that whole Magnitude. Lastly, this would be the very same, as to make God a
Body. Now if these things be Impossible; then must that so much Disbelievd
thing (looked upon as such a Puzzling Griphus, or rather as Contradictious
Nonsense) be an Undoubted Truth, according to the Common Notions of mankind;
that God is Every where; to wit, that He is All of him, the same Whole,
Undividedly, Every where. The sum of all is, That though it be an Absolute
Contradiction, for a Body, or Quantum, to be (...), All of it in every Part of
that Space, which the Whole is in; yet it is no Contradiction at all for an
Vnextended and Indistant Being, to be All of it Vndividedly, in every Part of
that Body, it Acts upon; but on the contrary, it would be statly Contradictious
to it; to say, that it is only Part of it in a Part; this being to Divide an
Indivisible thing, into Parts.

The Fourth and Last Objection, against Incorporeal and Vnextended Substance,
is from that Illocality, and Immobility, (which will follow thereupon) of
Humane Souls, and other Finite Particular Spirits, such as Demons or Angels;
That this is not only in it self very Absurd, to suppose these Finite and
Particular Beings, to be thus Illocal and Immovable; No where, and Every
where; (from whence it would seem to follow that they might Act the whole
Corporeal Universe, or take cognizance of all things therein Every where) but
also, that this Conceit is Contradictious to the Very Principles of
Religionists themselves, and plainly Confuted by the same; they acknowledging
Universally, that Humane Souls (at Death) departing out of this Body, do
Locally move from thence, into a certain other Place, Called Hades, Hell, or
Inferi. Now the Latter Part of this Objection is First to be Answered. And this
is indeed a thing, which the ancient Asserters of Incorporeal Substance, as
Vnextended, were not unaware of; That the Vulgarly Received Tradition, of
Humane Souls, (after Death) going into Hades, might be Objected against them.
For the Satisfying whereof, Plotinus suggesteth these Two Things; First, (...);
En. 6. L. 4. c.
That if by Hades be meant, nothing but (...) The Invisible, (as many times it
is) then is there no more signified by the Souls going into Hades, than its no
longer being Vitally united to this Earthy Body, and but Acting apart by it
self, and so has it nothing of Place necessarily included in it. Secondly,
(...); But if by Hades be understood, a Certain Worser Place, (as sometimes it
also is) What wonder is this? since now where our Body is, there in the same
place is our Soul said to be also? But you will Reply, how can this be, when
there is now no longer any Body left? We Answer, that if the Idol of the Soul
be not quite Separated from it, Why should not the Soul it self be said to be
there also, where its Idol is? Where by the Idol of the Soul Plotinus seems to
mean, an Airy or Spirituous Body, Quickened and Vitalized by the Soul, adhering
to it after death. But when the same Philosopher supposes, this very Idol of
the Soul to be also Separable from it, and that so as to subsist apart by it
self too, this going alone into Hades, or the Worser Place, whilst that lives
only in the Intelligible World (where there is no Place nor Distance) lodged in
the Naked Deity, having nothing at all of Body hanging about it, and being now
not A Part but the Whole, and so Situate nether here nor there; in this High
Flight of his, he is at once, both Absurdly Paradoxical, in dividing the Life
of the Soul as it were into Two, En. 4. L. 3. c. 4.
and forgot the Doctrine of his own School, which as himself elsewhere
intimates, was this, (...), That Our Soul, though it shall quit this Body, yet
shall it never be disunited from all Body. Wherefore Porphyrius answering the
same Objection, though he were otherwise much addicted to Plotinus, and here
uses his Language too, yet does he in this depart from him, adhering to the
ancient Pythagorick Tradition; which as will appear afterward, was this,
(...). p. 232.
That Humane Souls are always United to some Body or other. (...). As the Souls
being here upon Earth, (says he) is not its moving up and down upon it, after
the manner of Bodies; but its Presiding over a Body which moves upon the
Earth; so is its being in Hades, nothing but its presiding over that Idol, or
Enlivened Vaporo^^ Body, whose Nature it is to be in a Place, and which is of a
Dark Subsistence. Wherefore if Hades be taken for a Subterraneous and Dark
Place, yet may the Soul nevertheless, be said to go into Hades, because when it
quits this Gross Earthy Body, a more Spirituous and Subtle Body, collected from
the Spheres (or Elements) does still accompany it. Which Spirit being Moist and
Heavy, and naturally descending to the Subterraneous places, the Soul it self
may be said in this sense to go Under the Earth also, with it, not as if the
Substance thereof, passed from One Place to Another, but because of its
Relation and Vital Union to a Body which does so. Where Porphyrius adds,
contrary to the Sense of Plotinus; That the Soul is never quite Naked of all
Body; but has always some Body or other joined with it suitable and agreeable
to its own present Disposition (either a Purer or Impurer one.) But that at its
first Quitting, this Gross Earthly Body, the Spirituous Body, which
accompanies i^, (as its Vehicle) must needs go away Fouled and Incrassated
with the gross Vapors and steams thereof; till the Soul afterward by Degrees
Purging it self, this becomes at length A Dry Splendor, which has no Mysty
Obscurity, nor casts any Shadow.

But because this Doctrine of the Ancient Incorporealists, concerning the
Humane Souls being always, (after Death) United to some Body or other; is more
fully declared by Philoponus, P^eoem. in Aristot. D^ An.
then by any other, that we have yet met withal, we shall here excerp some
Passages out of him about it. First therefore, he declares this for his own
opinion, agreeable to the Sense of the best Philosophers; (...). That the
Rational Soul, as to its Energie, is separable from all Body; but the
Irrational Part or Life thereof, is Separable only from this Gross Body, and
not from all Body whatsoever; but has (after Death) a Spirituous or Aerie
Body, in which it acts; This I say is a True Opinion, as shall be afterward
proved by us. And again, (...). The Irrational Life of the Soul, has not all
its Being, in this Gross Earthy Body, but remains after the Souls Departure
out of it; having for its Vehicle and Subject, the Spirituous Body. Which it
self is also compounded out of the Four Elements, but receives its
Denomination from the Predominant Part, to wit Air: as this Gross Body of ours
is called Earthy, from what is most Predominant therein. Thus do we see, that
according to Philoponus, the Humane Soul after Death, does not merely exercise
its Rational Powers, and think only of Metaphysical and Mathematical Notions,
Abstract things, which are neither in Time nor Place, but exercises also its
Lower Sensitive and Irrational Faculties, which it could not possibly do, were
it not then Vitally United to some Body; and this Body then accompanying the
Soul, he calls Pneumatical, that is (not Spiritual in the Scripture-Sense, but)
Spirituous, Vaporous, or Airy. Let us therefore in the next place see, what
Rational Account, Philoponus can give of this Doctrine of the Ancients, and of
his Own Opinion agreeably thereunto, (...). Ibid.
Our Humane Soul, (in those who are not Purged and Cleansed in this Life) after
its departure out of this Body, is acknowledged, or rather Demonstrated, to go
into Hades, there to receive Punishment, for its evil Actions past. For
Providence does not only take Care of our Being, but also of our Well-Being.
Therefore is the Soul though lapsed into a Preter-Natural State, yet not
neglected by Providence, but has a Convenient Care taken of it; in order to
its Recovery. And since Sinning had its Original from the Desire of Pleasure,
it must of necessity be Cured by Pain. For here also Contraries are the Cures
of Contraries. Therefore the Soul being to be Purged, is Punished and Pained in
those Subterraneous Judicatories and Prisons, in order to its Amendment. But if
the Soul be Incorporeal, it is Impossible for it to Suffer. How then can it be
Punished? There must of Necessity be some Body joined with it: Which being
immoderately Constringed or Agitated, Concreted, or Secreted, and Discordantly
Moved, by Heat and Cold; or the like, may make the Soul sensible of Pain by
reason of Sympathy; as it is here in this Life. What Body therefore, is that
which is then Conjoined with the Soul, after the dissolution of that Earthy
Body, into its Elements? Certainly it can be no other, than this Pneumatical,
or Spirituous Body, which we now speak of. For in this are Seated, as their
Subject, the Irascible and Concupiscible Passions, and they are inseparable
from the same, nor could they be in the Soul, disunited from all Body. And that
Soul which is freed from these, would be forthwith freed from Generation; nor
would it be concerned in those Subterraneous Judicatories and Prisons, but be
carried up aloft, to the higher Celestial Regions, etc. After which he
endeavors further to confirm this Opinion, from the Vulgar Phenomenon, (...),
Furthermore, that there is such a Pneumatical (Spirituous, Vaporous, or Airy)
Body, which accompanies Souls Unpurged after Death; is evident also from the
Phenomenon themselves. For what account can otherwise be given, of those
Specter or Phantasms, which appear Shadow-like about Graves or Sepulchers?
since the Soul it self is neither of any Figure, nor yet at all Visible.
Wherefore these Ancients say, that Impure Souls after their departure out of
this Body, wander here up and down, for a certain space, in their Spirituous,
Vaporous, and Airy Body, appearing about Sepulchers, and haunting their former
Habitations. For which cause there is great reason, that we should take care of
Living Well; as also, of abstaining from a Fouler and Grosser diet; these
Ancients telling us likewise, that this Spirituous Body of ours, being fouled
and incrassated by Evil Diet, is apt to render the Soul, in this Life also,
more Obnoxious to the Disturbances of Passions. And here Philoponus goes on to
gratify us, with a further Account, of some other of the Opinions of these
Ancients, concerning this Spirituous or Airy Body, accompanying the Soul after
Death, (...), (...)^ They further add, that there is Something of the Plantal
and Plastic Life also, Exercised by the Soul, in those Spirituous or Airy
Bodies, after Death; they being Nourished too; though not after the same
manner, as these Gross Earthy Bodies of ours are here, but by Vapors; and that
not by Parts or Organs, but throughout the Whole of them, (as Sponges) they
imbibing every where those Vapors. For which cause, they who are wise, will in
this Life also, take care of using a Thinner and Dryer Diet, that so that
Spirituous Body (which we have also at this present time within our Grosser
Body) may not be Clogged and Incrassed, but Attenuated. Over and above which,
those Ancients made use of Catharms, or Purgations to the same end and purpose
also. For as this Earthy Body is washed by Water, so is that Spirituous Body
Cleansed by Cathartick Vapors; some of these Vapors being Nutritive, others
Purgative. Moreover these Ancients further declared, concerning this Spirituous
Body; that it was not Organized, but did the Whole of it, in every Part
throughout, exercise all Functions of Sense; the Soul Hearing, and Seeing, and
Perceiving all Sensibles, by it every where. For which Cause Aristotle himself,
affirms in his Metaphysics, That there is properly but One Sense, and but
One Sensory. He by this One Sensory meaning, the Spirit, or Subtle Airy Body,
in which the Sensitive Power, does all of it, through the Whole, immediately
apprehend all Variety of Sensibles. And if it be demanded, How it comes then to
pass, that this Spirit, appears Organized in Sepulchers, and most commonly of
Humane Form, but sometimes in the Form of some other Animals; to this those
Ancients Replied, That their appearing so frequently in Humane Form; proceeds
from their being, Incrassated with Evil Diet, and then as it were stamped upon,
with the Form of this Exterior Ambient Body, in which they are; as Crystal is
Formed and Colored, like to those things which it is fastened in, or Reflects
the Image of them. And that their having sometimes other different Forms,
proceeds from the Fantastic Power of the Soul, it self, which can at
pleasure transform this Spirituous Body into any shape. For being Airy, when it
is Condensed, and Fixed, it becomes Visible; and again Invisible, and
Vanishing out of Sight, when it is Expanded and Rarefied.

Now from these Passages cited out of Philoponus, it further appears, that
the Ancient Asserters of the Souls Immortality, did not suppose Humane Souls
after Death, to be quite stripped, Stark Naked from all Body; but that the
Generality of Souls, had then a certain Spirituous, Vaporous, or Airy Body,
accompanying them; though in different Degrees of Purity or Impurity,
Respectively to themselves. As also, that they conceived, this Spirituous Body,
(or at least something of it) to hang about the Soul also here in this Life,
before Death, as its Interior Indument or Vestment; which also then sticks to
it, when that other Gross Earthly Part of the Body, is by Death put off, as an
Outer Garment. And some have been inclinable to think (by reason of certain
Historick Phenomenon) these Two, to be things so distinct, that it is not
Impossible, for this Spirituous Body, together with the Soul to be Locally
separated from the other Grosser Body, for some time, before Death, and without
it. And indeed thus much cannot be denied, that our Soul Acts, not Immediately
only upon Bones, Flesh, and Brains, and other such like Gross Parts of this
Body, but first and chiefly upon the Animal Spirits; as the Immediate
Instruments of Sense and Fancy; and that by whose Vigor and Activity, the
other Heavy and Unwieldy Bulk of the Body, is so nimbly Moved. And therefore we
know no reason but we may assent here to that of Porphyrius, (...), That the
Blood is the Food and Nourishment of the Spirit, (that is, that Subtle Body
called the Animal Spirits) and that this Spirit is the Vehicle of the Soul, or
the more Immediate Seat of Life.

Nevertheless the same Philoponus there adds, that according to these
Ancients; besides the Terrestial Body, and this Spirituous and Airy Body too,
there is yet a Third kind of Body, of a Higher Rank then either of the Former,
(peculiarly belonging to such Souls after Death, as are Purged and Cleansed
from Corporeal Affections, Lusts, and Passions,) called by them. (...), and
(...), and (...), etc. A Luciform, and Celestial, and Ethereal Body. The Soul
(says he) continues either in the Terrestrial, or the Aereal Body, so long,
(...), Until that having Purged it self, it be carried aloft, and freed from
Generation. And then does it put off, both the Irascible and Concupisciple
Passions at once, together with this Second Vehicle, or Body, which we call
Spirituous. Wherefore these Ancients say, that there is another Heavenly Body,
always conjoined with the Soul, and Eternal, which they call Luciform, and
Star-like. For it being a Mundane thing, must of necessity have, some Part of
the World, as a Province allotted to it, which it may administer. And since it
is always Moveable, and ought always to Act, it must have a Body Eternally
conjoined with it, which it may always Enliven. And for these Causes do they
affirm, the Soul always to have a Luciform Body. Which Lucid and Etherial Body
of the Soul, is a thing often mentioned by other Writers also; as Proclus in
his Commentary upon the Timaeus, (...), P. 290.
The Humane Soul has also, (says he) such an Ethereal Vehicle belonging to
it, as Plato himself intim^t^s, when he affirms the Demiurgus at first to
have placed it in a Chariot. For of nec^ssity, every Soul before this Mortal
Body, must have an Eternal and easily Moveable Body, it being Essential to it
to move. And elsewhere the same Proclus, P. 164.
(...), Whilst we remain above, we have no need of these Divided Organs, which
now we have descending into Generation; but the Uniform Lucid or Splendid
Vehicle, is sufficient, this having all Senses United together in it. Which
Doctrine, of the Vnorganized Luciform, and Spirituous Vehicles, seems to have
been derived from Plato, he in his Epinomis, writing thus concerning a Good and
Wise man after Death; (...). Of whom, whether I be in Jest or Earnest, I
constantly affirm, that when dying he shall yield to Fate, he shall no longer
have this Variety of Senses, which now we have, but One Uniform Body, and live
a happy Life. Moreover Hi^rocles much insisteth upon this (...), this Luciform
and Ethereal Body, (...), Which also (says he) the Oracles call the Thin and
Subtle Vehicle, or Chariot of the Soul; he meaning doubtless by these Oracles,
the Magical or Chaldaick Oracles before mentioned. And amongst those now
Extant, under that Title, there seems to be a clear acknowledgment of these Two
Vehicula of the Soul, or Interior Induments thereof; the Spirituous, and the
Luciform Body, the latter of which, is there Enigmatically called (...), or a
Plain Superficies, in these words; (...), Take care, not to Defile or
Contaminate the Spirit; nor to make the Plain Superficies, Deep. For thus
Psellus glosseth upon that Oracle, (...)^ The Chaldaick Philosophers, bestow
upon the Soul, Two Interior Tunicles or Vestments, the one of which they
called, Pneumatical, or the Spirituous Body; which is weaved out as it were to
it, and compounded of the Gross Sensible Body (it being the more Thin and
Subtle part thereof) the other the Luciform Vestment of the Soul, Pure and
Pellucide, and this is that which is here called the Plain Superficies. Which,
says Pletho, is not so to be understood, as if it had not Three Dimensions
(for as much as it is a Body also) but only to denote the Subtlety and Tenuity
thereof. Wherefore when the aforesaid Hierocles also calls this Luciform and
Etherial Body, (...), The Spiritual Vehicle of the Rational Soul, he takes not
the Word (...), in that Sense, wherein it is used by Philoponus and Others; as
if he intended to confound this Etherial Body, with that other Spirituous or
Airy Body, and to make but one of them; but rather styles it Spiritual, in a
higher Sense, (and which comes near to that of the Scripture) as being a Body
more Suitable and Cognate, with that Highest and Divinest Part of the Soul,
Mind or Reason, then the other Terrestial Body is (which upon that account is
called also, by the same Hierocles, (as well as it is by St. Paul) (...), the
Animal or Natural Body.) So that this Spiritual Body of Hierocles, is not the
Airy* but the Etherial Body, and the same with Synesius his (...), His Divine
Body. And that this Distinction of two Interior Vehicles or Tunicles of the
Soul, besides that Outer Vestment, of the Terrestial Body, (styled in Plato
(...), the Crustaceous or Ostr^aceous Body) is not a mere Figment of the latter
Platonists since Christianity, but a Tradition derived down from Antiquity,
appears plainly from Virgil in his Sixth Aenead, where though not commonly
understood, he writes first of the Spirituous, or Airy Body, in which Unpurged
Souls, receive Punishment after Death, thus; Quin and Supremo cum Lumine Vita
reliquit,
Non tamen omne Malum miseris, nec funditus omnes
Corporeae excedunt pestes: penitusque necesse est
Multa diu concreta modis inolescere miris.
Ergo exercentur poenis, veterumque malorum
Supplicia expendunt; aliae panduntur inanes
Suspensae ad Ventos; aliis sub gurgite Vasto
Infectum eluitur Scelus, aut exuritur Igni.
And then again of the other Pure Ethereal and Fiery Body, in this manner,
Donec Longa dies perfecto temporis Orb,
Concretam exemit labem, Purumque reliquit
Aethereum Sensum, atque Aurai Simplicis Ignem.


Now as it was before observed, that the Ancient Asserters of the Souls
Immortality, supposing it to have besides this Terrestial Body, another
Spirituous or Airy Body, conceived this not only to accompany the Soul after
Death, but also to hang about it here in this Life, as its Interior Vest or
Tunicle; (they probably meaning hereby, the same with that which is commonly
called, the Animal Spirits, diffused from the Brain, by the Nerves, throughout
this whole Body) in like manner is it certain, that Many of them supposing, the
Soul besides those Two forementioned, to have yet a Third Luciform or Etherial
Body, conceived this in like manner, to adhere to it even in this Mortal Life
too, as its Inmost Clothing or Tunicle; yet so as that they acknowledged the
Force thereof, to be very much weakened and ab^ted, and its Splendor altogether
obscured, by the Heavy Weight, and Gross Steams or Vapors, of the Terrestial
Body. Thus Suidas ^po^ the Word (...), tells us out of Isidore, (...)^ That
according to some Philosophers, the Soul has a certain Luciform Vehicle,
called also Star- or Sun-like, and Eternal: which Luciform Body, is now shut up
within this Terrestrial Body (as a Light in a dark Lanthorn) it being supposed
by some of them, to be included within the Head, etc. With which agrees
Hierocles, (...), P. 293.
The Splendid or Luciform Body, lies in this Mortal Body of ours, continually
Inspiring it with Life, and containing the Harmony thereof. The ground of which
opinion was, because these Philosophers generally conceived, the Humane Soul to
have Pre-Existed, before it came into this Earthly Body, and that either from
Eternity, or else from the First beginning of the World's Creation; and being
never without a Body, and then in a Perfect State, to have had a Lucid and
Etherial Body, either Coeternal, or Co-Eve with it, (though in order of Nature
Junior to it) as its Chariot or Vehicle; which being Incorruptible, did always
inseparably adhere to the Soul, in its After- Lapses and Descents, into an
Aerial first, and then a Terrestrial Body; this being as it were the Vinculum
of Union, betwixt the Soul and them. Thus Pletho declares their Sense, (...),
By this Etherial Body, is our Humane Soul Connected, with its Mortal Body; the
whole thereof being Implicated with the whole Vital Spirit of the Embryo, for
as much as this it self is a Spirit also. But long before Pletho was this
Doctrine declared and asserted by Galen, Dug. Hip. and Plat. L. 7.
as agreeable both to Plato's and his own sense, He first Premising, that the
Immediate Organ or Instrument of Sight, was (...), a Luciform and Ethereal
Spirit, (...), etc. Wherefore we may reasonably affirm, that the Organ of
Sight, is a Luciform or Etherial Body; as that of Hearing is Aerial; that of
Smelling Vaporous; that of Taste Moist or Watery; and That of Touch Earthy; like
being perceived by like: And He accordingly thus understanding, those Known
Verses of Empedocles, which as Aristotle otherwise interprets them, are
Nonsense, (...), etc. And this was that which Empedocles meant to signify, in
those famous Verses of his; it being certain that by the most Earthy of our
Senses, the Touch, we perceive the Earthy Nature of Sensibles; and by the most
Luciform, viz. that of Sight, the Passions of Light; by that which is Aerial,
Sounds; by that which is Moist and Sponge-like, Tastes; and Lastly, by the Organ
of Smelling, which is the Extremity of those Former Cavities of the Brain, as
replenished with Vapors, Odours. After which he writes, of the Essence or
Substance of the Soul, in this manner, (...), And if we should now declare any
thing concerning the Essence or Substance of the Soul, we must needs affirm one
or other of these Two things; That either it self is this Luciform and Etherial
Body (which the Stoics whether they will or no, by consequence will be brought
unto, as also Aristotle himself) or else that the Soul is it self an
Incorporeal Substance, but that this Luciform Etherial Body, is its First
Vehicle, by which as a Middle, it communicates with the other Bodies. Wherefore
we must say, that this Etherial Lucid Body, is Extended throughout the whole
Brain; whence is that Luciform Spirit derived, that is the Immediate Instrument
of Sight. Now from hence it was, that these Philosophers, besides the Moral
Purgation of the Soul, and the Intellectual or Philosophical; recommended very
much a Mystical or Telestick way of Purifying, this Etherial Body in us, by
Diet and Catharms. P. 294.
Thus the forementioned Hierocles, (...), etc. Since to our Lucid or Splendid
Body, this Gross Mortal Body, is come, by way of Accession, we ought to Purify
the Former also, and free it from Sympathy with the Latter. And again
afterward, (...), Together with the Purgations of the Rational Soul, the
Purification of the Luciform or Etherial Vehicle, is also to be regarded, that
this being made Light, and Alate or Wingy, might no way hinder the Souls Ascent
upward: But he that endeavors, to Purify the Mind only, neglecting the Body,
applies not himself to the whole Man. Whereupon he concludes, (...), I
therefore call this the Telestick or Mystic Operation; which is Conversant
about the Purgation of the Lucid or Etherial Vehicle. And whereas Philosophy
was by Plato and Socrates Defined, to be a Continual Exercise of Dying (which
yet Pliny thought to be nothing but an Hypochondriacal or Atrabilarian
Distemper in them, in those words of his, which Salmasius and other Critics
can by no means understand, Est etiam quidam Morbus, Per Sapientiam Mori, That
the Dying by Wisdom or Philosophy, is also but a certain kind of Bodily
Disease, or Overgrown Melancholy) Though they supposed this principally to
consist, in a Moral Dying to Corporeal Lusts and Passions, yet was the design
thereof, partly Mystical and Telestick also, it driving at this further thing,
that when they should put off this Terrestrial Body, they might at once Dye
also, to the Spirituous or Aerial; and then their Soul have nothing left,
hanging about it, but only the Pure Etherial Body, its Light- winged Chariot:
which in Virgil's Language, is -- Purumque relinqui
Aethereum Sensum, atque Aurai Simplicis Ignem.


Notwithstanding which, the Pythagoreans and Platonists, seem not to have been
all of them of this Persuasion, that the same Numerical Etherial Body, which
the Soul was at first Created with, continues still about it, and adhereth to
it Inseparably to all Eternity, during its Descents, into other Grosser Bodies;
but rather to have supposed, that according to the Moral Disposition of the
Soul, it always finds or makes a Cognate and Suitable Body, Correspondently
Pure or Impure; and consequently, that by Moral Virtue and Philosophy, it might
again recover that Celestial Body, which was lost by its Fall and Descent
hither. This seems to have been Porphyrius his sense in these words of his,
(...) (...), However the Soul be in it self affected, so does it always find a
Body, suitable and agreeable to its present Disposition; and therefore to the
Purged Souls, does Naturally accrue a Body, that comes next to Immateriality;
that is, an Etherial one. And probably Plato was of the same Mind, when he
affirmed, the Soul to be always in a Body, but sometimes of one kind, and
sometimes of another.

Now from what has been declared, it appears already, that the most Ancient
Asserters of the Incorporiety and Immortality of the Humane Soul, supposed it
notwithstanding, to be Always Conjoined with a Body. Thus Hierocles plainly, P.
289.
(...), The Rational Nature, having always a Cognate Body, so proceeded from
the Demiurgus, as that neither it self is Body, nor yet can it be without Body,
but though it self be Incorporeal, yet its whole Form notwithstanding, is
Terminated in a Body. Accordingly whereunto, the Definition which he gives of a
Man, is this, (...), A Rational Soul, P. 290.
together with a Cognate Immortal Body; he concluding there afterward, that
this Enlivened Terrestrial Body, or Mortal man, is nothing but (...), The Image
of The True man, or an Accession thereunto, which is therefore Separable from
the same. Neither does he affirm this only of Humane Souls, but also of all
other Rational Beings whatsoever, Below the Supreme Deity, and Above Men; that
they always, Naturally Actuate a Body. Wherefore a Demon or Angel (which words
are used as Synonymous by Hierocles) is also Defined by him, after the same
manner, (...), A Rational Soul together with a Lucid Body. And accordingly
Proclus upon Plato's Timaeus, affirms, (...), That every Demon, Superior to
our Humane Souls, has both an Intellectual Soul, and an Ethereal Vehicle, the
Entireness thereof being made up or Compounded of these Two things. So that
there is hardly any other Difference left, betwixt Demons or Angels, and Men,
according to these Philosophers, but only this; That the Former are Lapsable,
into Aereal Bodies only, and no further; but the Latter into Terrestial also.
Now Hierocles positively affirms, this to have been the True Cabala, and
Genuine Doctrine of the Ancient Pythagoreans, entertained afterward by Plato;
(...), And This was the Doctrine of the Pythagoreans, which Plato afterward
declared; he resembling, Every both Humane and Divine Soul, (that is, in our
Modern Language, Every Created Rational Being) to a Winged Chariot, and a
Driver or Charioteer, both together: meaning by the Chariot, an Enlivened Body,
and by the Charioteer, the Incorporeal Soul it self Acting it.

And now have we given a full Account, in what manner the Ancient Asserters of
Incorporeal Substance as Vnextended, Answered that Objection against the
Illocality and Immobility of Particular, Finite Spirits; Demons or Angels, and
Humane Souls; that these being all Naturally Incorporate, however in Themselves
and Directly Immovable, yet were capable of being in some sense Moved, by
Accident, together with those Bodies, respectively, which they are Vitally
United to. But as for that Pretense; That these Finite Spirits, or Substances
Incorporeal, being Vnextended, and so having in themselves, no Relation to any
Place, might therefore Actuate and Inform the Whole Corporeal World at once,
and take Cognizance of all things therein; their Reply hereunto was; That these
being Essentially but Parts of the Universe, and therefore not Comprehensive of
the Whole; Finite or Particular, and not Universal Beings; (as the Three
Hypostases of the Platonic Trinity are) the Sphere of their Activity, could
not possibly Extend any further, than to the Quickening and Enlivening of some
certain Parts of Matter and the World, allotted to them; and thereby of
becoming Particular Animals; it being Peculiar to the Deity, or that
Incorporeal Substance, which is Infinite, to Quicken and Actuate All things.

But it would be no Impertinent Digression here, (as to the main Scope of our
Present Undertaking) should we briefly compare; the forementioned Doctrine and
Cabbala, of the Ancient Incorporealists, (the Pythagoreans and Platonists) with
that of Christianity; and consider the Agreement or Disagreement, that is
betwixt them. First therefore, here is a plain Agreement of these Best, and
most Religious Philosophers, with Christianity, in this; That the most
Consummate Happiness, and Highest Perfection, that Humane Nature is capable of,
consists not in a Separate State of Souls, stripped Naked from all Body, and
having no manner of Commerce with Matter; as some High-flown Persons in all
Ages have been apt to Conceit. For such amongst the Philosophers (and
Platonists too) was Plotinus; Vnevennes and Vnsafeness of whose Temper, may
sufficiently appear from hence; That as he conceived Humane Souls, might
possibly ascend to so high a Pitch, as quite to shake off Commerce with all
Body; so did he in the other hand again Imagine, that they might also Descend
and Sink down so low, as to Animate not only the Bodies of Bruits, but even of
Trees and Plants too; Two Inconsistent Paradoxes; the Latter whereof is a most
Prodigious Extravagancy; which yet Empedocles (though otherwise a Great Wit)
seems to have been guilty of also, from those Verses of his in Athenaeus; (...),
(...).
And amongst the Jews, the famous Maymonides was also of this Persuasion, it
being a Known Aphorism of his, in his Great Work, (...). That in the World to
Come, (or State of Consummate Happiness) there shall be nothing at all of Body,
but Pure Incorporeity. Upon which Account, being accused as a Denyer of the
Resurrection, (an Article as well of the Jewish, as of the Christian Faith) he
wrote that Book entitled Iggereth Teman, purposely to purge himself, and to
reconcile those Two Assertions together, which he does after such a manner; as
that there should be indeed a Resurrection, at the First Coming of the Jewish
Messiah, of some certain Persons, to live here a while upon the Earth, Eat and
Drink, Marry and be given in Marriage, and then die again; after which in the
World to come, they should for ever continue Pure Souls, Ununited to any Body.
In which, it may be well suspected, that the Design Maymonides drove at, was
against Christianity; which notwithstanding, as to this Particular, has the
Concurrent Suffrages of the best Philosophers, That the most Genuine and
Perfect state, of the Humane Soul, which in its own Nature is immortal, is to
continue for ever, not without, but with a Body. And yet our High-flown
Enthusiasts generally, (however calling themselves Christians) are such great
Spiritualists, and so much for the Inward Resurrection, (which we deny not to
be a Scripture-Notion also; As in that, of S. Paul, If ye be Risen with Christ,
etc. And again, If by any means I might attain to the Resurrection of the
Dead,) as that they quite Allegorize away, together with other Parts of
Christianity, the Outward Resurrection of the Body; and indeed will scarcely
acknowledge any Future Immortality, or Life to come after Death; their
Spirituality thus ending in Sadducism, and Infidelity, if not at length in
Downright Atheism, and Sensuality.

But besides this there is yet a further Correspondence, of Christianity, with
the forementioned Philosopbick Cabbala; in that the Former also supposes, the
Highest Perfection of our Humane Souls, not to consist in being Eternally
Conjoined, with such Gross Bodies, as these we now have, Unchanged and
Unaltered. For as the Pythagoreans and Platonists, have always Complained, of
these Terrestrial Bodies, as Prisons, or Living Sepulchers of the Soul; so does
Christianity seem to run much upon the same strain, in these
Scripture-Expressions; In this We Groan Earnestly, desiring to be Clothed upon,
with our House which is from Heaven: and again, We that are in this Tabernacle
do Groan, being burdened, not for that we would be Unclothed, (that is stripped
quite Naked of all Body) but so clothed upon, that Mortality might be
swallowed up of Life: and lastly, Our selves also which have the First Fruits
of the Spirit, Groan within our selves, waiting for the Adoption (Sonship or
Inheritance) namely, the Redemption of our Bodies. That is, the Freedom of them
from all those Evils and Maladies of theirs, which we herely oppressed under.
Wherefore we cannot think, that the same Heavy Load and Luggage, which the
Souls of good men being here burdened with, do so much groan to be delivered
from, shall at the General Resurrection, be laid upon them again, and bound
fast to them, to all Eternity. For of such a Resurrection as this, Plotinus,
(though perhaps mistaking it for the True Christian Resurrection) might have
some cause to affirm, that it would be but (...), A Resurrection to another
Sleep; the Soul seeming not to be Thoroughly Awake here, but as it were
Soporated, with the Dull Steams and Opiatick Vapors of this gross Body. For
thus the Author of the Book of Wisdom, The Corruptible Body presses down the
Soul, and the Earthly Tabernacle weighs down the Mind, that museth upon many
things. But the same will further appear, from that Account, which the
Scripture it self gives us, of the Resurrection; and First in General, when S.
Paul Answering that Querie, of the Philosophic Infidel, How are the dead
raised, or with what Body do they come? Replieth in this manner; Thou Fool
(that is, thou who think to puzzle or baffle, the Christian Article of the
Resurrection, which thou understandest not) That which thou sowest; is not
Quickened (to the Production of any thing) except it first die to what it was.
And thou sowest not that Body that shall be, but bare Grain as of Wheat, or of
Barley, or the like; but God (in the ordinary course of Nature) gives it a
Body, as it has pleased him, (that is, a Stalk, and an Ear, having many
Grains with Husks in it; and therefore neither in Quantity, nor Quality, the
same with that which was Sowed under Ground) Nor does he give to all Seeds, one
and the same kind of Body neither, but to every seed its own correspondent
Body; as to Wheat one kind of Ear, and to Barley another. As if he should have
said; Know that this Present Body of ours; is to be looked upon, but as a kind
of Seed of the Resurrection-Body, which therefore is accordingly, in some sense
the Same, and in some sense not the Same with it. Besides which General
Account, the Particular Oppositions, which the Scripture makes, betwixt the
Present and Future Body, seem very agreeable to those of the Philosophic
Cabala. For First, the Present Body, is said to be Sowed in Corruption, but the
Future Raised in Incorruption. For the Children of the Resurrection, cannot die
any more. And then Mortality shall be swallowed up of Life. Wherefore the
Christian Resurrection-Body, as well as that of the Philosophic Cabala, is
(...), and (...) too (2 Cor. 5.1.) an Immortal and Eternal Body. Again the Body
Sowed, is said to be a Dishonorable, Ignominious, and Inglorious Body, and
therefore called also by S. Paul, (...), The Body of our Humility, or
Humiliation; A Body agreeable to this Lapsed State of the Soul; But the Body
which shall be Raised, shall be a Glorious Body; and (...), Conformable to that
Glorious Body of Christ. Who when he was but Externally Transfigured, his Face
did shine as the Sun, and his Raiment was white as the Light. The Glory of a
Body, consists only in the Comeliness of its Proportion, and the Spendor
thereof; Thus is there one Glory of the Sun, and another Glory of the Moon, and
another Glory of the Stars, that is a different Splendour of them. Wherefore the
Future Body of the Righteous, according to the Scripture also, as well as the
Philosophic Cabala, will be (...), and (...), and (...), a Glorious, Splendid,
Luciform and Starlike Body, Wisd. 3.7. (...), The Righteous in the time of
their Visitation, shall shine forth. Daniel 12. the 2. and 3. They that be
wise, shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament; and they that turn many
to Righteousness, as the Stars for ever and ever. And Matthew the 13.43. Then
shall the Righteous shine forth as the Sun, in the Kingdom of their Father. And
therefore probably; this Future Glorious Resurrection Body, is that Inheritance
of the Saints in Light, which the Scripture speaks of, Col. 1. the 12.
Moreover, there is another difference betwixt this Present and that Future Body
of the Righteous, wherein S. Paul and Hierocles do well agree, the First being
called by both of them, (...), An Animal Body, The Second, (...), A Spiritual
Body. Which latter expression in Scripture, does not only denote, the Subtlety
and Tenuity thereof: but also as this Present Body is called an Animal Body,
because it is suitable and agreeable to that Animal Life, which men have Common
with Brutes; so is that Future called Spiritual, as bearing a fit proportion
and correspondency to Souls renewed in the Spirit of their Mind, or in whom the
Divine Spirit Dwells and Acts; exercising its Dominion. There is an Animal
Body, and there is a Spiritual Body. And, the First Adam was made a Living
Soul, the Last Adam a Quickening Spirit. And thus are (...) in the Scripture,
taken for (...), They who have not the Spirit. And (...), The Animal Man
receives not, the things of the Spirit of God. Which Spirit is also said in
Scripture, to be the Earnest of that our Future Inheritance, Ephesians the 1.
the 14. and the Earnest of this Spiritual and Heavenly Body, 2 Corinthians. the 5.
the 5. It is also said to be that, by which (Efficiently) these Mortal Bodies,
shall be Quickened, Romans the 8. the 11. If the Spirit of him, that raised up
Jesus from the dead, dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead,
shall also Quicken your Mortal Bodies, by his Spirit that dwells in you.
Neither does Hierocles fall much short of this Scripture Notion, of a Spiritual
Body, when he describes it to be that, (...), P. 297.
Which is Agreeable to the Intellectual Perfection of the Soul. This Spiritual
Body is that, which the Ancient Hebrews called, (...) Eagles Wings; We reading
thus in the Gemara of the Sanhedrin (c. 11. fol. 92. col. 2.) (...) If you Ask
what shall become of the Righteous, when God shall renew the world; the Answer
is; God shall make them wings like Eagles, whereby they shall fly upon the Face
of the Waters. Again, as this Present Body, is called in Scripture, an Earthly
Body, so is the Future Body of the Righteous, styled by S. Paul, as well as the
Pythagoreans, a Heavenly Body; and they who shall then be possessors thereof,
(...), Heavenly men, 1 Cor. 15. As is the Heavenly, such are they that are
Heavenly. Besides which, as Philosophers supposed, both Demons (or Angels) and
Men, to have one and the same, (...), and (...), or a like Lucid, Heavenly and
Etherial Body, so from that of our Savior, when he affirms, that they who
shall be accounted worthy to obtain that world and the Resurrection from the
dead, will neither Marry nor be given in Marriage; nor can die any more; for
they are (...) equal to the Angels; from hence I say, we may venture to call
this Resurrection-Body, of the Just, also, an Angelical, or Isangelical Body;
and the rather because, the Ancient Hebrews (as we learn from Nachmonides in
Shaar Haggemul) styled it (...) The Angelical Clothing of the Soul, and
Tertullian himself, Thus S. Austin. Corpora Angelica, and Qualia sunt Angelorum.
Angelificatam Carnem, Angelified Flesh. But Lastly, S. Paul is not only
Positive in his Doctrine here, but also Negative; Now this I say, brethren,
that Flesh and Blood cannot inherit the Kingdom of God, neither does Corruption
inherit Incorruption. Which Place being undoubtedly not to be Allegorized, it
may be from thence inferred, that the Happy Resurrection-Body, shall not be
this Foul and Gross Body of ours, only Varnished and Gilded over on the
outside of it, it remaining still Nasty Sluttish and Ruinous within, and having
all the same Seeds of Corruption and Mortality in its Nature, which it had
before, though by perpetual Miracle kept off, it being as it were by Violence
defended, from being Seized upon and devoured, by the Jaws of Death: but that
it shall be so Inwardly changed, in its Nature, as that the Possessers thereof,
Cannot die any more. But all this which has been said of the
Resurrection-Body, is not so to be understood, as if it belonged Universally,
to all that shall be Raised up at the last day, or made to appear upon the
Earth, as in their own Persons, at that Great and General Assizes; That they
shall have all alike, ( wicked as well as Good) such Glorious, Spiritual, and
Celestial Bodies; but it is only a Description of the (...), The Resurrection
of Life, which is Emphatically called also by our Savior Christ (...), The
Resurrection from the dead, or to a Happy Immortality; as they who shall be
thought worthy thereof, are likewise Styled by him, (...), The Children of the
Resurrection. Of which Resurrection only it is, that S. Paul treats in that
Fifteenth Chapter of his to the Corinthians. And we say, that this Christian
Resurrection of Life; is the Vesting and Settling of the Souls of Good men, in
their Glorious, Spiritual, Heavenly, and Immortal Bodies. The Complete
Happiness of a man, and all the Good that can be desired by him, Was by the
Heathen Poet thus Summed up, Vt sit Men's Sana in Corpore Sano, That there be a
Sound Mind in a Sound Body: and the Christian Happiness, seems to be all
comprised in these Two Things. First, in being Inwardly Regenerated and Renewed
in the Spirit of their Mind, Cleansed from all Pollution of Flesh and Spirit,
and made partakers of the Divine Life and Nature; and then Secondly, in being
Outwardly Clothed, with Glorious, Spiritual, Celestial, and Incorruptible
Bodies. The Scripture plainly declares, that our Souls are not at Home here,
in this Terrestrial Body, and These Earthly Mansions, but that they are
Strangers and Pilgrims there in it, which the Patriarchs also confessing,
plainly declared that they Sought a Country, not that which they came out from,
but a Heavenly one. From which passages of Scripture, some indeed would infer,
that Souls being at first Created by God Pure, Pre-Existed before this their
Terrene Nativity, in Celestial Bodies; but afterward stragled and wandered
down hither, as Philo for one, (...), Our Soul (says he) having left its
Heavenly Mansion, came down into this Earthly Body, as a strange place. But
thus much is certain, that Our Humane Souls were at first intended and designed
by God Almighty, the Maker of them, for other Bodies and other Regions; as
their proper Home and Country, and their Eternal Resting Place: however, to us,
that be not First, which is Spiritual, but that which is Natural, and
afterward that which is Spiritual. Now though some from that of St. Paul,
where he calls this Happy Resurrection-Body, (...), That house of ours that is
from Heaven, or which comes out of Heaven, would infer, that therefore, it
will not be taken, out of Graves and Charnel Houses; they conceiving also, that
the Individuation and Sameness of men's Persons, does not necessarily depend,
upon the Numerical Identity of all the Parts of Matter, because we never
continue thus the Same, our Bodies always flowing like a River, and passing
away by Insensible Transpiration, and it is certain, that we have not all the
same Numerical Matter, and neither more nor less, both in Infancy and in Old
Age, though we be for all that the self Same Persons: yet nevertheless
according to the best Philosophy, which acknowledges no Essential or Specifical
Difference of Matter, the Foulest and Grossest Body that is, merely by Motion,
may not only be Chrystallized, but also brought into the Purity and Tenuity of
the Finest Either. And undoubtedly, that Same Numerical Body of our Savior
Christ, which lay in the Sepulcher, was after his Resurrection thus
Transformed, into a Spiritual, and Heavenly Body; the Subtlety and Tenuity
whereof appeared, from his entering in when the doors were shut, and his
vanishing out of sight; however its Glory were for the time suspended, partly
for the better convincing his Disciples of the Truth of his Resurrection, and
partly because they were not then able to bear the Splendour of it. We conclude
therefore, that the Christian Mystery, of the Resurrection of Life, consists
not in the Souls being reunited to these Vile Rags of Mortality, these Gross
Bodies of ours (such as now they are) but in having them Changed into the
Likeness of Christ's Glorious Body, and in this Mortal's putting on Immortality.

Hitherto have we seen, the Agreement that is betwixt Christianity, and the Old
Philosophic Cabbala, concerning the Soul, in these Two Things. First, That the
highest Happiness and Perfection of the Humane Soul, consists not, in a State
of Pure Separation from all Body; and Secondly, that it does not consist
neither, in an Eternal Union with such Gross Terrestrial Bodies, as these
Unchanged; the Soul being not at Home, but a Stranger and Pilgrim in them, and
Oppressed with the Load of them: but that at last the Souls of Good men, shall
arrive at Glorious, Spiritual, Heavenly and Immortal Bodies. But now as to that
Point, Whether Humane Souls be always United to some Body or other, and
consequently when by Death they put off this Gross Terrestrial Body, they are
not thereby quite Divested, and Stripped Naked of all Body, but have a Certain,
Subtle and Spirituous Body, still adhering to them, and accompanying them? Or
else, Whether all Souls that have departed out of this Life, from the very
beginning of the World, have ever since continued, in a State of Separation
from all Body, and shall so continue forwards till the Day of Judgment or
General Resurrection? We must confess, that this is a thing not so explicitly
Determined, or expressly Decided in Christianity, either way. Nevertheless it is
First of all, certain from Scripture; That Souls Departed out of these
Terrestial Bodies, are therefore neither Dead nor Asleep, Death called Sleep in
Scripture, only (...).
till the Last Trump and General Resurrection; but still Alive and Awake; our
Savior Christ affirming, That they all Live unto God; the meaning whereof
seems to be this, that they who are said to be Dead, are Dead only unto Men
here upon Earth; but neither Dead unto themselves, nor yet unto God, their Life
being not Extinct, but only Disappearing to us, and withdrawn from our sight;
for as much as they are gone off this Stage which we still continue to act
upon. And thus is it said also, of our Savior Christ himself, and that after
his Resurrection too; That he Lives unto God (Romans the 6. the 10.) From
whence it is evident, that they who are said to Live to God, are not therefore
supposed to be less Alive, than they were, when they Lived unto men. Now it
seems to be a Privilege or Prerogative Proper to the Deity only, to Live and
Act alone, without Vital Union or Conjunction with any Body. Peri Arch. L.. 2.
Quaerendum, says Origin, Si Possibile est, penitus Incorporeas remanere
Rationabiles Creaturas, cum ad summum Sanctitatis ac Beatudinis venerint? An
necesse est eas semper Conjunctas esse Corporibus? It is worth our Enquiry;
Whether it be possible, for Rational Creatures, to remain Perfectly
Incorporeal, and Separate from all Body, when they are arrived to the Highest
Degree of Holiness and Happiness? Or Whether they be always of necessity
conjoined with some Bodies: And afterward he plainly affirms it to be
Impossible, Vivere praeter Corpus, Vllam aliam Naturam, praeter Patrem, and
Filium, and Spiritum Sanctum. For any other Nature, besides the Father, and the
Son, and Holy Ghost, to live quite without a Body. Indeed if this were most
Natural to the Humane Soul and most Perfective of it, to continue Separate from
all Body, then doubtless (as Origin Implied) should the Souls of Good men,
rather After the day of Judgment, continue in such a State of Separation, to
all Eternity. But on the contrary, If it be Natural to Souls, to Enliven and
Enform some Body or other, (though not always a Terrestrial one) as our Inward
Sense inclines us to think, then can it not seem so probable, that they should
by a kind of Violence, be kept so long in an Vn-Natural or Preter-Natural State
of Nakedness and Separation from all Body; some of them even from Adam till the
day of Judgment.

Again the Scripture also Intimates, that Souls Departed out of this Life, have
a Knowledge of one another, and are also capable of the Punishment of Sense or
Pain, Fear him (says our Savior) who After he has killed, has Power to cast
into Hell, Luke the 12. And the Soul of the Rich Man, is said to be immediately
after Death in Torments, before the Day of Judgment; as likewise to have Known
Abraham and Lazarus. And it seems neither agreeable to our Common Notions, nor
yet to Piety, to conclude, That the Souls of wicked men, departing out of this
Life, from the beginning of the world in their several Ages, till the Day of
Judgment, have all of them no manner of Punishment inflicted on them, save only
that, of Remorse of Conscience, and Future Expectation. Now it is not
conceivable, how Souls after Death should Know and be Knowable, and Converse
with one another, and have any Punishment of Sense or Pain inflicted on them,
were they not Vitally United to some Bodies. De An. p. ^09. Rigal.
And thus did Tertullian reason long ago; Dolet apud Inferos Anima cujusdam,
and Punitur in Flamma, and Cruciatur in Lingua, and de digito animae
foelicioris implorat Solatium Roris. Imaginem existimas, exitum illum Pauperis
Laetantis, and Divitis moerentis. Et quid illic Lazari nomen, si non in
veritate res est? Sed etsi Imago credenda est, testimonium erit veritatis. Si
enim non habet Anima Corpus, non caperet Imaginem Corporis. Nec mentiretur de
Corporalibus Membris Scriptura, si non erant. Quid est autem illud, quod ad
Inferna transfertur, post Divortium Corporis? quod detinetur, and in Diem
Judicii reservatur? Ad quod and Christus moriendo descendit? puto ad Animas
Patriarcharum? Incorporalitas Animae ab omni genere Custodiae libera est;
immunis a Poena and a Fovel^. Per quod enim Punitur aut Fovetur, hoc erit
Corpus. Igitur siquid Tormenti sive Solatii Anima praecepit in Carcere, vel
Diversorio Inferum, in Igni vel in Sinu Abrahae, probata erit Corporalitas
Animae. Incorporalitas enim nihil Patitur, non habens per quod Pati possit: aut
si habet, hoc erit Corpus. In quantum enim Omne Corporale Passibile est; in
tantum quod Passibile est Corporale est. We read in Scripture, of a Soul
Tormented in Hell, Punished with Flames, and desirous of a drop of water to
cool his Tongue. You will say perhaps, that this is Parabolical and Fictitious.
What then does the name of Lazarus signify there, if it were no Real thing?
But if it be a Parable never so much, yet must it notwithstanding, as to the
main, speak agreeably to Truth. For if the Soul (after Death) have no Body at
all, then can it not have any Corporeal Image, Shape, or Figure. Nor can it be
thought, that the Scripture, would Lie concerning Corporal Members, if there
were none. But what is that, which after its Separation from this Body, is
carried down into Hell, and there detained Prisoner, and reserved till the day
of Judgment? And what is that which Christ dying descended down unto, I suppose
to the Souls of the Patriarchs. But Incorporality is free from all Custody or
Imprisonment, as also devoid of Pain and Pleasure. Wherefore if Souls be
sensible of Pain after Death, and Tormented with Fire, then must they needs
have some Corporeity; for Incorporality suffers Nothing. And as every Corporeal
thing, is Passive or Patible, so again whatsoever is Passive is Corporeal.
Tertullian would also further confirm this, from a Vision or Revelation of a
certain Sister-Prophet, (Miracles and Prophecy, being said by him, not to be
then altogether Extinct,) Inter caetera ostensa est mihi Anima Corporaliter,
and Spiritus videbatur, Tenera and Lucida, and Aerii Coloris, Et Formae per
omnia Humanae; There was (said she) amongst other things, a Soul Corporally
Exhibited to my View, and it was Tender and Lucid, and of an Aereal Color, and
every way of Humane Form. Agreeably to which, Tertullian himself adds,
Effigiem non aliam Animae Humanae deputandam praeter Humanam, and quidem ejus
Corporis quod unaquaeque circuntulit. There is no other Shape to be assigned to
a Humane Soul, but Humane; and indeed that of the Body, which it before carried
about. It is true indeed, that Tertullian here drives the business so far, as
to make the Soul it self to be Corporeal, Figurate and Colorate, and after
Death, to have the very same Shape, which its respective Body had before in
this Life: he being one of those, who were not able to conceive of any thing
Incorporeal, and therefore being a Religionist, concluded God himself to be a
certain Body also. But the Reasons which he here insisteth on, will indeed
extend no further, than to prove, that the Soul has after Death, some Body
Vitally United to it, by means whereof, it is both capable of Converse, and
Sensible of Pain, for as much as Body alone, can have no Sense of any thing.

And this is that which Irenaeus, from the same Scripture gathers; not that
the Soul Is a Body, but that it Has a Body, after Death conjoined with it, and
that of the same Form and Figure, with that Body which it had before here in
this Life; L. 2. c. 62.
Plenissime autem Dominus docuit, non solum perseverare, non de corpore in
corpus transgredientes animas, sed and Characterem corporis, in quo etiam
adaptantur, custodire eundem; Et meminisse eas Operum quae egerunt hic, and a
quibus cessaverunt; in Enarratione quae scribitur de Divite and de Lazaro, qui
refrigerabatur in Sinu Abrahae; in qua ait Divitem cognoscere Lazarum post
mortem; Et manner in suo ordine unumquemque ipsorum; Our Lord has most plainly
taught us, that Souls do not only continue after Death, without passing out of
one Body into another, but also that they keep the Character of Body, wherein
they are then also adapted, the same which they had before; as likewise, that
they remember the Actions and Omissions of their Life past; in that Enarration,
which is written, concerning the Rich Man and Lazarus, who was refreshed in
Abraham 's bosom; wherein he affirms the Rich Man to have known both Lazarus
and Abraham after Death, as also each of them to remain in their own Order, And
thus again in the following Chapter; C. 63.
Per haec manifestissime declaratum est, and Perseverare Animas; and non de
corpore in corpus Exire; and habere Hominis Figuram; (ut etiam cognoscantur)
and meminisse eorum quae hic sint; and Dignam Habitationem Vnamquamque Gentem
percipere, etiam ante Judicium. By these things it is most manifestly declared,
that Souls do both Persevere after Death, and that they do not Transmigrate out
of one Body into another; and that they have a Humane Figure or Shape, (whereby
they may be known) as also that they remember the things here upon the Earth,
and their own Actions; and Lastly, that each kind of Good and Bad, have their
distinct and suitable Habitations assigned them, even before the Judgment. Now
that Irenaeus did not here mean, that Souls are themselves Bodily Substances,
and consequently, have a certain Character, Form, and Figure of their own, but
only that they have certain Bodies conjoined with them, which are Figurate; is
First of all evident, from the words themselves, Characterem corporis, in quo
etiam adaptantur, custodire Eundem, The Natural Sense whereof is this, That
they keep the Character of Body (wherein they are then also adapted, after
Death) the same with that which these Bodies before had here in this Life. And
it is further manifest from hence, because he else where plainly declares,
Souls themselves to be Incorporeal; as in his Fifth Book and Seventh Chapter,
Flatus autem Vitae Incorporalis est, But the breath of Life is Incorporeal.

Furthermore, Origin was not only of the same Persuasion, that Souls after
Death, had certain Subtle Bodies united to them, and that those Bodies of
theirs, had the same (...), Characterizing Form, which these their Terrestrial
Bodies before had; but also thinks, that this, together with the Souls
Immortality, may be sufficiently proved, from the frequent Apparitions of
Ghosts or Departed Souls; in way of opposition to Celsus, endeavoring to
invalidate the Scripture Testimonies, concerning the Apparitions of our Savior
Christ, and Imputing them either to Magical Imposture, or Fanatic Phrenzy, or
the Disciples mistaking their own Dreams and Phancies for Visions and
Sensations, after the Epicurean way; (...)^ Though this might seem to have been
smartly opposed by Celsus, yet are those very Apparitions of Ghosts
notwithstanding, a sufficient Argument or Proof of a certain Necessary Opinion,
that Souls do subsist after Death. Neither did Plato vainly conclude, the
Immortality and Permanency of the Soul, besides other things, from those
Shadow-like Phantasms of the Dead, that have appeared to many about Graves and
Monuments. Whereupon he gives this further account of these Apparitions,
(...)^ For these Apparitions of the Dead, are not mere Groundless Imaginations,
but they proceed from Souls themselves, really remaining and surviving after
Death, and subsisting in that which is called, a Luciform Body. Where
notwithstanding Origin, takes this (...), Or Luciform Body, in a Larger Sense,
than the Greek Philosophers were wont to do; namely so as to comprehend under
it, that Aerie or Vaporous Body also, which belongs to Unpurged Souls; who do
therein most frequently appear after Death; whereas it is thought proper to the
Purged Souls, to be clothed with the Luciform Body only. Besides which, the
same Origin tells us, that the Thing which St. Thomas the Apostle disbelieved,
was not our Savior's appearing after Death, as if he had thought it
Impossible, for Ghosts or Souls departed, Visibly to appear, but only his
Rising and Appearing in that same Solid Body, which had been before Crucified,
and was laid in the Sepulcher; (...), Thomas also, as well as the other
Apostles, assented to the woman affirming, that she had seen Jesus; as not
thinking it at all Impossible, for the Soul of a Dead man, to be Seen; but he
did not believe him to have Risen and Appeared, in that self same Solid Body,
which before he lived In; for which cause he said, not only, Unless I see him;
but added also, And Unless I shall put my finger into the print of the nails,
and thrust my hand into his side, I will not believe. Where again Origin
subjoyns, (...), -- (...), (...). These things were said by Thomas, not as
doubting at all, but that the Body of a Soul departed (to wit, Condensed) might
be seen with the Eyes of Sense, every way resembling that Form which it had
before in this Life, both in respect of Bigness, Figure, Color, and Voice; and
oftentimes also in the same Customary garments. Wherefore according to Origin,
the Jews were at that time Generally possessed with this Opinion, that Souls
after Death, had certain Bodies united to them, wherein they might Visibly
appear: neither is that of any great moment to the contrary, which a Learned
Critic objecteth, that Josephus writing of their Opinions, makes no mention
hereof: he omitting besides this, other Considerable Dogmata of theirs also, as
that of the Resurrection. However this at least is certain from hence that
Origin himself took it for granted, that Humane Souls departed, were not
altogether Naked or Unclothed, but Clothed with a certain Subtle Body, wherein
they could also Visibly appear, and that in their pristine Form.

Moreover, it might be here observed also, that when upon our Savior's first
Apparition to his Disciples, it is said, that they were affrighted, as
supposing, they had seen a Spirit; our Savior does not tell them, that a
Spirit or Ghost, had no Body at all, wherein it could Visibly appear; but (as
rather taking that for granted) that a Spirit had no Flesh and Bones, (no
(...)) no such Solid Body, as they might find him to have; bidding them
therefore, handle him; to remove that Scruple of theirs. As if he should have
said, Though Spirits, or Ghosts, and Souls Departed, have Bodies (or Vehicles)
which may by them be so far Condensed, as sometimes to make a Visible
appearance to the Eyes of men; yet have they not any such Solid Bodies, as
those of Flesh and Bone; and therefore by Feeling and Handling, may you
satisfy your selves, that I am not a mere Spirit, Ghost, or Soul, Appearing;
as others have frequently done, without a Miracle; but that I appear in that
very same Solid Body, wherein I was Crucified by the Jews, by miraculous Divine
Power, raised out of the Sepulcher, and now to be found no more there.
Agreeable to which of our Savior Christ, is that of Apollonius in
Philostratus, (...), Touch me and Handle me, and if you find me to avoid the
Touch, then may you conclude me to be a Spirit or Ghost, (that is, a Soul
departed) but if I firmly resist the same; then believe me Really to live, and
not yet to have cast off the Body. And indeed though Spirits or Ghosts, had
certain Subtle Bodies, which they could so far Condense, as to make them
sometimes Visible to men; yet is it reasonable enough to think, that they could
not Constipate or Fix them, into such a Firmness, Grossness, and Solidity, as
that of Flesh and Bone is, to continue therein; or at least, not without such
Difficulty and Pain, as would hinder them from attempting the same.
Notwithstanding which, it is not denied, but that they may possibly sometimes
make use of other Solid Bodies, Moving and Acting them, as in that famous Story
of Phlegons, where the Body Vanished not, as other Ghosts use to do, but was
left a Dead Carcass behind. Now as for our Savior Christ's Body, after his
Resurrection, and before his Ascension; which notwithstanding its Solidity in
Handling, yet sometimes Vanished also, out of his Disciples sight; this
probably, as Origin conceived, was purposely conserved for a time, in a certain
Middle State, betwixt the Cra^sities of a Mortal Body, and the Spirituality of
a Perfectly Glorified, Heavenly and Etherial Body.

But there is a place of Scripture, which as it has been interpreted by the
Generality of the Ancient Fathers, would Naturally Imply, even the Soul of our
Savior Christ himself, after his Death, and before his Resurrection, not to
have been quite Naked from all Body, but to have had a certain Subtle or
Spirituous Clothing, and it is this of St. Peter, (...), 1 Pet. 3.18, 19.
Which being understood by those Ancients, of our Savior Christ's descending
into Hades or Hell, is accordingly thus rendered in the Vulgar Latin, Of this
St. Austin, in his 12. Book, De Genesis ad Lit. c. 33. Et Christi quidem Animam
venisse usque ad ea loca in quibus peccatores cruciantur, ut cos solvent, quos
esse solvendos, occulto^ nobis sua justitia judicabat, non immerito creditur.
Put to Death In the Flesh, but Quickened in the Spirit. In which (Spirit) also,
he went and preached, to those Spirits, that were in Prison, etc. So that the
Word (...), or Spirit here, according to this interpretation, is to be taken,
for a Spirituous Body; the Sense being this, That when our Savior Christ was
put to death in the Flesh, or the Fleshly Body; he was Quickened in the Spirit,
or a Spirituous Body. In which (Spirituous Body) also, he went and preached to
those Spirits that were in Prison, etc. And doubtless it would be said, by the
Asserters of this Interpretation; that the word Spirit, could not here be taken
for the Soul of our Savior Christ; because this being Naturally Immortal,
could not properly be said to be Quickened, and Made Alive. Nor could He, that
is, our Savior Christ's Soul, be so well said, to go, In this Spirit neither,
that is, In it self, the Soul in the Soul, to preach to the Spirits in Prison.
They would add also, that Spirit here, could not be taken for the Divine Spirit
neither; which was the Efficient Cause of the Vivification of our Savior's
Body at his Resurrection; because then there would be no direct Opposition,
betwixt, Being put to Death in the Flesh, and, Quickened in the Spirit; unless
they be taken both alike Materially. As also the following Verse is thus to be
understood; That our Savior Christ, went in that Spirit, wherein he was
Quickened, when he was Put to Death In the Flesh, and therein preached to the
Spirits in Prison. By which Spirits in Prison also, would be meant, not Pure
Incorporeal Substances, or Naked Souls, but Souls Clothed with Subtle
Spirituous Bodies; as that word may be often understood elsewhere in Scripture.
But thus much we are unquestionably certain of; from the Scripture; That not
only Elias, whose Terrestrial Body, seems to have been, in part at least,
Spiritualized, in his Ascent in that Fiery Chariot, but also Moses, appeared
Visibly to our Savior Christ and his Disciples, upon the Mount, and therefore
(since Piety will not permit us to think this a mere Prestigious thing) in Real
Bodies; which Bodies also, seem to have been (...), Luciform or Lucid, like to
our Savior's then Transfigured Body.

Again, there are sundry places of Scripture which affirm that the Regenerate
and Renewed have here in this Life, a certain Earnest of their Future
Inheritance; which is, their Spiritual or Heavenly Body; as also the Quickening
of their Mortal Bodies is therein attributed, to the Efficiency of the Spirit
Dwelling in them. Which is a Thing that has been taken notice of by Some of
the Ancients, as Irenaeus; L. 5. c. 8.
Nunc autem Partem aliquam Spiritus ejus sumimus, ad Perfectionem and
Praeparationem Incorruptelae, paulatim assuescentes Capere and Portare Deum.
Quod and Pignus dixit Apostolus; hoc est, Partem ejus Honoris, qui a Deo nobis
promissus est -- Si ergo Pignus hoc habitans in nobis, jam Spirituales effecit,
and absorbetur Mortale ab Immortalitate. Now have we a Part of that Spirit, for
the Preparation and Perfection of Incorruption; we being accustomed by little
and little to Receive and Bear God. Which also the Apostle has called an
Earnest; that is, a Part of that Honor which is promised to us from God. If
therefore, this Earnest (or Pledge) dwelling in us, has made us already
Spiritual; the Mortal is also swallowed up by Immortality. And Novatian,
Spiritus Sanctus id agit in nobis, ut ad Aeternitatem and ad Resurrectionem
Immortalitatis, corpora nostra perducat, dum illa in se assuefacit cum Caelesti
Virtute misceri. This is that which the Holy Spirit does in us, namely to bring
and lead on our Bodies to Eternity and the Resurrection of Immortality; whilst
in it self it accustometh us, to be mingled with the Heavenly Virtue. Moreover
there are some places also, which seem to imply, that Good Men, shall after
Death, have a Further Inchoation of their Heavenly Body, the full Completion
whereof, is not to be expected before the Resurrection or Day of Judgment. We
know, that If our Earthly House of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a
Building of God, a House not made with hands, Eternal in the Heavens. For in
this we groan Earnestly. And Verse the 5. He that has wrought us for the self
same thing is God, who also has given us the Earnest of the Spirit. Now how
these Preludiums and Prelibations of an Immortal Body, can consist with the
Souls continuance after Death, in a Perfect Separation from all manner of Body,
till the Day of Judgment, is not so easily Conceivable.

Lastly, it is not at all to be Doubted, but that Irenaeus, Origin, and those
other Ancients, who entertained that Opinion, of Souls being Clothed after
Death, with a certain Thin and Subtle Body; suspected it not in the least, to
be Inconsistent, with that of the Future Resurrection: as it is no way
Inconsistent, for one who has only a Shirt or Wastcoat on, to put on a Suit of
Cloths, or Exterior Upper garment. Which will also seem the less strange, if
it be considered, that even here in this Life, our Body is as it were Two Fold,
Exterior and Interior; we having besides the Grosly-Tangible Bulk of our
Outward Body; another Interior Spirituous Body, the Souls Immediate
Instrument, both of Sense and Motion; which Latter is not put into the Grave
with the Other, nor Imprisoned under the Cold Sods. Notwithstanding all which,
that has been here suggested by us; we shall not our selves venture, to
determine any thing, in so great a Point; but Sceptically leave it Undecided.

The Third and Last thing, in the Forementioned Philosophic or Pythagorick
Cabbala, is concerning those Beings Superior to men, commonly called by the
Greeks, Demons, (which Philo tells us are the same with Angels amongst the
Jews, and accordingly are those words Demons and Angels, by Hierocles and
Simplicius, and other of the latter Pagan Writers, sometimes used indifferently
as Synonymous) viz. That these Demons or Angels, are not Pure, Abstract,
Incorporeal Substances, devoid of Vital Union with any Matter; but that they
consist of something Incorporeal, and something Corporeal, joined together; so
that as Hierocles writes of them, (...) (...), They have a Superior and an
Inferior Part in them; and their Superior Part is an Incorporeal Substance;
their Inferior Corporeal. In a word, that they all as well as men, consist of
Soul and Body, united together, there being only this Difference betwixt them,
that the Souls of these Demons or Angels, never descend down to such Gross and
Terrestrial Bodies, as Humane Souls do; but are always Clothed, either with
Aerial or Etherial ones. And indeed this Pythagorick Cabbala, was Universal,
concerning all Understanding Beings, besides the Supreme Deity, or Trinity of
Divine Hypostases; that is, concerning all the Pagan Inferior Gods; that they
are no other than Souls vitally united to some Bodies, and so made up of
Incorporeal, and Corporeal Substance, Joined together. For thus Hierocles
plainly expresses himself, in the forecited place; (...), etc. The Rational
Nature (in General) was so produced by God, as that it neither is Body, nor yet
without Body; but an Incorporeal Substance, having a Cognate or Congenit Body.
Which same thing was else where also thus declared by him, P. 17.
(...), The whole Rational Order, or Rank of Being, with its Congenite Immortal
Body, is the Image of the whole Deity, the Maker thereof. Where by Hierocles
his Rational Nature or Essence, and by the Whole Rational Order, is plainly
meant, all Understanding Beings Created, of which he acknowledges only these
Three Kinds and Degrees, First, the Immortal Gods, which are to him the
Animated Stars; Secondly, Demons, Angels, or Heroes; and Thirdly, Men, called
also by him, (...), Terrestrial Demons: he pronouncing of them all, that they
are alike, Incorporeal Substances, together with a Congenite Immortal Body; and
that there is no other Understanding Nature than such, besides the Supreme
Deity, which is Complete in it self, without the Conjunction of any Body. So
that according to Hierocles, the Ancient Pythagorick Cabbala, acknowledged no
such Entities at all, as those Intelligences of Aristotle, and the No's of some
High-flown Platonists; (that is, perfectly Unbodied Minds;) and much less any
Rank of Henades or Unities, Superior to these Noes. And indeed such Particular
Created Beings as these, could neither have Sense or Cognizance of any
Corporeal thing Existing without them; (Sense as Aristotle has observed,
Resulting from a Complication of Soul and Body, as Weaving, Results from a
Complication of the Weaver and Weaving Instruments:) nor yet could they Act
upon any Part of the Corporeal Universe. So that these Immovable Beings, would
be but like Adamantine Statues; and things Unconnected with the rest of the
World, having no Commerce with any thing at all but the Deity; a kind of
Insignificant Metaphysical Gazers, or Contemplators. Whereas the Deity though
it be not properly (...), a Mundane Soul, such as together with the Corporeal
World, as its Body, makes up one Complete and Entire Animal; yet because the
whole world proceeded from it, and perpetually depends on it, therefore must
it needs take Cognizance of all, and Act upon all in it; upon which account it
has been styled by these Pythagoreans, (...), (not a Mundane, but) a
Supra-Mundane Soul. Wherefore this Ancient Pythagorick Cabbala, seems to be
agreeable to reason also, that God should be the only Incorporeal Being, in
this sense, such whose Essence is Complete and Life Entire within it self,
without the Conjunction or Appendage of any Body: but that all other
Incorporeal Substances Created, should be Completed and Made up, by a Vital
Union with Matter; so that the whole of them, is neither Corporeal, nor
Incorporeal, but a Complication of both; and all the Highest and Divinest
things in the Universe, next to the Supreme Deity are Animals consisting of
Soul and Body united together. And after this manner, did the Ancient asserters
of Incorporeal Substance, as Unextended, decline that Absurdity Objected
against them, of the Illocality of all Finite Created Spirits, that these being
Incorporeal Substances, Vitally Clothed with some Body, may by reason of the
Locality and Mobility of their Respective Bodies, truly be said to be he Here
and There, and to Move from Place to Place.

Wherefore we are here also to show, what Agreement or Disagreement there is,
betwixt this Part of the Pythagorick Cabbala, and the Christian Philosophy. And
First, it has been already intimated, that the very same Doctrine, with this
of the Ancient Pythagoreans, was plainly asserted by Origin. Thus in his First
Book Peri Archon. c. 6. Solius Dei, (says he) id est Patris, and Filii, and
Spiritus Sancti, Naturae id proprium est, ut sine Materiali Substantia, and
absque Vlla Corporeae Adjectionis Societate, intelligatur subsistere. It is
proper to the Nature of God only, that is of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
to subsist without Material Substance; or the Society of any Corporeal
Adjection. Again, L. 2. c. 2. Materialem Substantiam Opinione quidem and
Intellectu solum Separari, a Naturis Rationalibus, and Pro ipsis, vel Post
ipsas Effectam videri; sed nunquam sine ipsa eas vel Vixisse, vel Vivere:
selius namque Trinitatis Incorporea Vita existere recte putabitur. Material
Substance in Rational Natures, is indeed Separable from them, in Conception and
Understanding, it seeming to be made for them, and in Order of Nature after
them; but it is not Really and Actually Separable from the same; nor did they
ever, or can they, live without it, For a Life perfectly Incorporeal, is
rightly deemed, to belong to the Trinity only. So also in his Fourth Book, and
his Anacephalaeosis, Semper erunt Rationabiles Naturae, quae indigent Indumento
Corporeo. Semper ergo erit Natura Corporea, cujus Indumentis Vti necesse est
Rationabiles Creaturas. Nisi quis putet se posse ostendere, quod Natura
Rationabilis absque Vllo Corpore, vitam degere possit. Sed quam difficile id
sit, and quam prope impossible Intellectui nostro, in Superioribus ostendimus.
There always will be Rational Natures, which stand in need of a Corporeal
Indument. Wherefore there will be always Corporeal Nature, as a necessary
Indument or Clothing for these Rational Creatures. Unless any one could show,
that it is possible for the Rational Nature to live without a Body. Which how
difficult and almost Impossible it is, to our Understanding, has been already
declared. Aquinas Affirms, Origin in this Doctrine of his, to have followed
the Opinion of certain Ancient Philosophers; and undoubtedly it was the Old
Pythagorick Cabbala, which the Learned Origin here adhered to; that (...), as
it is in Hierocles, and (...), The Rational Nature made by God, that is, all
Created Understanding Beings, are neither Body, nor yet without Body; but have
always a Cognate or Congenite Body, as their Vehicle or Indument. So that
Angels or Demons as well according to Origin, as Hierocles, are all of them
Incorporeal Substances, not Naked and Abstract, but Clothed with certain Subtle
Bodies; or Animals compounded and made up of Soul and Body together.

Wherefore Huetius and other learned men, seem not well to have understood
Origin here, but to have confounded Two different Opinions together, when they
suppose him, to have asserted, Angels and all Understanding Creatures, not, to
Have Bodies, but, to Be Bodies, and nothing else; and consequently, that there
is no Incorporeal Substance at all, besides the Deity, Whereas Origin only
affirms, that nothing besides the Trinity, could subsist and live alone,
absque ulla corporeae adjectionis Societate, without the Society of any
Corporeal Adjection, and that the Material Nature, is only a Necessary
Indument, or Clothing, of all Rational or Understanding Creatures. And in this
Sense is it, that an Incorporeal Life is said by him, to be proper only to the
Trinity: because all other Understanding Beings, are Animals, compounded of
Soul and Body together. But that Origin acknowledged, even our Humane Soul it
self, to be Incorporeal, as also that there is Something in Angels Incorporeal,
might be made evident from Sundry Passages in his Writings; as this
Particularly in his Sixth Book against Celsus, (...), etc. (...)^ We do not
think, an Incorporeal Substance to be Combustible; nor that the Soul of Man can
be resolved into Fire; or the Substance of Angels, Thrones, Dominions,
Principalities, or Powers. Where by the Substance of Angels, he doubtless meant
the Souls of them; Origen's Sense being thus declared by St. Jerome; In Libris
(...), Angelos, and Thronos, and Dominationes, and Potestates, and Rectores
Mundi and Tenebrarum, and omne Nomen quod nominatur, dicit, Animas esse little
Corporum, quae vel Desiderio vel ministerio susceperint, That in his Book of
Principles he affirms, Angels, and Thrones, and Dominions, and Powers, and
the Governors of the Darkness of this world, and every Name that is named (in
St. Paul) to be all of them, the Souls of certain Bodies, such as either by
their own Desire and Inclination, or the Divine Allotment, they have received.
Now there can be no Question made, but that he who supposed the Souls of men to
be Incorporeal, in a strict Philosophic Sense, and such as could not suffer
any thing from Fire, did also acknowledge Something Incorporeal in Angels. And
thus does he somewhere declare himself in that Book Peri Arechon, Per Christum
creata dixit (Paulus) omnia Visibilia and Invisibilia; per quod declaratur,
esse etiam in Creaturis quasdam Invisibiles, secundum proprietatem suam,
substantias; Sed hae quamvis ipsae non sunt Corporeae, utuntur tamen
Corporibus, licet ipsae sunt Corporea Substantia meliores. Illa vero Substantia
Trinitatis neque Corpus, neque In Corpore, esse credenda est: sed in toto
Incorporea. When Paul affirms all things, Visible and Invisible, to have been
Created by Cbrist, or the (...), he intimated that even amongst the Creatures,
there are some properly Invisible Substances. Which Invisible Substances
Created, though they be not Bodies, yet do they use Bodies, themselves being
better than Corporeal Substance. But the substance of the Trinity, is neither
Body, nor yet in Body, but altogether Incorporeal. Wherefore Angelical and
Humane Souls, are not as Huetius supposes, called Incorporeal by Origin, only
as Subtle Bodies sometimes are, by the more Simple and Unskilful; but in a
strict Philosophic sense; only he supposed them to differ from the Deity in
this, that though they be not Bodies, yet they are always In Bodies, or Clothed
with Bodies: whereas the Deity is in Both senses Incorporeal, it having not so
much as any Corporeal Indument. So that there is here no contradiction at all
to be found in Origin; he constantly asserting Angels, to have something
Incorporeal In them as their Superior Part, and not in that vulgar sense of a
Subtle Body, but in the Philosophic; nevertheless to Have also a Corporeal
Indument or Clothing, as their Out side, or Lower Part: and in that regard
only, He calling them Corporeal.

It is true indeed, that there were amongst the Ancient Fathers, some, who were
so far from supposing Angels to be altogether Incorporeal, that they ran into
the other Extreme, and concluded them to have Nothing at all Incorporeal in
them, but to be mere Bodies. But these either asserted, that there was no such
thing a^ all as any Incorporeal Substance, and that not only Angels, and Humane
Souls, but also God himself, was a Body: or at least they concluded, that
nothing Created was Incorporeal; and that God, though Himself Incorporeal, yet
could Create nothing but Bodies. These are here the Two Extremes, One, that
Angels have nothing Corporeal at all belonging to them: The Other, that they
are altogether Corporeal; or have Nothing Incorporeal in them: a Middle betwixt
both which, is the Origenick Hypothesis, the same with the Pythagorick; That in
Angels, there is a Complication of Incorporeal and Corporeal Substance both
together, or that they are Animals consisting of Soul and Body. We shall now
make it appear, that the Greater part of the Ancient Fathers, were for neither
of the Two forementioned Extremes; Either That Angels were wholly Incorporeal,
or that they were wholly Corporeal; but rather for the Middle Hypothesis, That
they Had Bodies, and yet Were not Bodies; But as other Terrestrial Animals,
Spirits or Souls, Clothed with Etherial or Aerial Bodies. And that the
Generality of the Ancient and most Learned Fathers, did not conceive Angels to
be mere Unbodied Spirits; is unquestionably Evident from hence, because they
agreed with the Greek Philosophers in that Conceit; that Evil Demons or Devils,
were therefore delighted with the Blood and Nidours of Sacrifices, as having
their more Gross, Aerie, and Vaporous Bodies nourished and refreshed with those
Vapors; which they did as it were Luxuriate and Gluttonize in. For thus does
Porphyrius write concerning them, in his Book De Abstinentia, (...)^ These are
they, who take pleasure in the Incense, Fumes, and Nidours of Sacrifices;
wherewith their Corporeal and Spirituous Part, is as it were Pinguified: for
this Lives and is Nourished by Vapors and Fumigations. And that before
Porphyrius, many other Pagan Philosophers, had been of the same Opinion,
appears from this of Celsus, Orig. L. 8.
(...), etc. We ought to give Credit to wise men, who affirm, that most of
these Lower and Circumterraneous Demons, are delighted with Geniture, Blood,
and Nidour; and such like things, and much gratified therewith: though they be
not able to do any thing more in way of recompense, then sometimes perhaps to
cure the Body; or to foretell good and evil Fortunes to Men and Cities. Upon
which account himself though a zealous Pagan, persuades men, to moderation in
the Use of these Sacrifices, as Principally gratifying the Inferior and Worser
Demons only. In like manner Origin frequently insisteth upon the same thing, he
affirming that Devils were not only delighted, with the Idolatry of the Pagans
in their Sacrifices, but also, Clnt. Cells. L. 7. p. 334.
(...), That their very Bodies were Nourished by the Vapors and Fumes, arising
from them; and that these Evil Demons therefore did as it were Deliciate and
Epicurize in them. And before Origin, most of the Ancient Fathers, as Justine
Martyr, Athenagoras, Tatianus, Tertullian, etc. and also many others after him,
endeavor to disparage those Material and Bloody Sacrifices, upon the same
Account, as things whereby Evil Demons were principally Gratified. We shall
here only cite one passage to this purpose out of St. Basil, or who ever were
the Author of that Commentary upon Isaiah, C. 1.
because there is something Philosophic in it; (...), Sacrifices are things of
no small pleasure and advantage to Demons, because the Blood being evaporated
by Fire and so attenuated, is taken into the Compages and Substances of their
Bodies: The whole of which is throughout, nourished with Vapors, not by
Eating, and Stomachs, or such like Organs, but as the Hairs and Nayls of all
Animals and whatsoever other things Receive nourishment into their whole
Substance. And thus do we see it undeniably manifest, that many of the Ancient
Fathers, supposed Devils to have Bodies; neither can it at all be doubted, but
that they concluded the same of Angels too; these being both of the same kind,
and differing but as Good and Evil men. And though they do not affirm this of
Good Angels, but of Devils only, that they were thus Delighted and Nourished
with the Fumes and Vapors of Sacrifices, and that they Epicurized in them; yet
was not the reason hereof, because they conceived them, to be altogether
Incorporeal; but to have Pure Etherial or Heavenly Bodies: it being proper to
those Gross and Vaporous Bodies of Demons only to be Nourished and Refreshed
after that manner. And Now that all these Ancient Fathers, did not suppose
either Angels or Devils, to be altogether Corporeal, or to have nothing but
Body in them, may be concluded from hence, because many of them plainly
declared the Souls of Men to be Incorporeal, and therefore it cannot be
imagined, that they should so far degrade Angels below Men, as not to
acknowledge them, to have any thing at all Incorporeal.

But we shall now Instance in some few amongst many of these Ancients, who
plainly asserted both Devils and Angels to be Spirits Incorporate; and not to
Be mere Bodies, but only to Have Bodies; that is, to consist of Soul and Body,
or Incorporeal and Corporeal Substance joined together. That Angels themselves
Have Bodies is every where declared by St. Austine, in his Writings; he
affirming, that the Bodies of Good men after the Resurr^ction, In Psalm. 85.
shall be Qualia sunt Angelorum Corpora, In Psalm. 145^
Such as are the Bodies of Angels, and that they shall be Corpora Angelica in
Societate Angelorum, Angelical Bodies, fit for Society and Converse with
Angels: and declaring the difference, betwixt the Bodies of Angels and of
Devils, De Genesis ad Lit. L. 3. c. 10.
in this manner, Daemones antequam transgrederentur, Coelestia Corpora
gerebant, quae conversa sint ex poena in Aeream Qualitatem, ut jam possint ab
Igne Pati, That though Devils before the Transgression had Celestial Bodies as
Angels now have, yet might these afterward in way of Punishment, be changed
into Aerial ones, and such as now may suffer by Fire. Moreover the same St.
Austin, some where calls Good Angels, by the name of Animae Beatae atque
Sanstae, Happy and Holy Souls. L. 2. c. 11.
And though it be true, that in his Retractations he recalleth and corrects
this; yet was this only a Scrupulosity in that Pious Father, concerning the
mere word, because he no where found in Scripture, Angels called by the name of
Souls: it being far from his meaning even there to deny them, to be Incorporeal
Spirits, joined with Bodies. And certainly he who every where concludes, Humane
Souls to be Incorporeal, cannot be thought to have supposed, Angels to have
nothing at all but Body in them. Again Claudianus Mamertus, writing against
Faustus, who made Angels to be mere Bodies, without Souls, or any thing
Incorporeal, maintains in way of Opposition; not that they are mere
Incorporeal Spirits, without Bodies (which is the other Extreme) but that they
consist of Corporeal and Incorporeal, Soul and Body, Joined together; he
writing thus of the Devils, Diabolus ex Duplici diversaque Substantia constat:
and Corporeus est and Incorporeus, The Devil consists of a double and
different Substance; he is Corporeal, and he is also Incorporeal. And again of
Angels, L. 3.
Patet Beatos Angelos, Vtriusque Substantiae, and Incorporeos esse in ea sui
part, qua ipsis Visibilis Deus; and in ea itidem Part Corporeos, qua
hominibus sunt ipsi Visibiles. It is manifest, that the blessed Angels, are of
a Twofold Substance; that they are Incorporeal, in that part of theirs wherein
God is Visible to them, and again Corporeal, in that other Part, wherein
themselves are Visible to men. Moreover Fulgentius writes concerning Angels in
this manner; L. 3. De Trin.
Plane ex Duplici eos esse Substantia asserunt Magni and Docti Viri. Id est, Ex
Spiritu Incorporeo, quo a Dei contemplatione nunquam recedunt; and ex Corpore
per quod ex tempore hominibus apparent.. Corpora vero Aetherea, id est, Ignea,
eos dicunt habere, Daemones vero Corpus Aereum. Great and learned men affirm,
Angels to consist of a Double Substance, that is, of a Spirit Incorporeal,
whereby they contemplate God; and of a Body whereby they are sometimes Visible
to men; as also that they have Etherial or Fiery Bodies, but Devils Aereal. And
perhaps this might be the meaning of Joannes Thessalonicensis, in that Dialogue
of his, read and approved of in the Seventh Council, and therefore the meaning
of that Council it self too, when it is thus declared, (...), etc. That the
Catholic Church acknowledges Angels, to be Intellectual, but not altogether
Incorporeal and Invisible; but to have certain Subtle Bodies, either Aerie or
Fiery. For it being there only denied, that they were Altogether Incorporeal,
one would think the meaning should not be, that they were Altogether Corporeal;
nor indeed could such an Opinion be fastened upon the Catholic Church; but
that they were partly Incorporeal, and partly Corporeal; this being also
sufficient in order to that design, which was driven at in that Council.
However Psellus, who was a Curious Enquirer into the Nature of Spirits,
declares it not only as his own Opinion, but also as agreeable to the Sense of
the Ancient Fathers, (...), That the Demoniack or Angelick kind of Beings, is
not altogether Incorporeal, or Bodiless, but that they are conjoined with
Bodies, or have Cognate Bodies belonging to them. Who there also further
declares the Difference, betwixt the Bodies of Good Angels and of Evil Demons,
after this manner, (...)^ P. 33.
The Angelical Body sends forth Rays and Splendours, such as would dazzle
Mortal Eyes, and cannot be born by them. But the Demoniack Body, though it
seems to have been once such also, (from Isaias his calling him that fell
from Heaven Lucifer) yet is it now Dark and Obscure, Foul and Squalid, and
grievous to behold, it being deprived of its Cognate Light and Beauty. Again
the Angelical Body, is so devoid of gross Matter, that it can pass through any
Solid thing, it being indeed more Impassible, than the Sunbeams; for though
these can Permeate Pellucid Bodies, yet are they hindered by Earthy and Opake,
and refracted by them; whereas the Angelical Body is such, as that there is no
thing so Imporous or Solid, that can resist or exclude it. But the Demoniack
Bodies, though by reason of their Tenuity, they commonly escape our sight, yet
have they notwithstanding Gross Matter in them, and are Patible, especially
those of them, which inhabit the Subterraneous places; for these are of so
Gross a Consistency and Solidity, as that they sometimes fall also under Touch,
and being stricken have a Sense of Pain, and are capable of being burnt with
Fire. To which purpose, the Thracian there adds more afterward from the
Information of Marcus the Monk, a person formerly Initiated in the Diabolick
Mysteries; P. 94.
and of great Curiosity, (...)^ The Demoniack Spirit or Subtle Body, being in
every part of it capable of Sense, does immediately See and Hear, and is also
Obnoxious to the affections of Touch: insomuch that being suddenly divided or
cut in two, it has a Sense of Pain, as the Solid Bodies of other Animals have;
it differing from them only in this, that those other Bodies, being once
discontinued, are not easily consolidated together again, whereas the Demoniack
Body, being divided, is quickly redintegrated by Coalescence, as Air or Water.
Nevertheless it is not without a Sense of Pain, at that time, when it is thus
divided, etc. Moreover the same Marcus affirms the Bodies of these Demons to
be Nourished also, though in a different manner, from ours, (...)^ They are
some of them Nourished by Inspiration, as the Spirit contained in the Nerves
and Arteries; others by sucking in the adjacent Moisture; not as we do by
mouths, but as Spunges and Testaceous Fishes. And now we may venture to
conclude, that this Opinion of Angels being not mere Abstract Incorporeal
Substances, and Unbodied Minds, but consisting of Something Incorporeal, and
Something Corporeal, that is, of Soul or Spirit, and Body Joined together, is
not only more agreeable to Reason, but has also had more suffrages amongst the
Ancient Fathers, and those of greater weight too, than either of those Two
other Extremes, viz. That Angels are mere Bodies, and have nothing at all
Incorporeal in them; or else, that they are altogether Incorporeal, without any
Bodily Indument or Clothing. Notwithstanding which this latter Opinion has
indeed prevailed most in these Latter Ages; Time being rightly compared to a
River, which quickly sinks the more Weighty and Solid things, and bears up only
the Lighter and more Superficial. Though there may be other Reasons given for
this also, as partly because the Aristotelick Philosophy when generally
introduced into Christianity, brought in its Abstract Intelligences along with
it; and partly because, some Spurious Platonists talking so much of their
Henades and Noes, their Simple Monads and Immovable Unbodied Minds, as the
Chief of their Generated and Created Gods; probably some Christians might have
a mind, to vie their Angels with them. And lastly, because Angels are not only
called in Scripture Spirits, but also by Several of the Ancients said to be
Incorporeal; whilst this in the mean time, was meant only either in respect of
that Incorporeal Part, Soul or Mind, which they supposed to be in them, or else
of the Tenuity and Subtlety of their Bodies or Vehicles. For this account does
Psellus give hereof, P. 30.33.
(...) (...)^ It is usual both with Christian Writers, and Pagans too, to call
the Grosser Bodies Corporeal, and those which by reason of their Subtlety avoid
both our Sight and Touch, Incorporeal. And before Psellus, Joannes
Th^ssalonicensis, in his Dialogue, approved in the Seventh Council; (...)^ If
you find Angels, or Demons, or Separate Souls called Sometimes Incorporeal, you
must understand this in respect of the Tenuity of their Bodies only; as not
consisting of the Grosser Elements, nor being so Solid and Antitypous as those
which we are now Imprisoned in. And before them both, Origin in the Proeme of
his Peri Archon, where citing a passage out of an Ancient Book, Entitled, The
Doctrine of Peter, wherein our Savior Christ is said to have told his
Disciples, That he was not (...), an Incorporeal Demon, though rejecting the
Authority of that Book; he thus interprets those words; non idem Sensus ex isto
sermon (...) indicatur, qui Graecis vel Gentilibus auctoribus ostenditur, quum
de Incorporea Natura a Philosophis disputatur. In hoc enim Libello, Incorporeum
Daemonium dixit, pro eo quod ipse ille quicunque est habitus vel circumscriptio
Daemonici Corporis, non est similis huic nostro Crassiori, vel Visibili
Corpori: sed secundum sensum ejus qui composuit illam Scripturam, intelligendum
est quod dixit; non esse tale Corpus quale habent Daemones, quod est
naturaliter Subtle, and velut Aura Tenue; and propter hoc vel imputatur a
multis vel dicitur Incorporeum; sed habere se Corpus Solidum and Palpabile. The
word (...), or Incorporeal, is not to be taken here, in that sense wherein it
is used, by the Greek and Gentile Writers, when they Philosophised concerning
the Incorporeal Nature. But a Demon is here said to be Incorporeal, because of
the Disposition of the Demoniack Body, not like to this Gross and Visible Body
of ours. So that the sense is, as if Christ should have said, I have not such a
Body, as the Demons have, which is naturally Subtle, Thin and Soft, as the Air,
and therefore is either supposed to be by many, or at least called Incorporeal,
but the Body which I now have, is Solid and Palpable. Where we see plainly that
Angels, though supposed to have Bodies, may notwithstanding be called
Incorporeal, by reason of the Tenuity and Subtlety of those Bodies,
comparatively with the Grossness and Solidity of these our Terrestrial Bodies.
But that indeed which now most of all inclines some to this Persuasion, That
Angels have nothing at all Corporeal hanging about them, is a Religious regard
to the Authority of the Third Lateran Council, having passed its Approbation
upon this Doctrine; as if the Seventh Ecumenical (so called) or Second Nicene,
wherein the contrary was before owned and allowed, were not of equal force, at
least to counterbalance the other.

But though this Doctrine of Angels, or all Created Understanding Beings
Superior to men, having a Corporeal Indument or Clothing, does so exactly
agree with the Old Pythagorick Cabbala, yet have we reason to think, that it
was not therefore merely borrowed or derived, from thence, by the Ancient
Fathers; but that they were led into it, by the Scripture it self. For first,
the Historick Phenomenon of Angels in the Scripture, are such, as cannot well
be otherwise Salved, than by supposing them to have Bodies; and then not to lay
any stress upon those words of the Psalmist, Who makes his Angels Spirits, and
Ministers a flame of fire (though with good reason by the Ancient Fathers
interpreted to this sense) because they may possibly be understood otherwise,
as sometime they are by Rabbinical Commentators: nor to insist upon those
passages of S. Paul, where he speaks of the Tongues of Angels, and of the Voice
of an Archangel, and such like, there are several other Places in Scripture,
which seem plainly to confirm this Opinion. As first, that of our Savior
before mentioned to this purpose, Luke the 20. the 35. They who shall be
accounted worthy, to obtain that world, and the Resurrection from the dead,
neither Marry nor are given in Marriage, neither can they die any more; for
they are Equal unto the Angels. For were Angels utterly devoid of all Bodies,
then would the Souls of Good men, in a State of Separation, and without any
Resurrection, be rather Equal to Angels, than after a Resurrection of their
Bodies. Wherefore the Natural meaning of these words seems to be this, De Genesis
ad Lit. L. 3.
(as St. Austin has interpreted them) that the Souls of Good men, after the
Resurrection, shall have Corpora Angelica, Angelical Bodies, and Qualia sunt
Angelorum Corpora, such Bodies as those of Angels are. Wherein it is supposed,
that Angels also have Bodies, but of a very different kind from those of ours
here. Again, that of St. Jude, where he writes thus of the Devils; The Angels
which kept not their First Estate (or rather according to the Vulgar Latin,
Suum Principatum, Their own Principality) but left their Proper Habitation (or
Dwelling House) has he reserved in everlasting Chains, under darkness, unto
the Judgment of the Great Day. In which words, it is first Implied, that the
Devils were Created by God Pure, as well as the other Angels, but that they
kept not (...), Their own Principality, That is, their Lordly Power and
Dominion over their Worser and Inferior part, they having also a certain
Duplicity in their Nature, of a Better and Worser Principle, of a Superior
Part, which ought to Rule and Govern, and of an Inferior, which out to be
Governed: nor is it indeed otherwise, easily conceivable, how they should be
Capable of Sinning. And this Inferior Part in Angels, seems to have a respect
to something that is Corporeal or Bodily in them also, as well as it has in
men. But then in the next place, St. Jude adds, as the Immediate Result and
Natural Consequent of these Angels Sinning, that they thereby Left or Lost,
(...), Suum Proprium Domicilium, That is, not only, their Dwelling Place at
Large, those Etherial Countries, and Heavenly Regions above, but also their
Proper Dwelling House, or Immediate Mansion; to wit their Heavenly Body. For as
much as that Heavenly Body, which Good men expect after the Resurrection, is
thus called by St. Paul, (...), Our Habitation, or Dwelling House that is from
Heaven. The Heavenly Body is the Proper House or Dwelling, Clothing or
Indument, both of Angelical and Humane Souls; and this is that which makes them
fit Inhabitants for the Heavenly Regions. This I say was the Natural effect and
Consequent of these Angels Sinning, their Leaving or Loosing, their Pure
Heavenly Body, which became thereupon forthwith Obscured and Incrassated; the
Bodies of Spirits Incorporate, always bearing a Correspondent Purity or
Impurity to the different disposition of their Mind or Soul. But then again, in
the last place, that which was thus in Part, the Natural Result of their Sin,
was also by the Just Judgment of God, converted into their Punishment; For
their Etherial Bodies, being thus changed into Gross, Aerial, Feculent, and
Vaporous ones, themselves were Immediately hereupon, as St. Peter in the
Parallel Place expresses it, (...), Cast down into Tartarus, and there
Imprisoned, or Reserved in Chains Under Darkness, until the Judgment of the
Great Day. Where it is observable that the word (...), used by St. Peter, is
the very same, that Apollodorus, and other Greek Writers frequently make use
of, in a like case, when they speak of the Titan's being Cast down from Heaven:
which seems to have been Really nothing else, but this Fall of Angels
Poetically Mythologized. And by Tartarus here in all probability, is meant this
Lower Caliginous Air, or Atmosphere of the Earth, according to that of St.
Austin, concerning these Angels, De Genesis ad Lit. L. 3. c. 10.
Post Peccatum in hanc sunt detrusi Caliginem, ubi tamen and Aer, That after
their Sin, they were thrust down down into the Misty darkness of this Lower
Air. And here are they, as it were Chained and Fettered also, by that same
Weight of their Gross and heavy Bodies, which first sunk them down hither, this
not suffering them to reascend up, or return back to those Bright Etherial
Regions above. And being thus for the present Imprisoned in this Lower
Tartarus, or Caliginous Air or Atmosphere, they are indeed here Kept and
Reserved in Custody, unto the Judgment of the Great Day, and General Assizes:
however they may notwithstanding in the mean time, seem to Domineer and Lord it
for a while here. And Lastly our Saviors, Go ye Cursed into everlasting fire,
prepared for the Devil and his Angels, seems to be a clear Confirmation of
Devils being Bodied; because First to Allegorize this Fire into nothing but
Remorse of Conscience, would endanger the rendering of other Points of our
Religion uncertain also; but to say that Incorporeal Substances Vnunited to
Bodies, can be tormented with Fire, is as much as in us lies, to expose
Christianity and the Scripture, to the Scorn and Contempt of all Philosophers,
and Philosophic Wits. P. 37.
Wherefore Psellus lays no small stress upon this Place, (...)^ I am also
convinced of this, That Demons have Bodies, from the words of our Savior
affirming, That they shall be Punished with Fire: which how could it be, were
they altogether Incorporeal? it being Impossible for that which is both it self
Incorporeal, and Vitally Vnunited to any Body, to suffer from a Body. Wherefore
of necessity it must be granted, by us Christians, that Devils shall receive
Punishment of Sense and Pain hereafter, in Bodies capable of Suffering.

Now if Angels in general, that is, all Created Beings Superior to men, be
Substances Incorporeal, or Souls Vitally United to Bodies; though not always
the same, but sometimes of one kind and sometimes times of another; and never
quite Separate from all Body; it may seem probable from hence, that though
there be other Incorporeal Substances besides the Deity, yet Vita Incorporea, a
Life perfectly Incorporeal in the forementioned Origenick Sense, or Sine
Corporeae Adjectionis Societate Vivere, to Live altogether without the Society
of any Corporeal Adjection, is a Privilege properly belonging to the Holy
Trinity only; and consequently therefore, that Humane Souls when by Death, they
are Divested of these Gross Earthly Bodies, they do not then Live and Act
Completely, without the Conjunction of any Body, and so continue till the
Resurrection or Day of Judgment: this Being a privilege which not so much as
the Angels themselves, and therefore no Created Finite Being, is capable of;
the Imperfection of whose Nature necessarily requires the Conjunction of some
Body with them, to make them up Complete, without which it is unconceivable,
how they should either have Sense or Imagination. And Thus does Origin
Consentaneously to his own Principles, Conclude, Cont. Cells. L. 7. P 353.
(...)^ Our Soul, which in its own Nature is Inco^poreal and Invisible, in
whatsoever Corporeal place it Existeth; does always stand in need of a Body,
suitable to the Nature of that place respectively. Which Body it sometimes
bears, having Put Off that which before was necessary, but is now
Superfluous, for the Following State; and sometimes again Putting On something,
to what before it had, now standing in need of some better Clothing, to fit it
for those more Pure Etherial and Heavenly places. But in what there follows, we
conceive that Origen's sense having not been rightly understood, his words have
been altered and perverted* and that the whole place ought to be read thus,
(...)^ The Sense whereof i^ this, The Soul descending hither into Generation,
Put on first, that Body which was useful for it whilst to continue in the Womb;
and then again afterward, such a Body as was necessary for it, to Live here
upon the Earth in. Again it having here a Two fold kind of Body, the one of
which is called (...) by St. Paul; (being a more Subtle Body, which it had
before) the other the Superinduced Earthly House, necessarily subservient to
this Schenos here; the Scripture Oracles affirm, that the Earthly House of this
Schenos, shall be corrupted or dissolved, but the Schenos it self, Superindue
or Put On a House not made with hands, Eternal in the Heavens: The same
declaring that the Corruptible shall put on Incorruption, and the Mortal
Immortality. Where it is plain, that Origin takes that (...) in St. Paul (1
Cor. 5.1.) for a Subtle Body, which the Soul had before its Terrene Nativity,
and which Continues with it after death; but in good men will at last
Superindue, or Put on (without Death) the Clothing of Immortality. Neither can
there be a better Commentary upon this place of Origin, than those Excerpta out
of Methodius the Martyr in Photius, though seeming to be Vitiated also; where,
as we conceive, the sense of Origin and his Followers, is first contained in
those words, (...), Thus Origin plainly in his Fifth Book, (p. 244.) That there
is (...)^ A difference, betwixt the Earthly House, in which The (...) is, that
will be dissolved; and the (...) it self, wherein good men groan, being
burdened, not that they would put it off, but put on Immortality upon it.
That in St. Paul the (...) is One thing; and the Earthly House of this (...)
Another thing; and We, that is, our Souls a Third thing, distinct from both..
And then it is further declared in this that follows, (...)^ That this short
Life of our Earthly Body being destroyed, our Soul shall then have before the
Resurrection, a dwelling from God; until we shall at last, receive it renewed,
restored, and so made an Incorruptible House. Wherefore in this we groan,
desirous not to put off, all Body, but to put on Life or Immortality upon the
Body which we shall then have. For that House which is from Heaven, That we
desire to put on, is Immortality. Moreover that the Soul is not altogether
Naked after Death, the same Origin endeavors to confirm further from that of
our Savior concerning the Rich Man and Lazarus, (...). The Rich man Punished,
and the Poor man refreshed in Abraham 's bosom, before, the Coming of our
Savior, and before the end of the world, and therefore before the
Resurrection, plainly teaches, that even now also after Death, the Soul uses a
Body. He thinks the same also to be further proved from the Visible
Apparition of Samuel's Ghost, (...), Samuel also visibly appearing after Death,
makes it manifest, that his Soul was then clothed with a Body. To which he
adds in Photius, (...), etc. That the Exterior Form and Figure of the Souls
Body after Death, does resemble that of the Gross Terrestrial Body here in this
Life. All the Histories of Apparitions, making Ghosts or the Souls of the Dead,
to appear in the same Form, which their Bodies had before. This therefore, as
was observed, is that which Origin understands, by (...) in St. Paul; not this
Gross Terrestial Body, but a certain Middle Body betwixt it, and the Heavenly,
which the Soul after Death, carries away with it. Now this Opinion of the
Learned Origens, was never reckoned up by the Ancient Fathers, or his greatest
Adversaries, in the Catalogue of his Errors; nor does Methodius the Martyr,
who was so great an Anti-Origenist, where he mentions this Origenick Opinion in
Photius, seem to tax it otherwise, then as Platonically Implying, the Soul to
be Incorporeal. Methodius himself on the contrary contending, not that the Soul
Has a Body conjoined with it after Death, as a distinct thing from it, but
that it self Is a Body; (...) (...), God is alone is praised as Incorporeal and
Invisible: but Souls are made by him, (who is the Father of all things)
Intellectual Bodies, ornamentally branched out (as it were) into Members
distinguishable by Reason, and having the same Form and Signature, with the
outward Body. Whence is it, that in Hades (or Hell) we Read of a Tongue, and a
Finger, and other Members, not as if there then were another Invisible Body
Coexisting with shese Souls, but because the Souls themselves are in their own
Nature (when stripped naked of all Clothing) according to their very Essence
such. We say therefore; if one of these two Opinions must needs be entertained,
that either the Soul it self Is a Body, or else that it Has a Body after
Death; the Latter of them which was Origens, ought certainly much to be
preferred before the Former, whether held in Tertullian's sense, that all
Substance, and consequently God himself, is Body; or else in that of Methodius,
that all Created Substance is such; God alone being Incorporeal.

But we have already showed, that Origin was not Singular in this Opinion,
Irenaeus before him having asserted the same thing, that Souls after Death, are
Adapted to certain Bodies, (where the word in the Greek probably was (...))
which have the same Character with these Terrestrial ones; and Philoponus after
him, who was no Pagan but Christian Philosopher, Dogmatizing in like manner. We
might here add, that Joannes Thessalonicensis, in that Dialogue of his, read in
the Seventh Synod, seems to have been of the same Persuasion also, when he
affirms of Souls* as well as Angels and Demons, that they were, (...), Often
seen by many Sensibly, in the Form of their own Bodies. However it is a thing,
which Psellus took for granted, where speaking of Devils, Insinuating their
Temptations into men's Souls, by affecting immediately the Fantastic Spirit,
he writes after this manner, P. 94.
(...)^ When one man speaks to another from afar off, he must (if he would be
heard) make a loud cry or noise, whereas if he stood near to him, he might
softly whisper into his ear. But could he immediately approach to the Spirit
(or Subtle Body of the Soul,) he should not then need so much as to make a
Whisper, but might silently and without noise, communicate whatsoever thoughts
of his own to him, by Motions made thereupon. And this is said to be the way,
that Souls, going out of these Bodies converse together; they communicating
their thoughts to one another without any Noise. For Psellus here plainly
supposes, Souls after Death, to have (...), that is, a certain Subtle Body,
adhering to them, by Motions upon which, they may silently converse with each
other. De Genesi ad Literam c 32.
It is true indeed, that St. Austin in his Twelfth Book De Genesi ad Literam,
does not himself close with this Opinion, of the Souls Having a Body after
Death, but much less of its Being a Body: nevertheless does he seem to leave
every man to his own Liberty therein, in these words; Si autem Quaeritur, dum
Anima de Corpore exierit, Vtrum ad aliqua loca Corporalia feratur, an ad
Incorporalia Corporalibus similia; an vero nec ad ipsa, sed ad illud quod and
Corporibus and Similitudinibus Corporum est Excellentius; Cito quidem
responderim; ad Corporalia loca eam vel non ferri nisi cum aliquo Corpore, vel
non localiter ferri. Jam utrum habeat aliquod Corpus, Ostendat qui Potest; Ego
autem non puto. Spiritalem enim arbitror esse non Corporalem, ad spiritalia
vero pro meritis fertur, aut ad Loca Poenalia similia Corporibus. But if it be
demanded, when the Soul goes out of this Body, whether it be carried into any
Corporal Places, or to Incorporals like to Corporals, or else to neither, but
to that which is more excellent than both Bodies, and the likenesses of Bodies;
the Answer is ready; that it cannot be carried to Corporal Places, or not
Locally carried any whither, without a Body. Now whether the Soul have some
Body, when it goes out of this Body, let them that can show: but for my part, I
think otherwise. For I suppose the Soul to be Spiritual and not Corporal, and
that after Death it is either carried to Spiritual things, or else to Penal
Places like to Bodies, such as have been represented to some in Ecstasies, etc.
Where St. Austin himself, seems to think, the Punishment of Souls after Death,
and before the Resurrection, to be Fantastical, or only in Imagination.
Whereas there could not be then so much as Fantastic Punishments neither, nor
any Imagination at all in Souls, without a Body; if that Doctrine of
Aristotle's be true, that Fancy or Imagination, is nothing else but a Weaker
Sense; that is, a thing which results from a Complication of Soul and Body both
together. But it is observable, that in the forecited place, that which St.
Austin chiefly opposed, was the Souls Being a Body, as Tertullian, Methodius,
and others had asserted; but as for its Having a Body, he says only this,
Ostendat qui potest, Let him that can show it; He granting in the mean time,
that the Soul cannot be Locally carried any whither at all after Death, nor
indeed be in any place, without a Body. However the same St. Austin, as he
elsewhere condemns, the Opinion of those, who would take the Fire of Hell
Metaphorically, acknowledging it to be Real and Corporeal; so does he somewhere
think it not improbable, but after Death, and before the Resurrection, De Civ.
D. Lib. 21. c. 26*
the Souls of men may suffer, from a certain Fire, for the consuming and
burning up of their dross, Post istius sane Corporis Mortem, donec ad illum
Veniatur, qui post Resurrectionem Corporum futurus est Damnationis and
Remunerationis Vltimus Dies; Si hoc temporis Intervallo, Ejusmodi Ignem
dicuntur perpeti quem non sentiant illi, qui non habuerint tales mores and
amores in hujus Corporis Vita, ut Eorum Ligna, and Faenum, and Stipula
Consumantur: alii vero sentiunt qui ejusmodi secum aedificiae portaverunt, etc.
non redarguo, quia forsitan Verum est. If in this Interval of Time, betwixt the
Death of the Body, and the Resurrection or Day of Judgment, the Souls of the
Dead be said to suffer such a Fire as can do no Execution, upon those who have
no Wood, Hay, nor Stuble to burn up; but shall be felt by such as have made
such Buildings or Superstructures, etc. I reprehend it not, because perhaps it
is True. The Opinion here mentioned, is thus Expressed by Origin, in his Fifth
Book against Celsus, which very place St. Austin seems to have had respect to,
C. Cells. L. ^.240.
(...)^ Celsus did not understand, That this Fire as well according to the
Hebrews and Christians, as to some of the Greeks, will be Purgatory to the
World; as also to every one of those persons, who stand in need of such
Punishment and Remedy by Fire; which Fire can do no Execution upon those, who
have no combustible Matter in them, but will be felt by such as in the Moral
structure, of their Thoughts, Words, and Actions, have built up Wood, Hay, and
Stuble. Now since Souls cannot suffer from Fire, nor any thing else in way of
Sense or Pain, without being Vitally United to some Body, we may conclude, that
St. Austin when he wrote this, was not altogether abhorrent, from Souls having
Bodies after Death.

Hitherto have we declared, How the Ancient Asserters of Incorporeal Substance,
as Vnextended, did repel the Assaults of Atheists and Corporealists made
against it; but especially, How they quitted themselves of that Absurdity, of
the Illocality and Immobility of Finite Created Spirits, by Supposing them
always to be Vitally United to some Bodies, and consequently, by the Locality
of those their respective Bodies, determined to Here and There: according to
that of Origin, C. Cells. L. 5.244.
(...), Our Soul stands in need of a Body, in order to Local Motions. We shall
in the next place declare, what Grounds of Reason there were, which induced
those Ancients, to assert and maintain a thing so repugnant to Sense and
Imagination, and consequently to all Vulgar Apprehension, as a Substance in it
self Vnextended, Indistant, and Indivisible, or Devoid of Magnitude and Parts.
Wherein we shall only represent the Sense of these Ancient Incorporealists, so
far as we can, to the best advantage, in order to their Vindication, against
Atheists and Materialists; our selves in the mean time, not asserting any
thing; but leaving every one that can, to make his own Judgment; and so either
to close with this, or that other following Hypothesis, of Extended
Incorporeals.

Now it is here observable, That it was a thing formerly taken for granted on
both sides, as well by the Asserters, as the Deniers of Incorporeal Substance,
That there is but One kind of Extension only; and Consequently that whatsoever
has Magnitude and Parts, or One Thing Without Another, is not only
Intellectually and Logically, but also Really and Physically Divisible or
Discerpible, as likewise Antitypous and Impenetrable; so that it cannot Coexist
with a Body, in the same Place, from whence it follows, that whatsoever
Arguments do evince, That there is some other Substance besides Body, the same
do therefore Demonstrate; according to the Sense of these Ancients, (as well
Corporealists as Incorporealists) that there is Something Vnextended; it being
supposed by them both alike, that whatsoever is Extended, is Body. Nevertheless
we shall here principally propound such Considerations of theirs, as tend
directly to Prove, That there is something Vnextendedly Incorporeal: And that
an Vnextended Deity is no Impossible Idea; to wit from hence, because there is
something Vnextended even in our very Selves. Where not to repeat the
forementioned Ratiocinacion of Simplicius, That whatsoever can Act and Reflect
upon its Whole Self, cannot possibly be Extended, nor have Parts Distant from
one another; Plotinus first argues after this manner, (...)^ P. 460.
What then will they say, who contend, that the Soul is a Body (or Extended?)
whether or no will they grant concerning every Part of the Soul in the same
Body (as that of it which is in the Foot, and that in the Hand, and that in the
Brain, etc.) and again every Part of those Parts, that each of them is Soul,
such as the Whole? If this be consented to, then is it plain, that Magnitude or
such a Quantity, would confer nothing at all, to the Essence of the Soul, as it
would do, were it an Extended Thing: but the Whole, would be in many Parts or
Places; which is a thing that cannot possibly belong to Body; That the same
Whole, should be in more; and That a Part, should be, what the whole is. But if
they will not grant, every Part of their Extended Soul, to be Soul, then
according to them must the Soul be Made up, and Compounded of Soul-less Things.
Which Argument is else where again thus propounded by him, En. 4. L. 7. c. 2.
(...)^ If every one of the Parts of this Extended Soul, or Mind, have Life in
it, then would any one of them alone be sufficient. But to say, that though
none of the Parts alone bave Life in them, yet the Conjunction of them
altogether, makes Life, is absurd; it being impossible, that Life and Soul
should result from a Congeries of Lifeless and Souless things; or that Mindless
things put together, should beget Mind. The sum of this Argumentation is this,
That either every part of an Extended Soul is Soul, and of an Extended Mind,
Mind; or not. Now if no Part of a Soul, as supposed to be Extended, alone be
Soul or have Life and Mind in it, then is it certain that the Whole resulting
from all the Parts, could have no Life nor Mind; because Nothing can (Causally)
come from Nothing. It is true indeed, that Corporeal Qualities and Forms,
according to the Atomick Physiology, result from a Composition and Contexture
of Atoms or Parts, each of which taken alone by themselves, have nothing of
that Quality or Form in them, -- Ne ex Albis Alba rearis;
Aut ea quae Nigrant, nigro de Semine nata.
You are not to think, that White things are made out of White principles, nor
Black things out of Black; but the Reason of the difference here is plain,
because these Qualities and Forms are not Entities Really distinct from the
Magnitude, Figure, Site, and Motion of Parts, but only such a Composition of
them, as cause different Phancies in us; but Life and Understanding, Soul and
Mind, are Entities Really distinct from Magnitude, Figure, Site, and Motion of
Parts, they are neither mere Phancies, nor Syllables of things, but Simple and
Uncompounded Realities. But if every supposed Part of a Soul be Soul, and of a
Mind, Mind; then would all the rest of it besides any One Part, be Superfluous:
or indeed every supposed Part thereof, would be the Same with the Whole; from
whence it follows, that it could not be Extended, or have any Real Parts at
all, since no Part of an Extended thing, can possibly be the Same with the
Whole.

Again the same Philosopher endeavors further to prove, that the Humane Soul
it self, is Vnextended and Indivisible, from its Energies and Operations, and
that as well those of Sensation as of Intellection, First therefore from
External Sensations, he Reasons in this manner, (...)^ P. 461.
That which percieveth in us, must of necessity be One thing, and by One and
the same Indivisible, perceive all; and that whether they be more things,
entering through several Organs of Sense, as the many Qualities of one
Substance; or One Various and Multiform thing, entering through the same Organ;
as the Countenance or Picture of a man. For it is not One thing in us, that
perceives the Nose, another thing the Eyes, and another thing the Mouth; but it
is one and the self same thing, that perceives all. And when one thing enters
through the Eye, another through the Ear, these also must of necessity come all
at last to one Indivisible, or else they could not be compared together, nor
one of them affirmed to be different from another? The several Sentiments of
them meeting no where together in One. He concludes therefore, that this One
thing in us, that sensibly perceives all things, may be resembled to the Center
of a Circle, and the several Senses, to Lines drawn from the Circumference,
which all meet in that one Center. Wherefore that which perceives and
apprehends all things in us, must needs be Really One, and the very same; that
is, Vnextended and Indivisible. Which Argument, is yet further pursued by him,
more particularly thus. If that which sensibly perceives in us, be Extended,
so as to have Distant Parts, one without another, then one of these Three
things must needs be affirmed; That either Every Part of this Extended
Substance of the Soul perceives a Part of the Object only; or every Part of it
the Whole Object, or else all comes to some One Point, which alone perceives,
both the several Parts of the Object, and the Whole, all the other, being but
as Circumferential Lines leading to this Center. Now of the Former of those
Three Plotinus thus; (...)^ If the Soul be a Magnitude, then must it be divided
together with the Sensible Object, so that one Part of the Soul must perceive
one Part of the Object, and another, another; and nothing in It, the Whole
Sensible: just as if I should have the sense of one thing, and you of another.
Whereas it is plain by our Internal Sense, That it is One and the Self same
thing in us, which perceives, both the Parts and the Whole. And of the Second,
he writes in this manner, (...)^ But if every Part of the Extended Soul,
perceive the Whole Sensible Object, since Magnitude is Infinitely Divisible,
there must be in every man Infinite Sensations, and Images of one and the same
Object. Whereas we are Intimately Conscious to our selves, That we have but
only One Sensation of One Object at the same time. And as for the Third and
Last Part of the Disjunction, That what Sensibly Perceives in every one, is but
One Single Point, either Mathematical or Physical. It is certain first that a
Mathematical Point, having neither Longitude, Latitude, nor Profundity, is no
Body nor Substance, but only a Notion of our own Mind, or a Mode of Conceiving
in us. And then as for a Physical Point or Minimum, a Body so Little that there
cannot possibly be any Less, Plotinus asserting the Infinite Divisibility of
Body, here explodes the thing it self. However he further intimates* that If
there were any such Physical Minimum, or Absolutely Least Body or Extensum,
this could not possibly receive upon it a Distinct Representation and
Delineation, of all the several Parts of a Whole Visible Object at once, as of
the Eyes, Nose, Mouth, etc. in a man's Face or Picture; or of the
Particularities of an Edifice: nor could such a Parvitude or Atom as this, be
the Cause of all Animal Motions. And this was one of Aristotl's Arguments,
whereby he would prove Vnextended Incorporeals, (...)^ If the Soul were
Indivisible as a Point, how could it Perceive, that which is Divisible? that
is, take notice of all the Distinct Parts of any Extended Object, and have a
Description of the whole of them at once upon it self? The Sum of the whole
Argumentation is this, That If the Soul be an Extended Substance, then must it
of necessity be either a Physical Point or Minimum, the Least Extensum that can
possibly be, (if there be any such Least, and Body or Extension be not
Infinitely Divisible) or else it must consist of more such Physical Points,
joined together. As for the former of these, it has been already declared to
be Impossible, that one Single Atom, or Smallest Point of Extension, should be
able distinctly to perceive all the variety of things: to which might be added,
That to suppose every Soul to be but one Physical Minimum, or Smallest
Extensum, is to imply such an Essential Difference in Matter or Extension, as
that some of the Points thereof, should be Naturally devoid of all Life, Sense,
and Understanding, and others again Naturally Sensitive and Rational. Which
Absurdity though it should be admitted, yet would it be utterly Unconceivable,
how there should come to be, One such Sensitive and Rational Atom in every man
and no more, and how this should constantly remain the same, from Infancy to
Old Age, whilst other Parts of Matter Transpire perpetually. But as for the
Latter; If Souls be Extended Substances, consisting of More Points, one without
another; all Concurring in every Sensation, then must every one of those
Points, either Perceive a Point and Part of the Object only, or else the Whole.
Now if every Point of the Extended Soul, Perceive only a Point of the Object,
then is there no One Thing in us, that Perceives the Whole; or which can
compare one Part with another. But if every Point of the Extended Soul,
Perceive the Whole Object at once, consisting of many Parts, then would there
be Innumerable Perceptions of the same Object in every Sensation; as many, as
there are Points in the Extended Soul. And from both those Suppositions, it
would alike follow, that no man is One Single Percipient or Person, but that
there are Innumerable distinct Percipients and Persons in every man. Neither
can there be any other Supposition made, besides those Three forementioned; as
That the whole Extended Soul, should Perceive both the Whole Sensible Object,
and All its several Parts, no Part of this Soul in the mean time having any
Perception at all by it self; because the Whole of an Extended Being, is
nothing but All the Parts taken together; and if none of those Parts have any
Life, Sense, or Perception in them, it is Impossible, that there should be any
in the Whole. But in very truth, to say that the Whole Soul Perceives all, and
no Part of it any thing; is to acknowledge it, not to be Extended, but to be
Indivisible; which is the Thing that Plotinus contends for.

And that Philosopher here further insists upon Internal Sensations also, and
that (...), or (...), That Sympathy, or Homopathy, which is in all Animals, to
the same purpose: It being One and the Same thing in them, which Perceives
Pain, in the most distant Extremities of the Body; as in the Sole of the Foot,
and in the Crown of the Head, and which moves one Part to succor and relieve
another laboring under it, which could not possibly be by Traduction of all,
to one Physical Point, as the Center, for diverse Reasons. P. 462.
(...)^ Since therefore these Sympathetick Senses, cannot possibly be made by
Traduction, at last to One thing; and Body being Bulkie or Out-swelling
Extension, One Part thereof Suffering, another cannot Perceive it, (for in all
Magnitude, This is One thing, and That Another) it follows, that what
Perceives in us, must be every where, and in all the parts of the Body, One and
the Same thing with it self. Which therefore cannot be it self Body, but must
of necessity be some other Entity or Substance Incorporeal. The Conclusion is,
that in Men and Animals, there is One thing Indivisibly the Same, that
Comprehends the Whole Outside of them, Perceives both the Parts, and the
Whole of Sensible Objects, and all transmitted through several Senses;
Sympathizeth with all the Distant Parts of the Body; and Acts entirely upon
all. And this is properly called, I My Self, not the Extended Bulk of the Body,
which is not One but Many Substances, but an Vnextended and Indivisible Unity,
wherein all Lines Meet, and Concentre, not as a Mathematical Point, or Least
Extensum; But as one Self-Active, Living, Power, Substantial, or Inside-Being,
that Contains, Holds, and Connecteth all together.

Lastly, the forementioned Philosopher endeavors yet further to prove, the
Human Soul to be Vnextended and Devoid of Magnitude, and Indivisible, from its
Rational Energies or Operations, its (...), and (...), Intellections of
Intelligibles, and Apprehensions of things Devoid of Magnitude, (...), For how
could the Soul (says he) if it were a Magnitude, Understand that which has no
Magnitude? and with that which is Divisible, Conceive what is Indivisible? Now
it is certain, that we have Notions of many things which are (...), altogether
Vnimaginable, and therefore have nothing of Length, Breadth, and Thickness in
them, as Virtue, Vice, Plot. p. 463.
etc. (...)^ Justice and Honesty, and the like, are things Devoid of Magnitude,
and therefore must the Intellections of them, needs be such too. So that the
Soul must receive these, by what is Indivisible, and Lodge them in that which
is Indivisible. We have also a Notion not only of mere Latitude or Breadth,
Indivisible as to Thickness; and of Longitude or a Line, Indivisible both as to
Breadth, and Thickness; but also of a Mathematical Point, that is every way
Indivisible, as to Length, Breadth, and Thickness. We have a Conception of the
Intension of Powers and Virtues, wherein there is nothing of Extension or
Magnitude. And indeed all the Abstract Essences of things, (or the (...)) which
are the First Objects of Intellection, are Indivisible: (...), etc. And though
we apprehend Forms that are in Matter too, yet do we Apprehend them as
Separated and Abstracted from the same; there being nothing of Flesh in our
Conception of a Man, etc. Nay, the Soul Conceives Extended things themselves,
Vnextendedly and Indivisibly; for as the Distance of a whole Hemisphere is
contracted into a narrow Compass in the Pupil of the Eye, so are all Distances
yet more contracted in the Soul it self, and there Understood Indistantly; For
the Thought of a Mile Distance, or of Ten thousand Miles, or Semidiameters of
the Earth, takes up no more Room in the Soul, nor Stretches it any more, than
does the Thought of a Foot or Inch, or indeed of a Mathematical Point. Were
that which perceives in us a Magnitude, then could it not be, (...), Equal to
every sensible, and alike perceive, both Lesser and Greater Magnitudes, than it
self: but least of all could it perceive, such things as have no Magnitude at
all. And this was the other Part of Aristotle's Argumentation, to Prove the
Soul and Mind to be Vnextended and Indivisible, (...); For how could it
perceive, that which is Indivisible, by what is Divisible? He having before
Demanded, How, is could apprehend things Divisible, and of a Great Extension,
by a mere Point or Absolute Parvitude. Where the Soul, or that which Perceives
and Understands, is according to Aristotle, neither Divisible, as a Continued
Quantity, nor yet Indivisible, either as a Mathematical, or as a Physical
Point, and Absolute Parvitude; but as that which has in it self, no
Out-Swelling Distance, nor Relation to any Place, otherwise than as it is
Vitally United to a Body; which, (where ever it be,) it always Sympathizes
with, and Acts upon.

Besides which, these Ancient Asserters of Vnextended Incorporeals, would in
all probability confirm that Opinion from hence; Because we can not only
Conceive Extension without Cogitation, and again Cogitation without Extension;
from whence it may be Inferred, that they are Entities Really Distinct, and
Separable from one another, (we having no other Rule, to Judge of the Real
Distinction and Separability of things then from our Conceptions) but also are
not able to Conceive Cogitation with Extension. We cannot conceive a Thought,
to be of such a certain Length, Breadth, and Thickness, Mensurable by Inches
and Feet, and by Solid Measures. We cannot Conceive Half, or a Third Part, or a
Twentieth Part of a Thought, much less of the Thought of an Indivisible Thing;
neither can we Conceive every Thought to be of some certain Determinate Figure,
either Round or Angular; Spherical, Cubical, or Cylindrical, or the like.
Whereas if whatsoever is Vnextended, be Nothing, Thoughts must either be mere
Non-Entities, or else Extended too, into Length, Breadth and Thickness;
Divisible into Parts; and Mensurable; and also (where Finite,) of a certain
Figure. And consequently all Verities in us (they being but Complex Axiomatical
Thoughts) must of necessity be Long, Broad, and Thick, and either Spherically
or Angularly Figurate. And the same must be affirmed, of Volitions likewise,
and Appetites or Passions, as Fear and Hope, Love and Hatred, Grief and Joy;
and of all other things belonging to Cogitative Beings, (Souls and Minds) as
Knowledge and Ignorance, Wisdom and Folly, Virtue and Vice, Justice and
Injustice, etc. that these are either all of them Absolute Non-Entities; or
Else Extended into Three Dimensions of Length, Breadth, and Profundity; and
Mensurable not only by Inches and Feet, but also by Solid Measures, as Pints
and Quarts: and last of all (where they are Finite as in men) Figurate. But if
this be Absurd, and these things belonging to Soul and Mind, (though doubtless
as great Realities at least, as the things which belong to Bodies) be
Vnextended, then must the Substances of Souls and Minds themselves be
Vnextended also. Thus Plotinus of Mind, (...), Mind is not Distant from it
self: and indeed were it so, it could not be One thing, (as it is) but Many;
every Conceivable Part of Distant and Extended Substance, being a Substance by
it self. And the same is to be said of the Humane Soul, though it Act upon
Distant Parts of that Body, which it is united to, that it self
notwithstanding, is not Scattered out into Distance, nor Dispersed into
Multiplicity, nor Infinitely Divisible; because then it would not be One Single
Substance, or Monade, but a Heap of Substances. Soul is no more Divisible, than
Life; of which the forementioned Philosopher thus, (...), Will you divide a
Life into two? then the whole of it being but a Life, the half thereof, cannot
be a Life. Lastly, if Soul and Mind, and the things belonging to them, as Life
and Cogitation, Understanding and Wisdom, etc. be Out-spread into Distance,
having one Part without another, then can there be no Good Reason given, why
they should not be, as well Really and Physically, as Intellectually Divisible;
and One Part of them Separable from another: since as Plotinus, (...), In all
Magnitude or Extension, This is One thing, and That Another. At least no Theist
ought to deny, but that the Divine Power, could Cleave, or Divide a Thought,
together with the Soul wherein it is into Many Pieces; and remove them to the
Greatest Distances from one another, (for as much as this implies no manner of
Contradiction, and whatsoever is Conceivable by us, may be done by Infinite
Power) in which case, neither of them alone, would be Soul or Mind, Life or
Thought, but all put together, make up one entire Mind, Soul, Life, and Thought.

Wherefore, the Sense of the Ancient Incorporealists, seems to have been as
follows. That there are in Nature, Two Kinds of Substances specifically
Differing from one another. The First (...), Bulks or Tumors, a mere Passive
Thing. The Second (...), Self-Active Powers or Virtues, or (...), the
Energetick Nature. The Former of these, is nothing else but Magnitude or
Extension, not as an Abstract Notion of the Mind, but as a Thing Really
Existing without it. For when it is called, Res Extensa, the meaning is not, as
if the Res were One thing, and the Extension thereof Another, but that it is
Extension, or Distance, Really Existing, or the Thing thereof (without the
Mind) and not the Notion. Now this in the Nature of it, is Nothing but Aliud
Extra Aliud, One thing without Another, and therefore perfect Alterity,
Disunity, and Divisibility. So that no Extensum whatsoever, of any Sensible
Bigness, is Truly and Really, One Substance, but a Multitude or Heap of
Substances, as Many as there are Parts into which it is Divisible. Moreover one
Part of this Magnitude, always Standing Without another, it is an Essential
Property thereof to be Antitypous or Impenetrable, that is, to Justle or
Shoulder out, all other Extended Substance from Penetrating into it, and
Co-Existing with it, so as to Possess and take up the same Room or Space. One
yard of Distance, or of Length, Breadth, and Thickness, cannot possibly be
added to another, without making the Whole Extension Double to what it was
before, since one of them must of necessity stand without the other. One
Magnitude cannot Imbibe or Swallow up another, nor can there be any Penetration
of Dimensions. Moreover Magnitude or Extension as such, is mere Outside or
Outwardness, it has nothing Within, no Self- Active Power or Virtue, all its
Activity, being either Keeping out or Hindering, any other Extended Thing, from
Penetrating into it: (which yet it does merely by its being Extended, and
therefore not so much by any Physical Efficiency, as a Logical Necessity,) or
else Local Motion, to which it is also but Passive; no Body or Extension as
such, being able to Move it self, or Act upon it self.

Wherefore were there no other Substance in the World besides this Magnitude or
Extension, there could be no Motion or Action at all in it; no Life,
Cogitation, Consciousness, No Intellection, Appetite or Volition (which things
do yet make up the Greatest part of the Universe) but all would be a dead Heap
or Lump: nor could any one Substance, Penetrate another, and Co-Exist in the
same Place with it. From whence it follows of necessity, that besides this
Outside Bulky Extension, and Tumourous Magnitude, there must be another kind of
Entity, whose Essential Attribute or Character, is Life, Self-Activity, or
Cogitation. Which first, that it is not a mere Mode or Accident of Magnitude
and Extension, is plain from hence, because Cogitation may be as well Conceived
without Extension, as Extension without Cogitation; whereas no Mode of any
thing can be Conceived without that whereof it is a Mode. And since there is
unquestionably, much more of Entity in Life and Cogitation, than there is in
mere Extension or Magnitude, which is the Lowest of all Being, and next to
Nothing; it must needs be Imputed, to the mere Delusion and Imposture of
Imagination, that men are so prone to think, this Extension or Magnitude, to be
the only Substance, and all other things besides, the mere Accidents thereof,
Generable out of it, and Corruptible again into it. For though that Secondary
and Participated Life, (as it is called) in the Bodies of Animals, be indeed a
mere Accident, and such as may be Present or Absent without the Destruction of
its Subject; yet can there be no Reason given, why the Primary and Original
Life it self, should not be as well a Substantial Thing, as mere Extension and
Magnitude. Again that Extension and Life, or Cogitation, are not Two Inadequate
Conceptions neither, of one and the self same Substance, considered brokenly
and by piecemeal; as if either all Extension had Life and Cogitation
Essentially belonging to it, (as the Hylozoists conclude) or at least all Life
and Cogitation had Extension; and consequently all Souls and Minds, and even
the Deity it self were, either Extended Life and Cogitation; or Living and
Thinking Extension (there being nothing in Nature Unextended; but Extension the
only Entity, so that whatsoever is devoid thereof, is ipso facto, Absolutely
Nothing) This, I say, will also appear from hence, because as has been already
declared, we cannot Conceive a Life or Mind or Thought, nor any thing at all
belonging to a Cogitative Being as such (as Wisdom, Folly, Virtue, Vice, etc.)
to be Extended into Length, Breadth, and Thickness, and to be Mensurable by
Inches, Feet, and Yards. From whence it may be concluded, that Extension, and
Life or Cogitation, are no Inadequate Conceptions of One and the self same
thing, since they cannot be Complicated together into one, but that they are
distinct Substances from each other. Lives and Minds, are such Tight and
Compact Things in themselves, and have such a Self-Vnity in their Nature, as
that they cannot be lodged, in that which is wholly Scattered out from it self
into Distance, and Dispersed into Infinite Multiplicity; nor be spread all over
upon the same as coextended with it. Nor is it conceivable, how all the several
Parts of an Extended Magnitude, should Jointly concur and contribute, to the
Production of One and the same Single and Indivisible Cogitation; or how that
whole Heap or Bundle of things, should be One Thinker. A Thinker, is a Monade,
or one Single Substance, and not a Heap of Substances: whereas no Body or
Extended thing, is One, but Many Substances, every Conceivable or Smallest part
thereof, being a Real Substance by it self.

But this will yet further appear, if we consider, what kind of Action
Cogitation is. The Action of an Extended Thing as such, is nothing but Local
Motion, Change of Distance, or Translation from Place to Place, a mere Outside
and Superficial thing; but it is certain, that Cogitation, (Fancy,
Intellection, and Volition) are no Local Motions; nor the mere Fridging up and
and down, of the Parts of an Extended Substance, changing their Place and
Distance; but it is Unquestionably, an Internal Energie; that is, such an
Energie as is Within the very Substance or Essence, of that which Thinks; or
in the Inside of it. From which Two kinds of Energies, we may now conclude,
that there are also Two kinds of Entity or Substance in Nature; the One mere
Outside, and which has Nothing Within it; the Other such a kind of Entity, as
has an Internal Energie; Acts From it self, and Within it self, and Upon it
self; an Inside Thing, whose Action is Within the very Essence or Substance
thereof. It being plain, that the Cogitative or Thinking Nature, is such a
thing, as has an Essential Inside or Profundity. Now this Inside of Cogitative
Beings, wherein they thus Act or Think Internally within themselves, cannot
have any Length, Breadth, or Thickness in it, because if it had, it would be
again a mere Outside thing. Wherefore had all Cogitative Beings, (Souls and
Minds) Extension and Magnitude never so much belonging to them, as some suppose
them to have, yet could this for all that, be Nothing but the mere Outside of
their Being, besides which, they must of necessity have also, an Vnextended
Inside, that has no Outswelling Tumor, and is not Scattered into Distance,
nor Dispersed into Multiplicity, which therefore could not possibly Exist a
Part in a Part, of the supposed Extension, as if one Half of a Mind or Thought,
were in One Half of that Extension, and another in another; but must of
necessity be All Vndividedly, both in the Whole of it, and in every Part. For
had every Twentieth or Hundredth Part of this Extensum, not the Whole of a Life
or Mind in it, but only the Twentieth or Hundredth Part thereof, then could
none of them have any true Life or Mind at all, nor consequently the Whole have
any. Nor indeed is it otherwise conceivable, how a whole Quantity of Extended
Substance should be One thing, and have One Personality, one I My Self in it
all, were there not One Indivisible thing, Presiding over it, which Held it all
together, and Diffused it self thorough all. And thus do we see, how this Whole
in the Whole and in every Part (do men what they can) will like a Ghost still
haunt them, and follow them every where. But now it is Impossible, that One and
the self same Substance, should be both Extended and Vnextended. Wherefore in
this Hypothesis of Extended Understanding Spirits, having One Part without
Another, there is an Undiscerned Complication of Two Distinct Substances,
Extended and Vnextended, or Corporeal and Incorporeal, both together; and a
Confusion of them into One. Where notwithstanding, we must acknowledge, that
there is so much of Truth aimed at; as that all Finite Incorporeal Substances,
are always Naturally united to Some Bodies, so that the Whole of these Created
Animals, is Completed and Made up of Both these together, an Extended Inside,
and an Vnextended Outside; both of them Substances indeed Really distinct, but
yet Vitally United, each to other.

The Sum of all is, That there are Two kinds of Substances in Nature, the First
Extension or Magnitude, Really Existing without the Mind, which is a thing that
has no Self-Vnity at all in it, but is Infinite Alterity and Divisibility, as
it is also mere Outside and Outwardness, it having nothing Within; nor any
other Action belonging to it, but only Locally to Move, when it is Moved. The
Second, Life and Mind; or the Self Active Cogitative Nature, an Inside Being,
whose Action is not Local Motion, but an Internal Energy, Within the Substance
or Essence of the Thinker himself, or in the Inside of him; which therefore
(though Vnextended, yet) has a certain Inward Recess, (...), or Essential
Profundity. And this is a thing which can Act all of it Entirely, upon either a
Greater or Lesser Quantity of Extended Substance or Body, and its Several
Parts, Penetrating into it, and Co-existing in the same Place with it.
Wherefore it is not to be looked upon, either as a Mathematical, or as a
Physical Point, as an Absolute Parvitude or the Least Extensum possible; it
having not only such an Essential Inside, Bathos, or Profundity in it, wherein
it Acts and Thinks within it self, but also a certain Amplitude of Active
Power ad Extra, or a Sphere of Activity upon Body. Upon which account, it was
before affirmed by Plotinus, that an Vnextended Incorporeal, is a thing Bigger
than Body; because Body cannot Exist otherwise, than a Point of it in a Point
of Space, whereas this One and the same Indivisible; can at once both
comprehend a Whole Extensum within it, and be All of it in every Part thereof.
And Lastly, all Finite Incorporeals, are always Naturally United to some Body
or other; from both which together, is Completed and Made up, in every Created
Understanding Being, one entire Animal, consisting of Soul and Body; and having
something Incorporeal, and something Corporeal in it; an Vnextended Inside, and
an Extended Outside; by means whereof, it is determined to Here and There, and
Capable of moving Locally, or Changing Place.

Thus have we represented the sense of the Ancient Vnextended Incorporealists
to the best advantage that we could; in way of Answer to the premised
Atheistick Argument, against Incorporeal Substance; and in order to the
Vindication of them from the Contempt of Atheists; And we do affirm, that the
forementioned Argumentations of theirs, do evince, That there is some other
Substance besides Body, which therefore according to the Principles of these
Atheists themselves, must be acknowledged to be Vnextended, it being concluded
by them that whatsoever is Extended is Body. But whether they do also,
absolutely prove, that there is, (...), and (...), A Substance Devoid of
Magnitude, Indistant, Without Parts, and Indivisible; this we shall leave
others to make a Judgment of. However it is certain that Atheists who maintain
the contrary, must needs assert, that every Thought, and whatsoever belongs
to Soul, Mind, (as Knowledge, Virtue, etc.) is not only Mentally and
Mathematically Divisible, so that there may be Half, a Third Part, or a Quarter
of a Thought, and the Rest, supposed; but also Physically Separable, or
Discerpible, together with the Soul wherein it is. They must also deny, that
there is any Internal Energy at all, or any other Action besides that Outside
Superficial Action, of Local Motion, and Consequently make all Cogitation
nothing but Local Motion, or Translation. And Lastly, they must maintain, that
no Substance can Co-exist with any other Substance (as Soul with Body)
otherwise than by Juxta-Position only, and by Possessing the Pores, or filling
up the Intervals thereof; as a Net with the water.

And this is the First Answer to the forementioned Atheistick Argument, against
Incorporeal Substance. That though whatsoever is Extended be Body, yet Every
thing is not Extended, but that Life and Mind or Cogitation, are an Vnextended,
Indistant and Indivisible Nature. But as we have already intimated, There are
other Learned Asserters of Incorporeal Substance, who lest, God and Spirits,
being thus made Vnextended; should quite Vanish into Nothing, Answer that
Atheistick Argumentation after a different manner; by granting to these
Atheists, that Proposition, that whatsoever Is, is Extended; and what is
Vnextended is Nothing; but then denying that other of theirs, That whatsoever
is Extended is Body: They asserting, Another Extension, Specifically Differing
from that of Bodies. For whereas Corporeal Extension, is not only Impenetrable,
so as that no one Part thereof, can Enter into another, but also both Mentally
and Really Divisible; one Part being in its Nature Separable from another; they
affirm, that there is another Incorporeal Extension, which is both Penetrable,
and also Indiscerpible; so that no One Part thereof, can possibly be Separated
from another, or the whole; and that to such an Incorporeal Extension, as this,
belongs Life, Cogitation, and Understanding, the Deity having such an
Infinite Extension, but all Created Spirits, a Finite and Limited one: which
also is in them supposed to be Contractible and Dilatable. Now it is not our
part here, to oppose Theists, but Atheists: wherefore we shall leave these Two
Sorts of Incorporealists to dispute it out friendly amongst themselves; and
indeed therefore with the more Moderation, Equanimity, and Toleration of
Dissent Mutually; because it seems, that Some are in a manner Fatally
Inclined, to think one way in this Controversy, and Some another. And what
ever the Truth of the Case be, it must be acknowledged, that this Latter
Hypothesis, may be very useful and Serviceable to retain some in Theism, who
can by no means admit, of a Deity, or Any thing else, Vnextended. Though
perhaps, there will not be wanting others also; who would go in a middle way
betwixt these Two, or Compound them together; by supposing the Deity to be
indeed altogether Vnextended, and all of it Every where; but Finite
Incorporeals or Created Spirits, to have an Vnextended Inside, a Life or Mind,
Diffusing it self into a certain Amplitude of Outward Extension, whereby they
are Determined to a Place; yet so as to be all in every Part thereof; which
Outward Extension, is therefore not to be Accounted Body, because Penetrable,
Contractable, and Dilatable; and because no one Part thereof is Separable from
the rest, by the Rushing or Incursion of any Corporeal thing upon them. And
thus is the Atheists Argument, against Incorporeal Substance, Answered Two
manner of ways; First, That there Is Something Vnextended; and Secondly, That
If there were none, yet must there of necessity be, a Substance otherwise
Extended than Body is, so as to be neither Antitypous nor Discerpible. And Our
selves would not be Understood here, Dogmatically to Assert any thing in this
Point, save only what all Incorporealists do agree in; To wit, That besides
Body, which is Impenetrably and Divisibly Extended, there is in Nature another
Substance, that is both Penetrable of Body and Indiscerpible; or which does not
Consist, of Parts Separable from one another. And that there is at least, such
a Substance as this, is unquestionably manifest, from what has been already
declared.

But the Atheist will in the next place, give an Account of the Original of
this Error (as He calls it) of Incorporeal Substance, and Undertake to show,
from what Mistake it proceeded; which is yet another Pretended Confutation
thereof. Namely, that it sprung Partly from the Abuse of Abstract Names and
Notions; Men making Substances of them, and Partly from the Scholastic
Essences, Distinct from the Things themselves, and said to be Eternal. From
both which Delusions and Dotages together, the Atheist conceives, that Men have
been first of all much Confirmed in the Belief of Ghosts and Spirits, Demons
and Devils, Invisible Beings called by several Names. Which Belief had also
another Original, men's Mistaking their own Phancies for Realities. The Chief of
all which affrightful Ghosts and Specter, according to these Atheists is the
Deity, the Oberon, or Prince of Fairies and Phancies. But then whereas men by
their Natural Reason, could not conceive otherwise, of these Ghosts and
Spirits, then that they were a kind of Thin, Aerial Bodies; their
Understandings have been so Enchanted by these Abstract Names (which are indeed
the Names of Nothing) and those Separate Essences and Quiddities of
Scholasticks, as that they have made Incorporeal Substances of them. The
Atheistick Conclusion is; That they who assert an Incorporeal Deity, do Really
but make a Scholastic Separate Essence, or the mere Abstract Notion of an
Accident, a Substantial Thing, and a Ghost or Spirit, presiding over the whole
world.

To which our Reply in General first of all is, That all this, is Nothing but
Idle Romantic Fiction, The Belief of a Deity and Substance Incorporeal,
standing upon none of those Imaginary Foundations. And then as for that
Impudent Atheistick Pretense, That the Deity is Nothing but a Figment or
Creature of Men's Fear and Imagination, and therefore the Prince of Fairies and
Phancies. This has been already Sufficiently Confuted, From P. 654. to 663.
in our Answer to the First Atheistick Argumentation. Where we have also over
and above showed, that there is not only a Natural Prolepsis or Anticipation of
a God in the Minds of Men, but also that the Belief thereof, is Supported by
the strongest and most Substantial Reason; His Existence Being indeed
Demonstrable, with Mathematical Evidence, to such as are capable; and not
blinded with Prejudice, nor Enchanted by the Witchcraft of Vice, and
Wickedness, to the Debauching of their Understandings. It has been also
showed, that the Opinion of other Ghosts and Spirits besides the Deity, Sprung
not merely from Fear and Fancy neither, as Childrens Bugbears, but from Real
Phenomenon; True Sensible Apparitions, with the Histories of them in all Ages,
without which the Belief of such things could never have held up so Generally
and Constantly in the World. As likewise that there is no Repugnancy at all to
Reason, but that there may be as well, Aerial and Etherial, as there are
Terrestrial Animals; and that the Dull and Earthy Stupidity of men's Minds, is
the Only thing which makes them, so prone to think, that there is no
Understanding Nature, Superior to Mankind; but that in the world, all is Dead
about Us; and to disbelieve the Existence of any thing, which themselves
Cannot, either See or Feel. Assuredly, The Deity is no Fancy; but the Greatest
Reality in the world, and that without which, there could be Nothing at all
Real; it being the only Necessary Existent; and Consequently Atheism is either
mere Sottishness, or else a strange kind of Irreligioas Fanaticism.

We now further add, that the Belief of Ghosts and Spirits Incorporeal, and
consequently of an Incorporeal Deity, sprung neither from any Ridiculous
Mistake of the Abstract Names and Notions of mere Accidents, for Substances,
nor from the Scholastic Essences, said to be Eternal,. For as for the Latter,
none of those Scholasticks ever Dreamed, that there was any Universal Man, or
Universal Horse, Existing alone by it self, and Separate from all Singulars;
nor that the Abstract Metaphysical Essences of men, after they were Dead,
Subsisting by themselves, did Walk up and down amongst Graves, in Airy Bodies.
It being absolutely impossible, that the Real Essence of any thing should be
Separable from the thing it self, or Eternal, when that is not so. And were the
Essences of all things, looked upon by these Scholasticks, as Substances
Incorporeal, then must they have made all things, (even Body it self,) to be
Ghosts, and Spirits, and Incorporeal; and Accidents also, (they having their
Essences too) to be Substantial. But in very Truth, these Scholastic Essences,
said to be Eternal, are nothing but the Intelligible Essences of things, or
their Natures as Conceivable, and Objects of the Mind. And in this Sense, is it
an acknowledged Truth, that the Essences of things, (as for example of a
Sphere, or Triangle) are Eternal, and such as were never Made, because there
could not otherwise be, Eternal Verities concerning them. So that the True
meaning of these Eternal Essences, is indeed no other than this, That Knowledge
is Eternal; or that there is an Eternal Mind, that comprehends the
Intelligible Natures and Ideas of all things, whether Actually existing, or
Possible only; their Necessary relations to one another, and all the Immutable
Verities belonging to them. Wherefore though these Eternal Essences themselves,
be no Ghosts nor Spirits, nor Substances Incorporeal, they being nothing but
Objective Entities of the Mind, or Noemata, and Ideas; yet does it plainly
follow, from the Necess^ry Supposition of them (as was before declared) That
there is One Eternal Unmade Mind, and Perfect Incorporeal Deity, a Real and
Substantial Ghost or Spirit, which comprehending It self, and all the Extent of
its own Power, the Possibilities of things, and their Intelligible Natures,
together with an Exemplar or Platform of the whole World; Produced the same
accordingly.

But our Atheistick Argumentator, yet further urges, That those Scholasticks
and Metaphysicians, who because Life or Cogitation, can be considered alone
Abstractly, without the Consideration of Body, therefore conclude it not to be
the Accident or Action of a Body, but a Substance by it self, (and which also
after men are Dead, can Walk amongst the Graves) that these, (I say) do so far
Abuse, those Abstract Names and Notions of mere Accidents, as plainly to make
Substances Incorporeal of them. To which therefore we Reply also, That were the
Abstract Notions of Accidents in General, made Incorporeal Substances, by those
Philosophers aimed at; then must they have supposed all the Qualities or
Affections of Bodies, such as Whiteness and Blackness, Heat and Cold, and the
like, to have been Substances Incorporeal also; a thing yet never heard, or
thought of. But the Case is far otherwise, as to Conscious Life, or Cogitation,
though it be an Abstract also; because this, is no Accident of Body, as the
Atheist (Serving his own Hypothesis,) securely takes it for granted, nor
indeed, of any thing else; but an Essential Attribute, of another Substance,
distinct from Body, (or Incorporeal;) after the same manner, as Extension or
Magnitude, is the Essential Attribute of Body, and not a mere Accident.

And now having so copiously Confuted, all the most Considerable Atheistick
Grounds, we are necessitated to dispatch those that follow, being of lesser
Moment, with all possible Brevity and Compendiousness. The Four next, which are
the Fifth, Sixth, Seventh, and Eighth, Atheistick Argumentations, pretend to no
more than only this, to disprove a Corporeal Deity; or from the Supposition,
That there is no other Substance in the World besides Body, to infer the
Impossibility of a God, that is, of an Eternal Unmade Mind, the Maker and
Governor of the Whole World: all Which therefore signify nothing at all, to
the Asserters of a Deity Incorporeal, who are the only Genuine Theists.
Nevertheless, though none but Stoics, and such other Corporealists, as are
notwithstanding Theists, be directly concerned in an Answer to them; yet shall
we first, so far consider the Principles of the Atheistick Corporealism,
contained in those Two Heads, the Fifth and Sixth, as from the Absolute
Impossibility of these Hypotheses to Demonstrate, a Necessity of Incorporeal
Substance; from whence a Deity will also follow.

Here therefore, are there Two Atheistick Hypotheses, founded upon the
Supposition; That All is Body; The First, in the way of Qualities, Generable
and Corruptible, which we call the Hylopathian; The Second in the way of
Vnqualified Atoms; which is the Atomick, Corporealism and Atheism. The Former
of these, was the most Ancient, and the First Sciography, or Rude Delineation
of Atheism. For Aristotle tells us, That the most Ancient Atheists, were those
who supposed, Matter or Body, that is Bulkie Extension, to be the only
Substance, and Unmade thing, that out of which all things were Made, and into
which all things are again Resolved; Whatsoever is else in the world, being
nothing, but the Passions, Qualities, and Accidents thereof, Generable and
Corruptible, or Producible out of Nothing, and Reducible to Nothing again. From
whence the Necessary Consequence is, That there is no Eternal Unmade Life or
Understanding; or that Mind, is no God, or Principle in the Universe, but
Essentially a Creature.

And thi^ Hylopathian Atheism, which supposes whatsoever is in the Universe,
to be either the Substance of Matter and Bulk, or else the Qualities and
Accidents thereof, Generable and Corruptible, has been called also by us
Anaximandrian. Though we deny not, but that there might be formerly, some
Difference amongst the Atheists of this Kind; nor are we ignorant, that
Simplicius and others, conceive Anaximander, to have asserted besides Matter,
Qualities also Eternal and Unmade, or an Homoeomery, and Similar Atomology,
just in the same manner as Anaxagoras afterward did, save only, that He would
not acknowledge any Unmade Mind or Life; Anaximader supposing all Life and
Understanding whatsoever, all Soul and Mind, to have Risen up, and been
Generated from a Fortuitous Commixture of those Similar Atoms, or the Qualities
of Heat and Cold, Moist and Dry, and the like, Contempered together. And we
confess, that there is some probability for this Opinion. Notwithstanding
which, because there is no Absolute certainty thereof, and because all these
Ancient Atheists agreed in this, that Life and Understanding, are either First
and Primary, or else Secondary Qualities of Body, Generable and Corruptible;
Therefore did we not think fit, to Multiply Forms of Atheism, but rather to
make but one kind of Atheism, of all this, calling it indifferently,
Hylopathian, or Anaximandrian.

The Second Atheistick Hypothesis, is that Form of Atheism described Under the
Sixth Head, which likewise supposing Body to be the only Substance; and the
Principles thereof, devoid of Life and Understanding; does reject all Real
Qualities, according to the Vulgar Notion of them, and Generate all things
whatsoever, besides Matter merely from the Combinations, of Magnitudes,
Figures, Sites, and Motions, or the Contextures of Vnqualified Atoms, Life and
Understanding not excepted: Which therefore according to them being no Simple
Primitive and Primordial thing, but Secondary, Compounded and Derivative, the
mere Creature of Matter and Motion, could not possibly be a God or First
Principle in the Universe. This is that Atomick Atheism, called Democritical;
Leucippus and Democritus being the First Founders thereof. For though there was
before them, another Atomology, which made Vnqualified Atoms, the Principles of
all Bodies, it supposing besides Body, Substance Incorporeal, yet were these,
as Laertius declares, the First that ever made, (...), Senseless Atoms the
Principles of all things whatsoever, even of Life and Understanding, Soul and
Mind.

Indeed it cannot be denied, but that from these Two Things granted, That all
is Body, and That the Principles of Body, are devoid of all Life and
Understanding, it will follow unavoidably, that there can be, no Corporeal
Deity. Wherefore the Stoics who professed to acknowledge no other Substance
besides Body, and yet nevertheless, had a strong Persuasion of the Existence of
a God, or an Eternal Unmade Mind, the Maker of the whole World, denied that
other Proposition of the Atheistick Corporealists, that the Principles of all
Bodies were devoid of Life and Understanding, they asserting an Intellectual
Fire, Eternal and Unmade, the Maker of the whole Mundane System, Which
Postulatum, of a Living Intellectual Body Eternal, were it granted to these
Stoics, yet could not this their Corporeal God notwithstanding, L. 1. C. C^ls.
P. 17.
be Absolutely Incorruptible, as Origin often inculcateth, (...). God to the
Stoics, is a Body, and therefore Mutable, Alterable, and Changeable, and he
would indeed be perfectly Corruptible, were there any other Body to act upon
him. Wherefore he is only Happy in this, that he wants a Corrupter or
Destroyer. And thus much was therefore rightly urged, by the Atheistick
Argumentator, that no Corporeal Deity, could be Absolutely in its own Nature
Incorruptible, nor otherwise than by Accident only Immortal, because of its
Divisibility. For were there any other Matter without this World, to make
Inroads or Incursions upon it, or to Disunite the Parts thereof, the Life and
Unity of the Stoical Corporeal God, must needs be Scattered and Destroyed. And
therefore of this Stoical God, P. 169.
does the same Origin thus further write, (...)^ The God of the Stoics being a
Body, has sometimes the whole for its Hegemonick in the Conflagration; and
sometimes only a part of the Mundane Matter. For these Men were not able to
reach, to a clear Notion of the Deity, as a Being every way Incorruptible,
Simple, Uncompounded, and Indivisible. Notwithstanding which, these Stoics,
were not therefore to be ranked amongst the Atheists, but far to be preferred
before them, and accounted only a kind of Imperfect Theists.

But we shall now make it evident, that in both these Atheistick Corporealisms,
(agreeing in those Two things, That Body is the only Substance, and That the
Principles of Body are not Vital) there is an Absolute Impossibility; not only
because, as Aristotle objecteth, they supposed no Active Principle; but also
because their bringing of Life and Understanding (being Real Entities) out of
Dead and Senseless Matter is also the Bringing of Something out of Nothing. And
indeed the Atomick Atheist, is here of the two rather the more Absurd and
Unreasonable, for as much as he discarding all Real Qualities, and that for
this very Reason, because Nothing can come out of Nothing, does himself
notwithstanding, produce Life, Sense, and Understanding (Unquestionable
Realities) out of mere Magnitudes, Figures, Sites, and Motions; that is,
indeed, Out of Nothing. Wherefore there being an Absolute Impossibility, of
both these Atheistick Hypotheses, (neither of which is able to salve the
Phenomenon of Life and Understanding) from that confessed Principle of theirs,
that Matter as such, has no Life nor Understanding belonging to it, it follows
unavoydably, that there must be some other Substance besides Body or Matter,
which is Essentially Vital and Intellectual: (...), Because all things cannot
possibly have a Peregrine, Adventitious and Borrowed Life, but something in the
Universe, must needs have Life Naturally and Originally. All Life cannot be
merely Accidental, Generable and Corruptible, producible out of nothing and
Reducible to Nothing again, but there must of Necessity be, some Substantial
Life, Which Point (That all Life, is not a mere Accident, but that there is
Life Substantial) has been of late with much Reason and Judgment, insisted
upon, the Urged by the Writer Of the Life of Nature. Neither must there be
only, such a Substantial Life, as is Naturally Immortal for the future, but
also such as is Eternal, and was never Made; all other Lives and Minds
whatsoever, (none of which could possibly be Generated out of Matter) being
derived from this Eternal Unmade Fountain, of Life and Understanding.

Which thing, the Hylozoick Atheists being well aware of; namely, that there
must of Necessity be, both Substantial and Eternal Unmade Life; but supposing
also Matter to be the only Substance; thought themselves necessitated, to
attribute to all Matter as such, Life and Understanding, though not Animalish
and Conscious, but N^tural only: they conceiving, that from the Modification
thereof alone by Organization, all other Animalish Life, not only the Sensitive
in Brutes, but also the Rational in Men, was derived. But this Hylozoick
Atheism, thus bringing all Conscious and Reflexive Life or Animality, out of a
Supposed Senseless Stupid and Inconscious Life of Nature, in Matter, and that
merely from a different Accidental Modification thereof, or Contexture of
Parts, does again plainly bring Something out of Nothing, which is an Absolute
Impossibility. Moreover this Hylozoick Atheism, was long since and in the first
Emersion thereof Solidly Confuted by the Atomick Atheists, after this manner;
If Matter as such, had Life, Perception, and Understanding belonging to it,
then of Necessity must every Atom or Smallest Particle thereof, be a Distinct
Percipient by it self; from whence it will follow, that there could not
possibly be, any such Men and Animals as now are, Compounded out of them, but
every Man and Animal, would be a Heap of Innumerable Percipients, and have
Innumerable Perceptions and Intellections; whereas it is plain, that there is
but one Life and Understanding, one Soul or Mind, one Perceiver or Thinker in
every one. And to say, that these innumerable Particles of Matter, Do all
Confederate together; that is, to make every Man and Animal, to be a Multitude
or Commonwealth of Percipients and Persons as it were clubbing together; is a
thing so Absurd and Ridiculous, that one would wonder, the Hylozoists should
not rather choose, to recant that their Fundamental Error, of the Life of
Matter, than endeavor to seek Shelter and Sanctuary for the same, under such a
Pretense. For though Voluntary Agents and Persons, may Many of them, resign up
their wills to One, and by that means, have all but as it were One Artificial
Will, yet can they not possibly resign up their Sense and Understanding too, so
as to have all but one Artificial Life, Sense, and Understanding: much less
could this be done, by Senseless Atoms, or Particles of Matter supposed, to be
devoid of all Consciousness or Animality. Besides which, there have been other
Arguments already suggested, which do sufficiently Evince, that Sense and
Understanding cannot possibly belong to Matter any way, either Originally or
Secondarily, to which more may be added else where.

And now from these Two things, That Life and Understanding do not Essentially
belong to Matter as such, and that they cannot be Generated out of Dead and
Senseless Matter, it is Demonstratively Certain, that there must be some other
Substance, besides Body or Matter. However, the Anaximandrian and Democritick
Atheists taking it for granted, that the First Principles of Body, are devoid
of all Life and Understanding, must either acknowledge a Necessity, of some
other Substance besides Body, or else deny the Truth of that Axiom, so much
made use of by th^mselves, That Nothing can come out of Nothing. And this was
our Second Undertaking, to show that from the very Principles of the Atheistick
Corporealism, represented in the Fifth and Sixth Heads, Incorporeal Substance
is, against those Atheists themselves Demonstrable.

Our Third and Last was this, That there being undeniably Substance
Incorporeal, the Two next following Atheistick Argumentations, built upon the
contrary Supposition, are therefore altogether Insignificant also, and do no
Execution at all. The first of which (being the Seventh) Impugning only, such a
Soul of the World, as is Generated out of Matter, is not properly Directed
against Theism neither, but only such a Form of Atheism (sometime before
mentioned) as indeed comes nearest to Theism. Which though concluding all
things to have sprung Originally, from Senseless Matter, Night and Chaos; yet
supposes things from thence to have ascended Gradually, to higher and higher
perfection; First, Inanimate Bodies, as the Elements, then Birds and other
Brute Animals (according to the forementioned Aristophanick Tradition, with
which agrees this of Lucretius, Principio Genus Alituum, variaeque Volucres.)
Afterward Men; and in the last place Gods; and that not only the Animated
Stars, but Jupiter or a Soul of the world, Generated also out of Night and
Chaos, as well as all other things. We grant indeed, that the True and Real
Theists amongst the Ancient Pagans also, held the World's Animation, and
whosoever denied the same, were therefore accounted Absolute Atheists. But the
World's Animation, in a larger Sense, signifies no more than this, That all
things are not Dead about us, but that there is a Living Sentient and
Understanding Nature Eternal, that first Framed the World, and still Presideth
over it: and it is certain, that in this Sense, all Theists whatsoever, must
hold the World's Animation. But the Generality of Pagan Theists held the
World's Animation also in a stricter Sense; as if the World were Truly and
Properly an Animal, and therefore a God, Completed and made up, of Soul and
Body together, as other Animals are. Which Soul of this great World-Animal, was
to some of them the Highest or Supreme Deity, but to others only a Secondary
God, they supposing an Abstract Mind Superior to it. But God's being the Soul
of the World in this Latter Paganick Sense, and the World's being an Animal or
a God; are things Absolutely disclaimed and renounced by us. However this
Seventh Atheistick Argument, is not directed against the Soul of the world in
the Sense of the Paganick Theists neither, this being, as they think, already
Confuted, but in the Sense of the Atheistick Theogonists; not an Eternal Unmade
Soul or Mind, but a Native and Generated One only, such as resulted from the
Disposition of Matter, and Contexture of Atoms, the Offspring of Night and
Chaos: the Atheists here pretending, after their Confutation of the True and
Genuine Theism, to take away all Shadows thereof also, and so to free Men from
all manner of Fear, of being obnoxious to any Understanding Being, Superior to
themselves. Wherefore we might here omit the Confutation of this Argument,
without any detriment at all, to the Cause of Theism. Nevertheless because this
in General, is an Atheistick Assertion, That there is no Life and
Understanding, presiding over the Whole World, we shall briefly examine the
Supposed Grounds thereof, which alone will be a sufficient Confutation of it.
The First of them therefore is this, that there is no other Substance in the
world besides Body; The Second, That the Principles of Bodies, are devoid of
all Life and Understanding; and the Last, That Life and Understanding are but
Accidents of Bodies resulting from such a Composition or Contexture of Atoms,
as produces soft Flesh, Blood, and Brains, in Bodies Organized, and of Humane
Form. From all which, the Conclusion is, that there can be no Life and
Understanding in the Whole, because it is not of Humane Form, and Organized,
and has no Blood, and Brains. But neither is Body, the only Substance, Nor are
Life and Understanding Accidents resulting from any Modification of Dead and
Lifeless Matter; Nor is Blood or Brains, that which Understands in us; but an
Incorporeal Soul or Mind, Vitally united to a Terrestrial Organized Body; which
will then understand with far greater advantage, when it comes to be Clothed
with a Pure, Spiritual and Heavenly One. But there is in the Universe also, a
higher kind of Intellectual Animals, which though consisting of Soul and Body
likewise, yet have neither Flesh, nor Blood, nor Brains, nor Parts so Organized
as ours are. And the most Perfect Mind and Intellect of all, is not the Soul of
any Body, but Complete in it self, without such Vital Union and Sympathy with
Matter. We conclude therefore, that this Passage of a Modern Writer; We Worms,
cannot conceive how, God can Understand without Brains; is Vox Pecudis, the
Language and Philosophy, rather of Worms or Brute Animals, then of Men.

The next, which is the Eighth Atheistick Argumentation, is briefly this, that
whereas the Deity by Theists is generally supposed, to be a Living Being
Perfectly Happy, and Immortal or Incorruptible; there can be no such Living
Being Immortal, and Consequently, none Perfectly Happy. Because all Living
Beings whatsoever, are Concretions of Atoms, which as they were at first
Generated, so are they again liable to Death and Curruption; Life being no
Simple Primitive Nature, nor Substantial thing, but a mere Accidental
Modification of Compounded Bodies only, which upon the Disunion of their Parts,
or the Disordering of their Contexture, vanishes again into Nothing. And there
being no Life Immortal, Happiness must needs be a mere Insignificant Word, and
but a Romantic Fiction. Where first, This is well, that the Atheists will
confess, that according to their Principles, there can be no such thing at all,
as Happiness; because no Security of Future Permanency; all Life perpetually
coming Out of Nothing, and whirling back into Nothing again. But this
Atheistick Argument, is likewise Founded, upon the Former Error; That Body is
the Only Substance, the First Principles whereof are devoid of all Life and
Understanding; whereas it is certain, that Life cannot possibly result, from
any Composition of Dead and Lifeless things; and therefore must needs be a
Simple and Primitive Nature. It is true indeed, that the Participated Life, in
the Bodies of Animals (which yet is but improperly called Life, it being
Nothing, but their being Actuated, by a Living Soul) is a mere Accidental
thing, Generable and Corruptible; since that Body which is now, Vitally united
to a Living Soul, may be Disunited again from it, and thereby become a Dead and
Lifeless Carcass: but the Primary or Original Life it self is Substantial, nor
can there be any Dead Carcass of a Humane Soul. That which has Life
Essentially belonging to the Substance of it, must needs be Naturally Immortal,
because no Substance can of it self Perish, or Vanish into Nothing. Besides
which, there must be also, some, not only Substantial, but also Eternal Unmade
Life, whose Existence is Necessary, and which is Absolutely Vnannihilable by
any thing else; which therefore must needs have, Perfect Security of its own
future Happiness; And this is an Incorporeal Deity. And this is a Brief
Confutation, of the Eight Atheistick Argument.

BUt the Democritick Atheist proceeds, endeavoring further to Disprove a God,
from the Phenomenon of Motion and Cogitation; in the Three following
Argumentations. First therefore, whereas Theists, commonly bring an Argument
from Motion, to Prove a God, or First Vnmoved Mover, the Atheists contend on
the contrary; that from the very Nature of Motion, the Impossibility of any
such First Vnmoved Mover, is clearly Demonstrable. For, it being an Axiom of
undoubted Truth, concerning Motion, That, Whatsoever is Moved, is Moved by some
other thing; Or, That Nothing can Move it self; it follows from thence
Unavoydably, That there is no Aeternum Immobile, No Eternal Vnmoved Mover; but
on the contrary, that there was Aeternum Motum, an Eternal Moved; Or, That One
thing was Moved by Another, from Eternity Infinitely, Without any First Mover
or Cause, Because, as Nothing could move it self; So could nothing ever Move
Another, but what was it self before Moved, by Something else.

To which we Reply; That this Axiom, Whatsoever is Moved, is Moved by Another,
and not by It self, was by Aristotle, and those other Philosophers, who made so
much use thereof, restrained to the Local Motion of Bodies only; That no Body
Locally Moved, was ever Moved Originally from it self, but from something else.
Now it will not at all follow from hence, That therefore Nihil Movetur nisi a
Moto, That No Body was ever Moved but by some other Body, that was also before
Moved, by Something else; or, That of necessity, One Body was moved by another
Body, and that by another, and so backwards, Infinitely, without any First
Vnmoved or Self-Moving and Self-Active Mover; as the Democritick Atheist fondly
Conceits. For the Motion of Bodies might proceed (as Unquestionably it did)
from something else, which is not Body, and was not Before Moved. Moreover the
Democritick Atheist, here also without any Ground imagines, That were there but
One Push once given to the world, and no more; this Motion would from thence
forward, always continue in it, one Body still moving another, to all Eternity.
For though this be indeed a Part of the Cartesian Hypothesis, that according to
the Laws of Nature, A Body Moving, will as well continue in Motion, as a Body
Resting in Rest, until that Motion be Communicated and Transferred to some
other Body; yet is the Case different here, Where it is supposed, not only one
Push to have been given to the world at first, but also the same Quantity of
Motion or Agitation, to be constantly Conserved and Maintained. But to let this
pass, because it is something a Subtle Point; and not so rightly Understood by
many of the Cartesians themselves. We say, that it is a thing Utterly
Impossible, That One Body should be Moved by Another Infinitely, without any
first Cause or Mover, which was Self Active; and that not from the Authority of
Aristotle only, Pronouncing (...), etc. That in the Causes of Motion, there
could not Possibly be an Infinite Progress; but from the Reason there subjoyned
by Aristotle, Because, (...), If there were no First Vnmoved Mover, there could
be no Cause of Motion at all. For were all the Motion, that is in the World, a
Passion, from something else, and yet no First Vnmoved Active Mover; then must
it be a Passion from no Agent, or without an Action; and Consequently proceed
from Nothing, and either Cause it self, or be Made without a Cause. Now the
Ground of the Atheists Error here, is only from hence, because He takes it
for granted, That there is no other Substance besides Body, nor any other
Action but Local Motion; from whence it comes to pass, that to Him, this
Proposition, No Body can Move it self, is one and the same with this, Nothing
can Act from It self, or be Self-Active.

And thus is the Atheistick Pretended Demonstration against a God, or First
Cause, from Motion, abundantly Confuted; we having made it Manifest, that there
is no Consequence at all in this Argument, That because No Body can Move it
Self, therefore there can be no First Vnmoved Mover; as also having discovered,
the Ground of the Atheists Error here, their taking it for granted, that there
is Nothing but Body; and lastly having plainly showed, that it implies a
Contradiction, there should be Action and Motion in the World, and yet Nothing
Self-Moving or Self-Active: So that it is Demonstratively certain from Motion,
that there is a First Cause or Vnmoved Mover. We shall now further add, That
from the Principle acknowledged by the Democritick Atheists themselves, That No
Body can move it self, it follows also undeniably, that there is some Other
Substance besides Body, something Incorporeal, which is Self-Moving and
Self-Active, and was the First Vnmoved Mover of the Heavens or World. For if no
Body from Eternity, was Ever able to Move it self, and yet there must of
necessity be some Active Cause of that Motion which is in the World (since it
could not Cause it self) then is there unquestionably, some Other Substance
besides Body, which having a Power of Moving Matter, was the First Cause of
Motion, it Self being Vnmoved.

Moreover it is certain from hence also, That there is another Species of
Action, distinct from Local Motion, and such as is not Heterochinesie, but
Autochinesie or Self-Activity. For since the Local Motion of Body is
Essentially Heterochinesie, not Caused by the Substance it self Moving, but by
something else Acting upon it, that Action by which Local Motion is First
Caused, cannot be it self Local Motion, but must be Autochinesie or
Self-Activity, That which is not a Passion from any other Agent, but springs
from the immediate Agent it self; which Species of Action is called Cogitation.
All the Local Motion that is in the World, was First Caused by some Cogitative
or Thinking Being, which not Acted upon by any thing without it, nor at all
Locally Moved, but only Mentally; is the Immovable Mover of the Heaven, or
Vortices. So that Cogitation is in Order of Nature, before Local Motion, and
Incorporeal before Corporeal Substance, the Former having a Natural Imperium
upon the Latter. And now have we not only Confuted the Ninth Atheistick
Argument, from Motion, but also Demonstrated against the Democritick Atheists
from their own Principle, that there is an Incorporeal and Cogitative
Substance, the First Immovable Mover of the Heavens, and Vortices; that is, an
Incorporeal Deity.

But the Democritick Atheist, will yet make a futher Attempt, to prove that
there can be Nothing Self-Moving or Self-Active, and that no Thinking Being
could be a First Cause; He laying his Foundation in this Principle, That
Nothing takes its Beginning from it self, but from the Action of some other
Agent without it. From whence he would infer, that Cogitation it self is
Heterochinesie, the Passion of the Thinker, and the Action of something without
it; no Cogitation ever rising up of it self without a Cause: and that
Cogitation is indeed, Nothing but Local Motion, or Mechanism; and all Living
Understanding Beings Machines, Moved from without: and then make this
Conclusion. That therefore no Understanding Being could possibly be a First
Cause. He further adding also, that no Understanding Being as such, can be
Perfectly Happy neither, as the Deity is supposed to be, because Dependent upon
Something without it; and this is the Tenth Atheistick Argumentation.

Where we shall First consider, that which the Democritick Atheist makes his
Fundamental Principle, or Common Notion to disprove all Autochinesie or
Self-Activity by. That Nothing takes Beginning from it self, but from the
Action of some other thing without it. Which Axiom, if it be Understood of
Substantial Things, then is it indeed acknowledged by us to be unquestionably
true, it being the same with this, That No Substance which once was not, could
ever possibly cause it self or bring it self into Being; but must take its
Beginning from the Action of something else; but then it will make Nothing at
all against Theism. As it is likewise True, That No Action whatsoever, (and
therefore no Cogitation,) takes Beginning from it self, or causes it self to
be, but is always produced by some Substantial Agent, but this will no way
advantage the Atheist neither. Wherefore if he would direct his Force against
Theism, he ought to understand this Proposition thus, That No Action
whatsoever, takes Beginning from the Immediate Agent, (which is the Subject of
it) but from the Action of some other thing without it; or, That Nothing can
Move or Act otherwise, then as it is Moved and Acted upon, by something else.
But this is only to beg the Question, or to Prove the thing in Dispute,
Identically, That Nothing is Self-Active, because Nothing can Act from it self.
Whereas it is in the mean time, undeniably certain, That there could not
possibly be any Motion or Action at all in the Universe, were there not
something Self-Moving or Self-Active, for as much as otherwise all that Motion
or Action would be a Passion from Nothing, and be Made without a Cause.

And whereas the Atheists would further prove, that no Cogitation, Takes its
Beginning from the Thinker, but always from the Action of some other thing
without it, after this manner; Because it is Conceivable, why This Cogitation,
rather then that, should start up at any time, were there not some Cause for
it, without the Thinker. Here in the first place we freely grant, that our
Humane Cogitations, are indeed commonly Occasioned, by the Incursions of
Sensible Objects upon us; as also, that the Concatenations of those Thoughts
and Phantasms in us, which are distinguished from Sensations, (whether we be
asleep or awake) do many times depend upon Corporeal and Mechanical Causes in
the Brain. Notwithstanding which, that all our Cogitations, are Obtruded, and
Imposed upon us from without; and that there is no Transition in our Thoughts
at any time, but such as had been before in Sense; (which the Democritick
Atheist averrs) this is a Thing, which we absolutely deny. For, had we no
Mastery at all over our Thoughts, but they were all like Tennis Balls, Bandied,
and Struck upon us, as it were by Rackets from without; then could we not
steadily and constantly carry on any Designs and Purposes of Life. But on the
contrary that of Aristotle's, is most true, (as will be elsewhere further
Proved) that Man and all Rational Beings, are in some sense, (...), a Principle
of Actions, subordinate to the Deity; which they could not possibly be, were
they not also, a Principle of Cogitations, and had some Command over them; but
these were all as much determined, by Causes without, as the Motions of the
Weathercock are. The Rational Soul is it self an Active and Bubling Fountain of
Thoughts; that perpetual and Restless Desire, which is as Natural and Essential
to us, as our very Life, Continually Raising up and Protruding, New and New
Ones, in us; which are as it were Offered to us. Besides which, we have also, a
further Self Recollective Power, and a Power of Determining and Fixing our Mind
and Intention, upon some certain Objects, and of Ranging our Thoughts
accordingly. But the Atheist is here also to be taught, yet a Further Lesson;
that an Absolutely Perfect Mind, (such as the Deity is supposed to be,) does
not (as Aristotle writes of it) (g d="fo"), Sometimes Understand, and sometime
not Understand; it being Ignorant of Nothing, nor Syllogizing about any thing;
but comprehending all Intelligibles, with their Relations and Verities at once,
within it self; and its Essence and Energie, being the same. Which Notion, if
it be above the Dull Capacity of Atheists, who measure all Perfection by their
own Scantling, this is a thing, that We cannot help.

But as for that Prodigious Paradox of Atheists, that Cogitation it self, is
nothing but Local Motion or Mechanism, we could not have thought it possible
that ever any man should have given entertainment to such a Conceit; but that
this was rather, a mere Slander raised upon Atheists; were it not certain from
the Records of Antiquity, That whereas the old Religious Atomists, did upon
Good Reason, reduce all Corporeal Action (as Generation, Augmentation, and
alteration) to Local Motion, or Translation from place to place; (there being
no other Motion besides this Conceivable in Bodies) the ancient Atheizers of
that Philosophy (Leucippus and Democritus) not contented herewith, did Really
carry the business still on further, so as to make Cogitation it self also;
Nothing but Local Motion. As it is also certain, that a Modern Atheistick
Pretender to Wit, has publicly owned this same Conclusion, That Mind is
Nothing else but Local Motion in the Organick parts of Man's Body. These men
have been sometimes indeed a little Troubled, with the Fancy, Apparition, or
Seeming of Cogitation, that is The Consciousness of it, as knowing not well
what to make thereof; but then they put it off again, and satisfy themselves
worshipfully with this, that Fancy is but Fancy, but the Reality of
Cogitation, nothing but Local Motion; as if there were not as much Reality in
Fancy and Consciousness, as there is in Local Motion. That which inclined
these men so much, to this Opinion, was only because, they were Sensible and
Aware of this, that if there were any other Action, besides Local Motion
admitted, there must needs be some other Substance acknowledged, besides Body.
Cartesius indeed undertook to defend Brute Animals, to be Nothing else but
Machines, but then he supposed that there was Nothing at all of Cogitation, in
them, and Consequently nothing of true Animality or Life, no more, than is in
Artificial Automaton, as a Wooden Eagle, or the like; Nevertheless, this was
justly thought to be Paradox enough. But that Cogitation it self, should be
Local Motion, and Men nothing but Machines; this is such a Paradox, as none but
either a Stupid and Besotted, or else an Enthusiastic, Bigotical, or Fanatic
Atheist, could possibly give entertainment to. Nor are such men as these, fit
to be Disputed with, any more than a Machine is.

But whereas the Atheistick Objecter, adds also over and above, in the last
place, that no Understanding Being can be Perfectly Happy neither, and
therefore not a God, because Essentially Dependent upon something else without
it; This is all one as if he should say, That there is no such thing as
Happiness at all in Nature; Because it is certain, that without Consciousness
or Understanding nothing can be Happy (since it could not have any Fruition of
it self) and if no Understanding Being can be Happy neither, then must the
Conclusion needs be, that of the Cyrenaicks, that (...), Happiness is a mere
Chimera, a Fantastic Notion or Fiction of Men's Minds; a thing which has no
Existence in Nature. These are the men, who afterward Argue from Interesse
also against a God and Religion. Notwithstanding that they confess their own
Principles to be so far, from promising Happiness to any, as that they
absolutely Cut off, all Hopes thereof. It may be further observed also in the
last place, that there is another of the Atheists Dark Mysteries here likewise
couched, That there is no Scale or Ladder of Entity and Perfection in Nature,
one above another; the whole Universe from top to bottom, being Nothing but One
and the same Senseless Matter, diversely Modified. As also, that Understanding as
such, rather speaks Imperfection; it being but a mere Whisling, Evanid, and
Fantastic thing; so that the most absolutely Perfect, of all things in the
Universe, is Grave, Solid, and Substantial Senseless Matter: of which more
afterward. And thus is the Tenth Atheistick Argumentation also Confuted.

But the Democritick and Epicurean Atheists, will make yet a further Assault,
from the Nature of Knowledge, Understanding, after this manner; If the World
were Made by a God, or an Antecedent Mind and Understanding, having in it self
an Exemplar or Platform thereof, before it was made, then must there be Actual
Knowledge, both in order of Nature, and Time, before Things; whereas Things
which are the Objects of Knowledge and Understanding, are unquestionably in
order of Nature before Knowledge; this being but the Signature of them, and a
Passion from them. Now the only Things, are Singular Sensibles or Bodies. From
whence it follows, that Mind is the Youngest and most Creaturely Thing in the
world; or that the World was before Knowledge and the Conception of any Mind;
and no Knowledge or Mind, before the world as its Cause. Which is the Eleventh
Atheistick Argumentation.

But we have Prevented our selves here in the Answer to this Argument, (which
would make all Knowledge, Mind, and Understanding Junior to the World, and the
very Creature of Sensibles,) having already Fully Confuted it; and clearly
Proved, That Singular Bodies, are not the only Things, and Objects of the Mind,
but that it contains its Immediate Intelligibles within it self; which
Intelligibles also are Eternal, and That Mind is no Fantastic Image of
Sensibles, nor the Stamp and Signature of them, but Archetypal to them; the
First Mind being That of a Perfect Being, comprehending it self, and the Extent
of its own Omnipotence, or the Possibilities of all things. So that Knowledge is
Older than all Sensible things; Mind Senior to the World, and the Architect
thereof. Wherefore we shall refer the Reader for an Answer to this Argument, to
Page 729. and so onwards, where the Existence of a God, (that is, a Mind before
the World) is Demonstrated also, from this very Topic, viz. the Nature of
Knowledge and Understanding.

We shall in this place only add; that as the Atheists can no way Salve the
Phenomenon of Motion, so can they much less that of Cogitation, or Life and
Understanding. To make which yet the more Evident, we shall briefly represent,
a Syllabus or Catalogue of the many Atheistick Hallucinations or Delirations,
concerning it. As First, That Senseless Matter being the only Substance, and all
things else but Accidental Modifications thereof; Life and Mind is all a mere
Accidental Thing, Generable and Corruptible, Producible out of Nothing, and
Reducible to Nothing again; and that there is no Substantial Life or Mind any
where. In Opposition to which, we have before proved, That there must of
necessity be some Substantial Life, and that Humane Souls being Lives
Substantial, and not mere Accidental Modifications of Matter, they are
consequently in their own Nature Immortal, since No Substance of it self ever
vanishes into Nothing.

Again the Democriticks, and other Atheists conclude, that Life and Mind, are
no Simple and Primitive Natures, but Secondary and Compounded things; they
resulting from certain Concretions and Contextures of Matter, and either the
Commixtures and Contemporations of Qualities, or else the Combinations of those
Simple Elements of Magnitude, Figure, Site, and Motion; and so being Made up,
of that which has Nothing of Life or Mind in it. For as Flesh is not Made, out
of Fleshy Particles, nor Bone out of Bony, (as Anaxagoras of old dreamed) so
may Life as they conceive, be as well Made out of Lifeless Principles, and Mind
out of that which has no Mind or Understanding at all in it: just as Syllables
Pronounceable, do result from Combinations of Letters, some of which are Mutes,
and cannot by themselves be Pronounced at all, others but Semi-Vocal. And from
hence do these Atheists Infer, that there could be no Eternal Unmade Life or
Mind, nor any that is Immortal or Incorruptible; since upon the Dissolution of
that Compages or Contexture of Matter, from whence they Result, they must needs
Vanish into Nothing. Wherefore according to them, there has probably, sometime
heretofore been, no Life nor Understanding at all in the Universe, and there
may Possibly be None again. From whence the Conclusion is, That Mind and
Understanding, is no God, or Principle in the Universe; it being Essentially
Factitious, Native and Corruptible; or as they express it in Plato, (...),
Mortal from Mortal things: as also, That the Souls of men, cannot subsist
Separately, after Death, and walk up and down in Airy Bodies; no more than the
Form of a House or Tree, after the Dissolution thereof, can subsist by it self
Separately, or appear in some other Body. But all this Foolery of Atheists,
has been already Confuted, we having before showed, that Life and
Understanding are Active Powers, Vigours, and Perfections, that could never
possibly result from mere Passive Bulk, or Dead and Senseless Matter, however
Modified and Compounded; because Nothing can come Effectively from Nothing.
Neither is there any Consequence at all in this, that because Flesh is not made
out of Fleshy Principles, nor Bone out of Bony, Red out of Red things, nor
Green out of Green; therefore Life and Understanding, may as well be
Compounded, out of things Dead and Senseless: because these are no Syllables or
Complexions, as the others are, nor can either the Qualities of Heat and Cold,
Moist and Dry; or else Magnitudes, Figures, Sites, and Motions, however
Combined together, as Letters Spell them out, and make them up; but they are
Simple and Primitive things. And accordingly it has been proved, that there
must of necessity be, some Eternal Unmade Life and Mind: For though there be no
necessity that there should be any Eternal Unmade Red, or Green, because Red
and Green may be Made out of things not Red nor Green, they and all other
Corporeal Qualities (so called) being but several Contextures of Matter, or
Combinations, of Magnitudes, Figures, Sites, and Motions, causing those several
Phancies in us: and though there be no necessity, that there should be Eternal
Motion, because if there were once no Motion at all in Matter, but all Bodies
Rested, yet might Motion have been Produced by a Self- Moving or Self Active
Principle; And Lastly, though there be no necessity that there should be
Eternal Unmade Matter or Body neither, because had there been once no Body at
all, yet might it be Made or Produced by a Perfect Omnipotent Incorporeal
Being: nevertheless is there an Absolute Necessity, that there should be
Eternal Unmade Life, and Mind, because were there once no Life nor Mind at all,
these could never have been produced out of Matter altogether Lifeless and
Mindless. And though the Form of a House cannot possibly Exist Separately from
the Matter and Substance thereof, it being a Mere Accidental Thing, resulting
from such a Compages of Stone, Timber and Mortar, yet are Humane Souls and
Minds, no such Accidental Forms of Compounded Matter, but Active Substantial
things, that may therefore subsist Separately from these Bodies, and Enliven
other Bodies of a different Contexture. And however some that are no Atheists,
be over prone to conceive, Life, Sense, Cogitation, and Consciousness in
Brutes, to be Generated out of Dead, Senseless, and Vnthinking Matter, (they
being disposed thereunto by certain Mistaken Principles, and ill Methods of
Philosophy) nevertheless is this unquestionably in it self, a Seed of Atheism;
because if any Life, Cogitation, and Consciousness, may be Produced out of Dead
and Senseless Matter, then can no Philosophy hinder, but that all might have
been so.

But the Democritick Atheists, will yet venture further to deny, that there is
any thing in Nature Self-Moving or Self-Active, but that whatsoever Moves and
Acts, was before Moved by something else, and Made to Act thereby; and again,
that from some other thing; and So backward Infinitely; from whence it would
follow, that there is no First in the Order of Causes, but an Endless
Retro-Infinity. But as this is all one, as to Affirm, that there is no such
thing at all as Life in the World, but that the Universe is a Compages of Dead
and Stupid Matter, so has this Infinity in the Order of Causes been already
exploded for an Absolute Impossibility.

Nevertheless the Atheists will here advance yet an Higber Paradox; That all
Action whatsoever, and therefore Cogitation, Fancy, and Consciousness it self,
is Really Nothing else but Local Motion; and Consequently not only
Brute-Animals, but also Men themselves mere Machins, Which is an equal, either
Sottishness or Impudence, as to assert, a Triangle to be a Square, or a Sphere,
a Cube, Number to be Figure, or any thing else to be any thing: and it is
Really all one as to affirm, that there is indeed no such thing in our selves,
as Cogitation: there being no other Action in Nature, but Local Motion and
Mechanism.

Furthermore the Democritick and Epicurean Atheists, Universally agree in this,
that not only Sensations, but also all the Cogitations of the Mind, are the
mere Passions of the Thinker, and the Actions of Bodies Existing without, upon
him: though they do not all declare themselves, after the same manner herein.
For First, the Democriticks conclude, that Sense is Caused by certain Grosser
Corporeal Effluvia, streaming from the Surfaces of Bodies Continually, and
entering through the Nerves; But that all other Cogitations of the Mind, and
men's either sleeping or waking Imaginations, proceed from another sort of
Simulachra, Idols and Images, of a more Fine and Subtle Contexture, coming into
the Brain, not through those open Tubes, or Channels of the Nerves, but
immediately through all the smaller Pores of the Body: so that, as we never
have sense of Any thing, but by means of those Grosser Corporeal Images,
obtruding themselves upon the Nerves; so have we not the least Cogitation at
any Time in our Mind neither, which was not Caused by those Finer Corporeal
Images, and Exuvious Membranes, or Effluvia, rushing upon the Brain, or
Contexture of the Soul. (...), Leucippus and Democritus determined, that as
well Noesis as Aisthesis, Mental Cogitation as External Sensation, was Caused
by certain Corporeal Idols, coming from Bodies without; since neither Sensation
nor Cogitation, could otherwise possibly be produced. And thus does Laertius
also represent the sense of these Atheistick Philosophers, that the Effluvia
from Bodies called Idols, were the only Causes, (...), Of all the Motions,
Passions, and Affections, and even the very Volitions of the Soul. So that as
we could not have the least Sensation, Imagination, nor Conception, of any
thing otherwise than from those Corporeal Effluvia, rushing upon us from Bodies
without, and begetting the same in us, at such a time; so neither could we have
any Passion, Appetite, or Volition, which we were not in like manner,
Corporeally Passive to. And this was the Ground of the Democritick Fate, or
Necessity of all Humane Actions, maintained by them, in opposition to the
(...), or Liberty of Will, which cannot be conceived without Self Activity, and
something of Contingency. They supposing Humane Volitions also, as well as all
the other Cogitations, to be Mechanically Caused and Necessitated, from those
Effluvious Images of Bodies, coming in upon the Willers. And however Epicurus
sometime pretended to Assert Liberty of Will, against Democritus, yet
forgetting himself, did he also here securely Philosophize, after the very same
manner, Nunc age quae moveant Animum res, accipe paucis; Lucret. L. 4. p. 358
360.

Quae veniunt veniant in Mentem, percipe paucis.
Principio hoc dico Rerum Simulachra vagari, etc.
But others there were amongst the Ancient Atomists, who could not conceive
Sensations themselves, to be thus Caused by Corporeal Effluvia, or Exuvious
Membranes, streaming from Bodies Continually, and that for Diverse Reasons
alleged by them; but only by a Pressure from them upon the Optic Nerve by
Reason of a Tension of the Intermedious Air or Ether (being that which is
called Light) whereby the distant Object is Touched and Felt, (...), as it were
by a Staff. Which Hypothesis concerning the Corporeal Part of Sense, is indeed
much more Ingenious, and agreeable to Reason than the Former. But the Atheizers
of this Atomology, as they supposed Sense to be Nothing else but such a
Pressure from Bodies without, so did they conclude Imagination and Mental
Cogitation, to be but the Relics and Remainders of those Motions of Sense
formerly Made, and Conserved afterward in the Brain (like the Tremulous
Vibrations of a Clock or Bell, after the striking of the Hammer, or the Rouling
of the Waves, after that the Wind is ceased) Melting, Fading, and Decaying
insensibly by degrees. So that according to these, Knowledge and Understanding,
is Nothing but Fading and Decaying Sense, and all our Volitions but Mechanic
Motions caused from the Actions or Trusions of Bodies upon us. Now though it be
true, that in Sensation, there is always a Passion Antecedent, made upon the
Body of the Sentient from without; yet is not Sensation it self this very
Passion, but a Perception of that Passion; much less can Mental Conceptions be
said to be the Action of Bodies without, and the mere Passion of the Thinker;
and least of all Volitions such, there being plainly here, something (...), In
our own Power, (by means whereof, we become a Principle of Actions, accordingly
deserving Commendation or Blame,) that is, something of Self-Activity.

Again according to the Democritick and Epicurean Atheists, all Knowledge and
Understanding is Really the same thing with Sense: the Difference between these
Two, to some of them being only this, That what is commonly called Sense, is
Primary and Original Knowledge, and Knowledge but Secondary, or Fading and
Decaying Sense: but to others, that Sense is Caused by those more Vigorous
Idols, or Effluvia from Bodies, intromitted through the Nerves; but
Understanding and Knowledge, by those more Weak and Thin, Vmbratile and Evanid
ones, that penetrate the other smaller Pores of the Body: so that both ways,
Understanding and Knowledge, will be but a Weaker Sense. Now from this Doctrine
of the Atheistick Atomists, that all Conception and Cogitation of the Mind
whatsoever, is Nothing else but Sense and Passion from Bodies without, this
Absurdity first of all follows unavoidably, that there cannot possibly be, any
Error, or False Judgment, because it is certain, that all Passion is True
Passion, and all Sense or Seeming, and Appearance, True Seeming and Appearance.
Wherefore though some Sense and Passion, may be more Obscure than other, yet
can there be none False; it self being the very Essence of Truth. And thus
Protagoras, one of these Atheistick Atomists, having First asserted, That
Knowledge is Nothing else but Sense, did thereupon admit this as a Necessary
Consequence, That (...), Every Opinion is True; because it is Nothing but
Seeming and Appearance, and every Seeming and Appearance is truly such: and
because it is not possible, for any one to Opine that which is Not, or to Think
otherwise than he Suffers. Wherefore Epicurus being Sensible of this
Inconvenience, endeavored to Salve this Phenomenon of Error and False
Opinion or Judgment, consistently with his own Principles, after this manner,
That though all Knowledge be Sense and all Sense True, yet may Error arise
notwithstanding, Ex Animi Opinatu, From the Opination of the Mind, adding
something of its own, over and above, to the Passion and Fancy of Sense. But
herein he shamefully contradicts himself; For if the Mind in Judging, and
Opining, can Superadd any thing of its own, over and above, to what it Suffers,
then is it not a mere Passive Thing, but must needs have a Self-Active Power of
its own, and consequently will prove also Incorporeal, because no Body can Act
otherwise, than it Suffers, or is Made to Act by something else without it. We
conclude therefore, That since there is such a thing as Error, or False
Judgment, all Cogitations of the Mind cannot be mere Passions; but there must
be something of Self-Activity in the Soul it Self, by means whereof, it can
give its Assent, to things not clearly Perceived, and so Err.

Again from this Atheistick Opinion, That all Knowledge is Nothing else but
Sense, either Primary or Secundary, it follows also; That there is no Absolute
Truth nor Falsehood, and that Knowledge is of a Private Nature, Relative, and
Fantastical only, or mere Seeming; that is, Nothing but Opinion: because Sense
is plainly, Seeming, Fantasy, and Appearance; a Private thing and Relative to
the Sentient only. And here also did Protagoras, according to his wonted
Freedom, admit this Consequence, That Knowledge being Sense, there was no
Absoluteness at all therein, and That nothing was True otherwise, than (...),
To this and to that man so Thinking; That every man did, but (...), Opine only
his Own things; That (...), Every man was the Measure of Things, and Truth to
himself; and Lastly, (...), That whatsoever Seemed to every one, was True to
him to whom it Seemed. Neither could Democritus himself, though a man of more
discretion than Protagoras, dissemble this Consequence from the same Principle
asserted by him, that Understanding is Fantastical, and Knowledge but Opinion;
he owning it sometimes before he was aware, as in these words of his, (...)^ We
ought to Know Man, according to this Rule, That he is such a thing, as has
Nothing to do with Absolute Truth; and again, (...) (or (...)^ We know nothing
Absolutely, concerning any thing; and all our Knowledge is Opinion. Agreeably
to which, he determined, that men's Knowledge was diversified by the Temper of
their Bodies, and the Things without them. And Aristotle Judiciously observing
both these Doctrines, That there is no Error or False Judgment, but every
Opinion True; and again, That Nothing is Absolutely True but Relatively only;
to be Really and Fundamentally One and the same; imputes them both together,
to Democritus, in these words of his, (...), Democritus held, that there was
Nothing Absolutely True: but because he thought Knowledge or Understanding, to
be Sense; therefore did he conclude that whatsoever Seemed according to Sense,
must of necessity be True (not Absolutely, but Relatively) to whom it so
Seemed. These Gross Absurdities did the Atheistick Atomists plunge themselves
into, whilst they endeavored to Salve the Phenomenon of Cogitation, Mind, or
Understanding, agreeably to their own Hypothesis. And it is certain, that all
of them, Democritus himself not excepted, were but mere Blunderers in that
Atomick Physiology, which they so much pretended to, and never rightly
Understood the Same. For as much as that with Equal Clearness teaches these Two
things at once, That Sense indeed is Fantastical and Relative to the Sentient;
But that there is a Higher Faculty, of Understanding and Reason in us, which
thus discovers the Phantastry of Sense, and reaches to the Absoluteness of
Truth; or is the Criterion thereof.

But the Democritick and Epicurean Atheists will further Conclude, that the
only Things or Objects of the Mind, are Singular Sensibles, or Bodies Existing
without it; which therefore must needs be in Order of Nature, before all
Knowledge, Mind, and Understanding whatsoever; this being but a Fantastic
Image or Representation of them. From whence they Infer, that the Corporeal
World, and these Sensible things, could not possibly be Made, by any Mind or
Understanding; because Essentially Junior to them, and the very Image and
Creature of them. Thus does Aristotle Observe, concerning both Democritus and
Protagoras, that they did (...), Suppose the only Things or Objects of the Mind
to be Sensibles; and that this was the Reason, why they made Knowledge to be
Sense, and therefore Relative and Fantastical: But we have already Proved,
that Mind and Understanding is not the Fantastic Image of Sensibles or
Bodies; and that it is in its own Nature not Ectypal, but Archetypal, and
Architectonical of all. That it is Senior to the World, and all Sensible
Things, it not looking abroad, for its Objects any where without, but
containing them within it self; The first Original Mind, being an Absolutely
perfect Being, Comprehending it self, and the Extent of its own Omnipotence, or
all Possibilities of things, together with the Best Platform of the whole, and
poducing the same accordingly.

But it being plain, that there are besides Singulars, other Objects of the
Mind Universal; from whence it seems to follow, that Sensibles, are not the
only Things; some Modern Atheistick Wits, have therefore invented, this further
device to maintain the Cause, and carry the Business on; That Vniversals are
nothing else but Names or Words, by which Singular Bodies are called, and
Consequently, that in all Axioms and Propositions, Sententious Affirmations and
Negations (in which the Predicate at least is Universal) we do but Add or
Substract, Affirm or Deny, Names of Singular Bodies: and that Reason or
Syllogism, is Nothing but the Reckoning or Computing, the Consequences of these
Names or Words. Neither do they want the Impudence, to Affirm, that besides
those Passions or Phansies, which we have from things by Sense; we know N^^hing
at all o^ any thing, but only the Names, by which it is cal^^d. Then which
there cannot be a greater Sottishness or Madness: For if Geometry, were nothing
but the Knowledge of Names by which Singular Bodies are called, as it self
could not deserve that Name of a Science; so neither could its Truths be the
same in Greek and in Latin: and Geometricians, in all the several distant Ages
and Places of the World, must be supposed to have had, the same Singular Bodies
before them, of which they Affirmed and Denied, those Universal Names.

In the Last place, the Epicurean and Anaximandrian Atheists, agreeably to the
Premised Principles, and the Tenor of their Hypothesis, do both of them
endeavor to Depreciate and Undervalue, Knowledge or Understanding, as a thing
which has not any Higher Degree of Perfection or Entity in it, than is in Dead
and Senseless Matter. It being according to them, but a Passion from Singular
Bodies Existing without, and therefore both Junior, and Inferior to them; a
Tumult raised in the Brain, by Motions made upon it, from the Objects of Sense;
That which Essentially includes in it, Dependence upon Something else; at
best, but a Thin and Evanid Image of Sensibles, or rather an Image of those
Images of Sense; a mere Whifling and Fantastic thing; upon which account they
conclude it, not fit to be attributed, to that which is the First Root and
Sourse of all things, which therefore is to them no other, than Grave and
Solid, Senseless Matter; the only Substantial, Self-Existent, Independent thing,
and Consequently the most Perfect and Divine. Life and Understanding, Soul and
Mind are to them, no Simple and Primitive Natures, but Secondary and
Derivative, or Syllables and Complexions of things, which Sprung up afterward,
from certain Combinations of Magnitudes, Figures, Sites, and Motions, or
Contemperations of Qualities; Contextures either of Similar or Dissimilar
Atoms. And as themselves are Juniors to Senseless Matter and Motion, and to
those Inanimate Elements, Fire, Water, Air and Earth, the First, and most Real
Productions of Nature and Chance; so are their Effects, and the Things that
belong to them, comparatively with those other Real Things of Nature, but
Slight, Ludicrous, and Vmbratil; as Landscape in Picture, compared with the Real
Prospect, of High Mountains, and Low Valleys, Winding or Meandrous Rivers,
Towering Steeples, and the Shady Tops of Trees and Groves: as they are
accordingly, commonly disparaged, under those Names of Notional and Artificial.
And thus was the Sense of the Ancient Atheists represented by Plato; (...)^ De
Leg L. 10. p. 889.
They say, that the Greatest and most Excellent Things of all, were made by
Senseless Nature, and Chance: but all the Smaller and more Inconsiderable, by
Art, Mind, and Understanding; which taking from Nature, those First and Greater
Things as its Groundwork to Act upon, does Frame and Fabricate all the other
Lesser Things, which are therefore Commonly called Artificial. And the Mind of
these Atheists, is there also further declared, by that Philosopher after this
manner. The First, most Real, Solid and Substantial things in the whole World,
are those Elements, Fire, Water, Air and Earth, made by Sensl^ss Nature and
Chance, without any Art, Mind, or Understanding: and n^xt to these the Bodies
of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and this Terrestrial Globe, produced out of the
fore^aid Inanimate Elements, by Unknowing Nature or Chance likewise, without
any Art, Mind or God. The Fortuitous Concourse of Similar or Dissimilar Atoms,
begetting this whole System and Compages of Heaven and Earth; (...)^ But that
afterward, Art or Mind and Understanding, being Generated also in the last
place, out of those same Senseless and Inanimate Bodies or Elements, (it rising
up in certain Smaller Pieces of the Universe, and Particular Concretions of
Matter, called Animals) Mortal from Mortal things, did produce certain other
Ludicrous things, which partake little of Truth and Reality, but are mere
Images, Vmbrages and Imitations, as Picture and Landscape, etc. but above all,
those Moral Differences of Just and Unjust, Honest and Dishonest, the mere
Figments of Political Art, and Slight Vmbratil Things, compared with Good and
Evil Natural; that consist in nothing, but Agreement and Disagreement with
Sense, and Apppetite: (...)^ For, as for Things Good and Honest, those that are
such by Nature, differ from those which are such by Law; but as for Just and
Unjust, there is by Nature no such thing at all. The Upshot and Conclusion of
all is, That there is no such Scale or Ladder in Nature, as Theists and
Metaphysicians suppose, no Degrees of Real Perfection and Entity one above
another, as of Life and Sense, above Inanimate Matter, of Reason and
Understanding above Sense; from whence it would be Inferred, that the Order of
things in Nature, was in Way of Descent, from Higher and Greater Perfection,
Downward to Lesser and Lower, which is indeed to Introduce a God. And that
there is no such Scale or Ladder of Perfection and Entity, they endeavor
further to prove from hence, because according to that Hypothesis, it would
follow, that every the Smallest and most Contemptible Animal, that could see
the Sun, had a Higher degree of Entity and Perfection in it, than the Sun it
self; a thing ridiculously Absurd: or else according to Cotta's Instance;
Idcirco Formicam anteponendam esse huic Pulcherimae Vrbi, quod in Vrbe Sensus
sit nullus, in Formica non modo Sensus, sed etiam Men's, Ratio, Memoria. That
therefore every Ant or Pismire, were far to be preferred, before this most
beautiful City of Rome; because in the City, there is no Sense; whereas an Ant
has not only Sense, but also Mind, Reason and Memory; that is, a certain
Sagacity superior to Sense. Wherefore they conclude that there is no such
Scale or Ladder in Nature, no such Climbing Stairs of Entity and Perfection,
one above another, but that the whole Universe is One Flat and Level, it being
indeed all, Nothing but the same Uniform Matter, Under several Forms, Dresses,
and Disguises; or Variegated by Diversity of Accidental Modifications: one of
which, is that of such Beings as have Fancy in them, commonly called Animals;
which are but some of Sportful or Wanton Natures, more trimly Artificial and
Finer Gamaieus, or Pretty Toys; but by reason of this Fancy, they have no
Higher Degree of Entity and Perfection in them, than is in Senseless Matter: as
they will also, be all of them quickly transformed again, into other seemingly
dull, Vnthinking and Inanimate Shapes. Hitherto the Sense of Atheists.

But the Pretended Grounds, of this Atheistick Doctrine, (or rather Madness)
have been already also confuted, over and over again. Knowledge and
Understanding, is not a mere Passion from the thing Known, Existing without the
Knower, because to Know and Understand, as Anaxagoras of old determined, is
(...), to Master and Conquer the thing Known, and consequently not merely to
Suffer from it, or Passively to Lie Under it, this being (...), to be Mastered
and Conquered by it. The Knowledge of Universal Theoremes in Sciences, is not
from the Force of the thing Known existing without the Knower, but from the
Active Power, and Exerted Vigor or Strength, of that which Knows. Cons L. 5.
Pro. 4.
Thus Severinus Boethius; Videsne ut in cognoscendo, cuncta Sua potius
Facultate, quam Eorum quae Cognoscuntur Vtantur? Neque id injuria, nam cum omne
Judicium Judicantis Actus existat, necesse est ut suam quisque Operam, non ex
Aliena, sed ex propria Potestate persiciat. See you not, how all things in
Knowing, use their own Power and Faculty, rather, than that of the thing Known?
For since Judgment is the Action of that which Judges, every thing must of
necessity perform its own Action, by its own Power, Strength, and Faculty, and
not by that of another. Sense it self is not a mere Passion; or Reception of
the Motion from Bodies without the Sentient, for if it were so, then would a
Looking-Glass, and Other Dead things See: but it is a Perception of a Passion,
made upon the Body of the Sentient, and therefore has something of the Souls
own Self-Activity in it. But Understanding and the Knowledge of Abstract
Sciences, is neither Primary Sense, nor yet the Fading and Decaying Remainders,
of the Motions thereof, but a Perception of another kind, and more Inward than
that of Sense; not Sympathetical but Unpassionate, the Noemata of the Mind,
being things distinct from the Phantasmata of Sense and Imagination; which are
but a Kind of Confused Cogitations. And though the Objects of Sense be only
Singular Bodies, Existing without the Sentient, yet are not these Sensibles
therefore, the only Things and Cogitables; but there are other Objects of
Science, or Intelligibles, which the Mind Contains within it Self. That Dark
Philosophy of some, tending so directly to Atheism, That there is Nothing in
the Mind or Understanding which was, not First in Corporeal Sense, and derived
in way of Passion frrom Matter, was both Elegantly and Solidly Confuted by
Boethius his Philosophic Muse, after this manner, Boet Cons. L. 5. M. 4.
Quondam Porticus attulit,
Qui Sensus and Imagines,
Credant Mentibus imprimi;
Mos est aequore paginae,
Pressas Figere literas.
Nihil motibus explicat,
Notis subdita Corporum,
Rerum reddit imagines,
Cernens omnia Notio?
Aut quae cognita dividit?
Alternumque legens iter,
Nunc decidit in Infima;
Veris falsa redarguit?
Long Causa potentior,
Impressas patitur notas.
Et Vires Animi movens,
Cum vel Lux oculos ferit,
Tum Mentis Vigor excitus,
Ad Motus similes vocans,
Obscuros nimium Senes,
E Corporibus extimis,
Vt quondam Celeri stylo
Quae nullas habeat notas,
Sed Men's si propriis vigens
Sed tantum patiens jacet
Cassasque in Speculi vicem
Vnde haec sic animis viget
Quae vis singula prospicit?
Quae divisa recolligit?
Nunc Summis Caput inserit,
Tum sese referens sibi
Haec est Efficiens magis
Quam quae Materiae modo
Praecedit tamen Excitans
Vivo in corpore Passio.
Vel Vox auribus instrepit:
Quas intus species tenet,
Notis applicat exteris.
It is true indeed, that the (...), or Thing Understood, is in order of Nature
before the Intellection and Conception of it, and from hence was it, that the
Pythagoreans and Platonists concluded, that (...), Mind or Intellect, was not
the very First and Highest Thing in the Scale of the Universe, but that there
was another Divine Hypostasis, in order of Nature before it, called by them
(...) and (...), One and The Good, as the (...) or Intelligible thereof. But as
those Three Archical Hypostases of the Platonists and Pythagoreans, are all of
them Really but One (...) or Divinity: And the First of those Three, (Superior
to that which is properly called by them, Mind or Intellect) is not supposed
therefore to be Ignorant of it self: So is the First Mind or Understanding, no
other, than that of a Perfect Being, Infinitely Good, Fecund, and Powerful, and
vertually Containing all things; comprehending it self and the Extent of its
own Goodness, Fecundity, Virtue, and Power; that is, all Possibilities of
things, their Relations to one another, and Verities; a Mind before Sense, and
Sensible Things. An Omnipotent Understanding Being, which is it self its own
Intelligible, is the First Original of all things. Again, that there must of
necessity be some other Substance besides Body or Matter, and which in the
Scale of Nature is Superior to it, is evident from hence, because otherwise,
there could be no Motion at all therein, no Body being ever able to move it
self. There must be something Self-Active and Hylarchical, something that can
Act both from it self, and upon Matter, as having a Natural Imperium, or
Command over it. Cogitation is in order of Nature, before Local Motion. Life
and Understanding, Soul and Mind, are no Syllables or Complexions of things,
Secundary and Derivative, which might therefore be made out of things devoid of
Life and Understanding; but Simple, Primitive, and Uncompounded Natures: they
are no Qualities or Accidental Modifications of Matter, but Substantial Things.
For which Cause Souls or Minds can no more be Generated out of Matter, than
Matter it Self, can be Generated out of Something else: and therefore are they
both alike (in some sense) Principles, Naturally Ingenerable and Incorruptible;
though both Matter, and all Imperfect Souls and Minds, were at first Created by
one Perfect Omnipotent Understanding Being. Moreover Nothing can be more
Evident than this, that Mind and Understanding has a Higher Degree of Entity
or Perfection in it, and is a Greater Reality in Nature, than mere Senseless
Matter or Bulkie Extension. And Consequently the things which belong to Souls
and Minds, to Rational and Intellectual Beings as such, must not have Less, but
More Reality in them, than the things which belong to Inanimate Bodies.
Wherefore the Differences of Just and Unjust, Honest and Dishonest, are greater
Realities in Nature, than the Differences of Hard and Soft, Hot and Cold, Moist
and Dry. He that does not perceive any Higher Degree of Perfection, in a Man,
than in an Oyster, nay than in a Clod of Earth or Lump of Ice, in a Piece of
Past, or Pye-Crust, has not the Reason or Understanding of a Man in him. There
is unquestionably, a Scale or Ladder of Nature, and Degrees of Perfection and
Entity, one above another, as of Life, Sense, and Cogitation, above Dead,
Senseless and Vnthinking Matter; of Reason and Understanding above Sense, etc.
And if the Sun be Nothing but a Mass of Fire, or Inanimate Subtle Matter
Agitated, then has the most Contemptible Animal, that can see the Sun, and
has Consciousness and Self enjoyment, a Higher Degree of Entity and Perfection
in it, than that whole Fiery Globe; as also than the Materials, (Stone, Timber,
Brick and Mortar) of the most Stately Structure, or City. Notwithstanding
which, the Sun in other regards, and as its vastly Extended Light and Heat,
has so great an Influence, upon the Good of the whole World, Plants and
Animals; may be said to be a far more Noble and Useful thing in the Universe,
than any one Particular Animal whatsoever. Wherefore there being plainly a
Scale or Ladder of Entity; the Order of Things was unquestionably, in way of
Descent, from Higher Perfection, Downward to Lower; it being as Impossible, for
a Greater Perfection to be produced from a Lesser, as for Something to be
Caused by Nothing. Neither are the Steps or Degrees of this Ladder, (either
upward or downward) Infinite; but as the Foot, Bottom, or Lowest Round thereof,
is Stupid and Senseless Matter, devoid of all Life and Understanding; so is the
Head, Top, and Summity of it, a Perfect Omnipotent Being, Comprehending it
self, and all Possibilities of things. A Perfect Understanding Being, is the
Beginning and Head of the Scale of Entity; from whence things Gradually Descend
downward; lower and lower, till they end in Senseless Matter. (...), Mind is the
Oldest of all things, Senior to the Elements, and the whole Corporeal World;
and likewise according to the same Ancient Theists, it is (...), by Nature Lord
over all, or has a Natural Imperium and Dominion over all; it being the most
Hegemonical thing. And thus was it also affirmed by Anaxagoras, (...), that
Mind is the Sovereign King of Heaven and Earth.

We have now made it evident, that the Epicurean and Anaximandrian Atheists,
who derive the Original of all things from Senseless Matter, devoid of all
Manner of Life, can no way Salve the Phenomenon of Cogitation (Life and
Understanding, Soul and Mind) no more than they can that of Local Motion. And
the Reason why we have insisted so much upon this Point, is because these
Atheists, do not only pretend to Salve this Phenomenon of Cogitation without a
God, and so to take away the Argument for a Deity from thence; but also to
Demonstrate the Impossibility of its Existence, from the very Nature of
Knowledge, Mind, and Understanding. For if Knowledge, be in its own Nature,
Nothing but a Passion from Singular Bodies Existing without the Knower; and if
Life and Understanding, Soul and Mind, be Junior to Body, and Generated out of
Senseless Matter, then could no Mind or Understanding Being, Possibly be a God,
that is a First Principle, and the Maker of all things. And though Modern
Writers, take little or no Notice of this, yet did Plato anciently, make the
very State of the Controversy, betwixt Theists and Atheists principally to
consist in this very thing, viz. Whether Life and Understanding, Soul and Mind,
were Juniors to Body, and Sprung out of Senseless Matter, as Accidental
Modifications thereof, or else were Substantial things, and in order of Nature
Before it. For after the Passages before Cited, he thus concludes, Pl. L. 10.
De Leg.
(...)^ These men seem to suppose, Fire, Water, Air and Earth, to be the very
First things in the Universe, and the Principles of all, calling them only
Nature; but Soul and Mind, to have sprung up afterward out of them. Nay, they
do not only Seem to suppose this, but also in Express Words declare the same.
And thus (by Jupiter) have we discovered, the very Fountain of that Atheistick
Madness, of the Ancient Physiologers; to wit, their making Inanimate Bodies,
Senior to Soul and Mind. And accordingly, that Philosopher addresses himself to
the Confutation of Atheism, no otherwise than thus, by proving Soul not to be
Junior to Senseless Body, or Inanimate Matter, and Generated out of it; (...)^
That which is the First Cause of the Generation and Corruption of all Things,
the Atheistick Doctrine supposes, not to have been First Made; but what is
indeed the Last thing, to be the First, And hence is it, that they err
concerning the Essence of the Gods. For they are ignorant what kind of thing
Soul is, and what power it has; as also especially concerning its Generation
and Production, That it was First of all made before Body, it being that which
Governs the Motions, Changes, and Transformations thereof. But if Soul be First
in Order of Nature before Body, then must those things which are Cognate to
Soul, be also before the Things which appertain to Body; and so Mind and
Understanding, Art and Law be before Hard and Soft, Heavy and Light: and that
which these Atheists call Nature* (the Motion of Inanimate Bodies) Junior to
Art and Mind, it being Governed by the same. Now that Soul is in order of
Nature before Body, this Philosopher demonstrates only from the Topic or Head
of Motion, because it is Impossible, that one Body should Move another
Infinitely, without any First Cause or Mover; but there must of Necessity be
something Self-Moving, and Self-Active, or which had a power of Changing it
Self, that was the first Cause of all Local Motion in Bodies. And this being
the very Notion of Soul, that it is such a thing, as can Move or Change it self
(in which also the Essence of Life consists.) He thus infers, (...)^ It is
therefore sufficiently demonstrated from hence, that Soul is the Oldest of all
things in the Corporeal World; it being the Principle of all the Motion, and
Generation in it. And his Conclusion is, (...)^ It has been therefore rightly
affirmed by us, that Soul is Older than Body, and was Made Before it, and Body
Younger and Junior to Soul; Soul being that which Rules, and Body that which
is Ruled. From whence it follows that the Things of Soul also, are Older than
the things of Body; and therefore Cogitation, Intellection, Volition, and
Appetite, in order of Nature before Length, Breadth and Profundity. Now it is
Evident, that Plato in all this Understood, not only the Mundane Soul, or his
Third Divine Hypostasis, the Original of that Motion that is in the Heavens and
the whole Corporeal Universe, but also all other Particular Lives and Souls
whatsoever, or that whole Rank of Beings called Soul; he supposing it all to
have been at first made, before the Corporeal System, or at least to have been
in order of Nature Senior to it, as Superior and more excellent, (that which
Rules being Superior to that which is Ruled) and no Soul or Life whatsoever,
to be Generated out of Senseless Matter.

Wherefore we must needs here condemn that Doctrine of some Professed Theists
and Christians of Latter Times, who Generate all Souls, not only the Sensitive
in Brutes, but also the Rational in Men, out of Matter. For as much as hereby,
not only that Argument for the Existence of a God, from Souls, is quite taken
away; and nothing could hinder but that Senseless Matter might be the Original
of all things; if Life and Understanding, Soul and Mind sprung out of it; but
also the Atheist will have an advantage, to prove the Impossibility of a God
from hence. Because if Life and Understanding, in their own Nature be
Factitious, and Generable out of Matter, then are they no Substantial Things,
but Accidental only, from whence it will plainly follow, that no Mind could
possibly be a God, or First Cause of all things, it being not so much as able
to Subsist by it Self. Moreover if Mind as such, be Generable, and Educible out
of Nothing, then must it needs be in its own Nature Corruptible also, and
Reducible to Nothing again; whereas the Deity is both an Unmade and
Incorruptible Being. So that there could not possibly be according to this
Hypothesis, any other God, than such a Jupiter, or Soul of the World, as the
Atheistick Theogonists acknowledged, that Sprung out of Night, Chaos, and
Nonentity, and may be again Swallowed up into that Dark Abyss. Senseless Matter
therefore, being the only Unmade and Incorruptible thing; and the Fountain of
all things, Even of Life and Understanding; it must needs be acknowledged to be
the Only Real Numen.

Neither will the Case be much different, as to some others; who though indeed
they do not professedly Generate, the Rational, but only the Sensitive Soul,
both in Men and Brutes; yet do nevertheless maintain, the Humane Soul it self,
to be but a mere Blank, or White Sheet of Paper, that has nothing at all in
it, but what was Scribled upon it, by the Objects of Sense; and Knowledge or
Understanding to be nothing but the Result of Sense, and so a Passion from
Sensible Bodies existing without the Knower. For hereby, as they plainly make
Knowledge and Understanding, to be in its own Nature, Junior to Sense, and the
very Creature of Sensibles; so do they also imply, the Rational Soul and Mind
it self, to be as well Generated as the Sensitive, wherein it is Vertually
Contained: or to be nothing but a Higher Modification of Matter; agreeably to
that Leviathan Doctrine, That men differ no otherwise from Brute Animals, then
only in their Organization, and the Use of Speech or Words.

In very truth, Whoever maintaineh, that any Life or Soul, any Cogitation or
Consciousness, Self-Perception and Self-Activity, can spring out of Dead,
Senseless and Unactive Matter, the same can never possibly have any Rational
Assurance, but that his own Soul, had also a like Original, and Consequently is
Mortal and Corruptible. For if any Life and Cogitation can be thus Generated,
then is there no Reason, but that all Lives may be so; they being but Higher
Degrees in the same Kind: and neither Life, nor any thing else, can be in its
own Nature Indifferent, to be either Substance or Accident, and sometimes one,
sometimes the other: but either all Life, Cogitation, and Consciousness, is
Accidental, Generable and Corruptible; or else none at all.

That which has inclined so many, to think the Sensitive Life at least, to be
nothing but a Quality or Accident of Matter, Generable out of it, and
Corruptible into it, is that strange Protean Transformation of Matter, into so
many seemingly Unaccountable Forms and Shapes, together with the Scholastic
Opinion threupon, of Real Qualities; that is, Entities distinct from the
Substance of Body, and its Modifications, but yet Generable out of it, and
Corruptible, into it. They concluding that as Light, and Colors, Heat and
Cold, etc. according to those Phancies which we have of them, are Real
Qualities of Matter, distinct from its Substance and Modifications, so may
Life, Sense, and Cogitation, be in like manner Qualities of Matter also
Generable and Corruptible. But these Real Qualities of Body in the Sense
declared, are things that were long since justly exploded, by the Ancient
Atomists, and expunged out of the Catalogue of Entities, of whom Laertius has
Recorded, that they did (...), quite cashier and banish Qualities out of their
Philosophy* they resolving all Corporeal Phenomenon, and therefore those of
Heat and Cold, Light and Colors, Fire and Flame, etc. intelligibly, into
nothing but the Different Modifications of Extended Substance, viz. More or
Less Magnitude of Parts, Figure, Site, Motion or Rest, (or the Combinations of
them) and those different Phancies Caused in us by them. Indeed there is no
other Entity, but Substance and its Modifications. Wherefore the Democriticks
and Epicureans, did most shamefully contradict themselves, when pretending to
reject and explode, all those Entities of Real Qualities, themselves
nevertheless, made Life and Understanding: such Real Qualities of Matter,
Generable out of it, and Corruptible again into it.

There is nothing in Body or Matter, but Magnitude, Figure, Site, and Motion or
Rest; now it is Mathematically Certain, that these however Combined together,
can never possibly Compound or Make up Life or Cogitation: which therefore
cannot be an Accident of Matter, but must of necessity be a Substantial thing.
We speak not here of that Life (improperly so called) which is in Vulgar Speech
attributed to the Bodies of Men and Animals: for it is plainly A^cidental to a
Body, to be Vitally United to a Soul, or not. Therefore is this Life of the
Compound, Corruptible and Destroyable, without the Destruction of any Real
Entity; there being nothing Destroyed, nor Lost to the Universe, in the Deaths
of Men and Animals, as such; but only a Disunion or Separation made, of those
Two Substances, Soul and Body one from another. But we speak here of the
Original Life of the Soul it self, that this is Substantial, neither Generable
nor Corruptible, but only Creatable and Annihilable by the Deity. And it is
strange, that any men should persuade themselves, that that which Rules and
Commands, in the Bodies of Animals, moving them up and down, and has Sense or
Perception in it, should not be as Substantial, as that Stupid and Senseless
Matter, that is Ruled by it. Neither can Matter, (which is also but a mere
Passive thing) Efficiently produce Soul, any more than Soul Matter: no Finite
Imperfect Substance, being able to produce another Substance out of Nothing.
Much less can such a Substance as has a Lower Degree of Entity and Perfection
in it, Create that, which has a Higher. There is a Scale or Ladder of Entities
and Perfections in the Universe, one above another, and the Production of
things cannot possibly be in Way of Ascent from Lower to Higher, but must of
necessity be in way of Descent from Higher to Lower. Now to produce any One
Higher Rank of Being, from the Lower, as Cogitation from Magnitude and Body, is
plainly to invert this Order, in the Scale of the Universe, from Downwards to
Upwards; and therefore is it Atheistical; and by the Same reason, that One
Higher Rank or Degree in this Scale, is thus unnaturally Produced from a Lower,
may all the rest be so produced also. Wherefore we have great reason to stand
upon our Guard here, and to defend this Post against the Atheists; That no Life
or Cogitation, can either Materially or Efficiently result from Dead and
Senseless Body; or that Souls being all Substantial, and Immaterial things, can
neither be Generated out of Matter, nor Corrupted into the same, but only
Created or Annihilated by the Deity.

The Grand Objection against this Substantiality of Souls Sensitive, as well as
Rational, is from that Consequence, which will be from thence inferred, of
their Permanent Subsistence after Death, their Perpetuity, or Immortality. This
seeming very absurd, that the Souls of Brutes also should be Immortal, or
subsist after the Deaths of the Respective Animals: But especially to Two Sorts
of Men; First, such as scarcely in good earnest believe, their own Soul's
Immortality; and Secondly, such Religionists, as conclude, that if Irrational
or Sensitive Souls, subsist after Death, then must they needs go presently,
either into Heaven or Hell. And R. Cartesius was so sensible of the
Offensiveness of this Opinion, that though he were fully convinced of the
necessity of this Disjunction, that either Brutes have nothing of Sense or
Cogitation at all, or else they must have some other Substance in them besides
Matter, he chose rather to make them mere Senseless Machins, then to allow them
Substantial Souls. Wherein avoiding a Lesser Absurdity or Paradox, he plainly
plunged himself into a Greater; scarcely any thing being more generally
received, than the Sense of Brutes. Though in truth all those, who deny the
Substantiality of Sensitive Souls, and will have Brutes to have nothing but
Matter in them, ought consequently according to Reason, to do as Cartesius did,
deprive them of all Sense. But on the contrary, if it be evident from the
Phenomenon, that Brutes are not mere Senseless Machins or Automata, and only
like Clocks or Watches, then ought not Popular Opinion and Vulgar Prejudice so
far to prevail with us, as to hinder our Assent, to that which sound Reason and
Philosophy clearly dictates, that therefore they must have something more than
Matter in them. Neither ought we, when we clearly conceive any thing to be
true, as this, That Life and Cogitation cannot possibly rise, out of Dead and
Senseless Matter; to abandon it, or deny our Assent thereunto because we find it
attended with some Difficulty, not easily Extricable by us, or cannot free all
the Consequences thereof from some Inconvenience or Absurdity, such as seems to
be in the Permanent Subsistence of Brutish Souls.

For the giving an Account of which notwithstanding, Plato and the Ancient
Pythagoreans, proposed this following Hypothesis. That Souls as well Sensitive,
as Rational, being all Substantial, but not Self-Existent, (because there is
but one Fountain, and Principle of all things) were therefore Produced or
Caused by the Deity. But this; not in the Generations of the respective
Animals; it being indecorous that this Divine Miraculous Creative Power, should
constantly lacquey by and attend upon Natural Generations; as also incongruous,
that Souls should be so much Juniors to Every Atom of Dust, that is in the
whole World; but either all of them from Eternity; according to those who
Denied the Novity of the World; or rather according to others, who asserted the
Cosmogonia, in the first beginning of the World's Creation. Wherefore, it being
also Natural to Souls as such, to Actuate and Enliven some Body, or to be as it
were Clothed therewith, these as soon as Created, were immediately Invested with
certain Thin and Subtle Bodies, or put into Light Ethereal or Aereal Chariots
and Vehicles; wherein they subsist both before their Entrance into other Gross
Terrestrial, Bodies and after their Egress out of them. So that the Souls not
only of men, but also of other Animals, have sometimes a Thicker, and sometimes
a Thinner Indument or Clothing. And thus do we understand Boethius, not only of
the Rational; but also of the other Inferior Sensitive Souls, in these Verses
of his, Tu Causis Animas paribus Vitasque Minores,
Provehis, and Levibus sublimes Curribus aptans,
In Coelum Terramque seris.
Where his Light Chariots, which all Lives or Souls at their very First
Creation, by God are placed in; and in which being wasted, they are both
together as as it were Sowed into the Gross Terrestrial Matter; are Thin,
Aereal and Ethereal Bodies. But this is plainly declared by Proclus upon the
Timaeus, after he had spoken of the Souls of Demons and Men, L. 5 p. 290.
in this manner; (...), And every Soul, must of necessity have, before these
Mortal Bodies, certain Eternal and easily moveable Bodies, it being Essential
to them to move. There is indeed mention made by the same Proclus, and others,
of an Opinion of (...), Irrational or Brutish Demons, or Demoniack Aereal
Brutes; L. 4. p. 283.
of which he sometime speaks doubtfully, as (...), If there be any Irrational
Demons, as the Theurgists affirm. But the Dispute, Doubt or Controversy here
only was, Whether there were any such Irrational Demons Immortal or no. For
thus we learn from these Words of Ammonius upon the Porphyrian Isagoge, (...),
Some affirm, that there is a certain kind of Irrational Demons Immortal; but
others, that all these Irrational or Brutish Demons, are Mortal: Where by
Irrational Demons Immortal, seem to be understood, such as never Descend into
Terrestrial Bodies, (and these are there disclaimed by Ammonius) but the Mortal
Ones, such as act also upon Gross Terrestrial Bodies, obnoxious to Death and
Corruption. As if Ammonius should have said, There are no other Brutish or
Irrational Demons, than only the Souls of such Brute Animals, as are here
amongst us, sometimes acting only Aereal Bodies. Thus according to the ancient
Pythagorick Hypothesis; There is neither any New Substantial thing now Made,
which was not before, nor yet any Real Entity Destroyed into Nothing; not only
no Matter, but also no Soul nor Life: God after the First Creation, neither
making any New Substance, nor yet Annihilating any thing made. He then Creating
nothing that was not fit to be Conserved in Being, and which could not be well
Used and Placed in the Universe; and afterward never Repenting him of what he
had before done. And Natural Generations and Corruptions, being nothing but
Accidental Mutations, Concretions and Secretions, or Anagrammatical
Transpositions of Prae- and Post-Existing things, the same Souls and Lives
being sometimes United to one Body, and sometimes to another, Sometimes in
Thicker and sometimes in Thinner Clothing; and sometimes in the Visible,
sometimes in the Invisible: (they having Aereal as well as Terrestrial
Vehicles;) and never any Soul quite naked of all Body. And thus does Proclus
complain of some as Spurious Platonists, In Tim. p. 330.
(...), Who Destroying the Thinner Vehicles of Souls, were therefore
necessitated sometimes, to leave them in a State of Separation from all Body;
or without any Corporeal Indument. Which Cabbala probably derived from the
Egyptians, by Pythagoras; was before fully represented by us out of Ovid,
though that Transmigration of Humane Souls there into Ferine Bodies, has not
been by all acknowledged, as a Genuine Part thereof. And the same was likewise
insisted upon by Virgil. Georg. L. 4. as also owned and confirmed by Macrobius,
for a Great Truth, Somn. Scip. L. 2. C. 12.
Constat secundum verae rationis Assertionem, quam nec Cicero nescit, nec
Virgilius ignorant, dicendo, Nec Morti esse Locum; -- Constat inquam, Nihil
intra Vivum Mundum perire, sed eorum quae interire videntur, solam mutari
Speciem. It is manifest according to Reason and True Philosophy, which neither
Cicero, nor Virgil, were unacquainted with, (the Latter of these affirming,
That there is no place at all left for Death) I say, it is manifest, that none
of those things, that to us seem to die, do absolutely perish, within the
Living World, but only their Forms changed.

Now how extravagant soever this Hypothesis seem to be, yet is there no
Question, but that a Pythagorean would endeavor to find some Countenance and
Shelter for it, in the Scripture; especially that place which has so puzzled
and non-plus'd Interpreters, Romans 8.19. For the Earnest expectation of the
Creature, waits for the Manifestation of the Sons of God. For the Creature
was made subject unto Vanity, not willingly, but by reason of him who has
subjected the same in hope. Because the Creature it self also shall be
delivered from the Bondage of Corruption, into the glorious Liberty of the
Children of God. For we know, that the whole Creation Groaneth, and Travelleth
in pain together; until now. And not only they, but our selves also which have
the First Fruits of the Spirit, Groan within Our selves, Waiting for the
Adoption, even the Redemption of our Bodies. Where it is first of all evident,
(...) that the (...), Creature or Creation Spoken of, is not the very same the
(...) or (...), the Children or Sons of God, but something distinct from them.
Wherefore in the next place the Pythagorean will add, that it must of necessity
be understood, either of the Inanimate Creature only, or of the Lower Animal
Creation, or else of both these together. Now though it be readily
acknowledged, that there is a Prosopopoeia here; yet cannot all those
Expressions for all that, without difficulty and violence be understood, of the
Inanimate Creation only, or Senseless Matter. Viz. That this has (...), an
Earnest Expectation of some future Good to it self; That it is now made Subject
(...), to Vanity, Frustration and Disappointment of Desire; and (...), to
Corruption and Death: And that (...), not Willingly, but Reluctantly; And yet
(...) too, In Hope notwithstanding of some further Good to follow afterward;
and that it does in the mean time (...) and (...) Groan and Travel in Pain
together, till it be at length delivered, from the Bondage of Corruption, into
the glorious Liberty of the Children of God. Moreover, in the Generations and
Corruptions of Senseless Bodies, as of Minerals and Vegetables, or when for
example, Oil is turned into Flame, Flame into Smoke; Water into Vapor, Vapor
into Snow or Hail; Grass into Milk, Milk into Blood and Bones; and the like,
there is I say in all this, no Hurt done to any thing, nor any Real Entity
destroyed, all the Substance of Matter still remaining entirely the same,
without the least diminution, and only Accidental Transformations thereof made.
All this, is Really Nothing, but Local Motion; and there is no more Toil nor
Labor to an Inanimate Body in Motion, than in Rest; it being altogether as
Natural for a Body to be Moved by something else, as of it self to Rest. It is
all nothing, but Change of Figure, Distance, Site, and Magnitude of Parts,
causing several Sensations, Phancies, and Apparitions in us. And they who would
have the meaning of this place to be, That all such like Mutations, and
Alternate Vicissitudes in Inanimate Bodies, shall at Length quite cease, these
Groaning in the mean time, and traveling in Pain, to be delivered from the
Toylsome Labor of such Restless Motion, and to be at Ease and Quiet; by taking
away all Motion thus, out of a fond regard, to the Ease and Quiet of Senseless
Matter, they would thereby ipso facto Petrifie, the whole Corporeal Universe,
and Consequently the Bodies of Good Men also after the Resurrection, and
Congeal all into Rockie Marble or Adamant. And as vain is that other Conceit of
some, that the whole Terrestrial Globe, shall at last be Vitrified, or turned
into Transparent Crystal, as if it also Groaned in the mean time for this. For
whatsoever Change shall be made of the World, In the New Heaven, and the New
Earth to come, it is Reasonable to think, that it will not be made, for the
sake of the Senseless Matter, or the Inanimate Bodies themselves, to which all
is alike, but only for the Sake of Men and Animals, the Living Spectators, and
Inhabitants thereof, that it may be fitter, both for their Use and Delight.
Neither indeed can those words; For the Creature it self shall be delivered
from the Bondage of Corruption, into the Glorious Liberty of the Children of
God, be understood of any other, than Animals; for as much as this Liberty of
the Children of God, here meant, is their being Clothed, instead of Mortal,
with Immortal Bodies; of which no other Creatures are Capable, but only such as
consist of Soul and Body. And that (...), that Whole Creation, which is said
afterward to Groan and Travel in Pain, together, may be well understood, of
all That of the Creation, which Can Groan, or be Sensible of Evil or Misery.
Wherefore the Pythagorean would interpret this place, of the Lower Animal
Creation only, which is Sensible of Good and Evil; That as this, was
Unwillingly, or against its own Inclination (after the Fall of man, or Lapse of
Souls) made subject to Vanity, and the Bondage of Corruption, Pain, Misery and
Death, in those Gross Terrestrial Bodies: In the manifestation of the Sons of
God, when they in stead of these Mortal Bodies, shall be clothed with Celestial
and Immortal ones, then shall this Creature also have its certain share in the
Felicity of that Glorious Time, and partake in some Measure of such a Liberty,
by being Freed in like manner from these their Gross Terrestrial Bodies, and
now living only in Thin Aerial and Immortal ones: and so a Period put to all
their Miseries and Calamities, by him who made not Death, neither has pleasure
in the Destruction of the Living, but Created whatsoever lives, to this end,
that it might have its Being, and enjoy it self. But however thus much is
certain, that Brute Animals, in this place cannot be quite excluded; because
the (...) the Whole Creation, will not Suffer that: and therefore a Pythagorist
would conclude it a warrantable Inference, from this Text of Scripture, That
that whole Rank in the Creation, of Irrational and Brutish Animals, below Men,
shall not be utterly Annihilated, in the Consummation of things, or Future
Renovation of the World* quite stripped of all this Furniture; Men being then
left alone in it: but that there shall be a Continuation of this Species or
Rank of Being. And not only so neither; as if there should still be a constant
Succession of such Alternate Generations and Corruptions, Productions or Births
and Deaths of Brute Animals, to all Eternity; but also that the Individuals
themselves shall continue the same, for as much as otherwise there would be
none at all delivered from the Bondage of Corruption. And Lastly, that these
very Souls of Brutes, which at this time Groan and Travel in Pain, shall
themselves be made partakers of that Liberty of the Children of God; since
otherwise, they should be With Child, or Parturient of Nothing; Groaning not
for themselves, but others. But enough of this Pythagorick Hypothesis, which
supposing all manner of Souls, Sensitive as well as Rational, to be Substantial
things, and therefore to have a Permanency after Death, in their distinct
Natures, allows them certain Thin Aerial Ochemata, or Vehicles, to Subsist in,
when these Gross Terrestrial ones shall fail them.

But let these Aerial Vehicles of the Souls of Brutes go for a Whimsey or mere
Figment; nor let them be allowed, to Act or Enliven any other, than Terrestrial
Bodies only, by means whereof they must needs be immediately after Death, quite
Destitute of all Body; they Subsisting nevertheless, and not vanishing into
Nothing, because they are not mere Accidents, but Substantial things: We say
that in this case, though the Substances of them remain, yet must they needs
continue in a State of Insensibility and Inactivity, unless perhaps they be
again afterward united to some other Terrestrial Bodies. Because though
Intellection be the Energie of the Rational Soul alone, without the Concurrence
of Body, yet is the Energie of the Sensitive, always Conjoined with it: Sense
being, as Aristotle has rightly determined. a Complication of Soul and Body
together, as Weaving is of the Weaver and Weaving Instruments. Wherefore we
say, that if the Irrational and Sensitive Souls in Brutes, being Substantial
things also, be after Death quite destitute of all Body, then can they neither
have Sense of any thing, nor Act upon any thing, but must continue for so long
a time, in a State of Insensibility and Inactivity. Which is a thing therefore
to be thought the less Impossible, because no man can be certain, that his own
Soul in Sleep, Lethargies, and Apoplexies, etc. has always an uninterrupted
Consciousness of it self; and that it was never without Thoughts, even in the
Mother's Womb. However there is little Reason to doubt, but that the Sensitive
Souls of such Animals, as Lie Dead or Asleep all the Winter, and Revive or
Awake again, at the Approaching warmth of Summer, do for that time continue, in
a State of Inactivity and Insensibility. Upon which account, though these Souls
of Brutes may be said in one Sense to be Immortal, because the Substance of
them, and the Root of life in them, still remains, yet may they in another
Sense, be said also to be Mortal, as having the Exercise of that Life for a
time at least, quite suspended. From whence it appears, that there is no Reason
at all, for that Fear and Suspicion of some; That if the Souls of Brutes be
Substantial, and continue in Being after Death, they must therefore needs go
either to Heaven or Hell. But as for that Supposed Possibility, of their
awakening again afterward, in some other Terrestial Bodies, this seems to be
no more, than what is found by daily Experience, in the Course of Nature, when
the Silkworm and other Worms, dying, are transformed into Butterflies. For
there is little Reason to doubt, but that the same Soul which before Acted the
Body of the Silkworm, does afterward Act that of the Butterfly: upon which
account it is, that this has been made by Christian Theologers, an Emblem of
the Resurrection.

Hitherto have we declared Two several Opinions, concerning the Substantial
Souls of Brutes, supposed therefore to have a Permanent Subsistence after
Death, one of Plato's and the Pythagorean's, that when they are divested of
these Gross Terrestrial Bodies, they Live and have a Sense of themselves, in
Thin Aerial ones. The other, of such as Exploding these Aerial Vehicles of
Brutes, and allowing them none but Terrestrial Bodies, affirm the Substances of
them Surviving Death, to continue in a State of Inactivity and Insensibility,
Sleep, Silence, or Stupor. But now to say the Truth, there is no Absolute
Necessity, that these Souls of Brutes, because Substantial, should therefore
have a Permanent Subsistence after Death to all Eternity; Because though it be
True, that no Substance once Created by God, will of it self ever vanish into
nothing, yet is it true also, that whatsoever was Created by God out of
Nothing, may possibly by him be Annihilated and Reduced to nothing again.
Wherefore when it is said, that the Immortality of the Humane Soul is
Demonstrable by Natural Reason, the meaning hereof is no more than this, that
its Substantiality is so Demonstrable; from whence it follows, that it will
Naturally no more perish or vanish into Nothing, than the Substance of Matter
it self: and not that it is Impossible, either for it, or Matter, by Divine
Power to be Annihilated. Wherefore the assurance that we have of our own Souls
Immortality, must depend upon something else, besides their Substantiality,
namely a Faith also in the Divine Goodness, that he will conserve in Being or
not Annihilate, all such Substances Created by him; whose Permanent
Subsistence, is neither Inconsistent with his own Attributes, nor the Good of
the Universe; as this of Rational Souls unquestionably is not; they having both
Morality and Liberty of Will, and thereby being capable of Rewards and
Punishments, and Consequently Fit Objects for the Divine Justice to display it
self upon. But for ought we can be certain, the case may be otherwise, as to
the Souls of Brute Animals devoid both of Morality and Liberty of Will, and
therefore Incapable of Reward and Punishment, That though they will not
Naturally of themselves, vanish into Nothing, yet having been Created by God,
in the Generations of the Respective Animals, and had some enjoyment of
themselves for a time, they may by him again be as well Annihilated in their
Deaths and Corruptions: and if this be Absolutely the Best, then doubtless is
it so. And to this seems agreeable the Opinion of Porphyrius amongst the
Philosophers, when he affirmed every Irrational Power or Soul, to be resolved
into the Life of the Whole; that is, Retracted and Resumed into the Deity, and
so Annihilated as to its Creaturely Nature. Though possibly there may be
another Interpretation of that Philosophers meaning here, Viz. That all the
Sensitive Souls of Brutes, are Really but one and the same Mundane Soul, as it
were Out-flowing, and variously Displaying it self, and Acting upon all the
several parts of Matter, that are capable to receive it, but at their Deaths
retiring again back into it self. But we have Sufficiently retunded the Force
of that Objection against the Ingenerability of all Souls, and the
Substantiality of those of Brutes also, from their consequent Permanence after
Death; we having showed, That notwithstanding this their Substantiality, there
is no Absolute Necessity, of their Perpetuity after Death, and Permanency to
all Eternity, or else that if they do continue to Subsist, (God Annihilating no
Substance) unless they have Aerial Vehicles to Act, they must remain in a State
of Inactivity, and Insensibility, Silence, or Sleep.

Now therefore if no Souls; no Life nor Cogitation, could possibly be ever
Generated out of Dead and Senseless Matter, they being not mere Accidents, but
Substantial things, which must in this case have come from Nothing; then either
all Souls Existed of themselves from Eternity, or else there must of Necessity
be some Eternal Unmade Life and Mind, from whence all the other Lives and Minds
were derived. And that this was the Doctrine of the Ancient Theists, That no
Soul or Mind, no Life or Understanding, was ever Generated out of Matter, but
all Produced by the Deity, the Sole Fountain of Life and Understanding; might
be here proved, were it needful, at large by sundry Testimonies, but it may
sufficiently appear from those Verses of Virgil, First in his Sixth Aenead,
where after he had spoken of God, as a Spirit and Mind diffused thorough out
the whole world, he adds, Inde hominum pecudumque genus, Vitaeque Volantum,
Et quae marmoreo fert monstra sub aequore Pontus,
That from thence, are the Lives of all Men and Beasts, Birds flying in the
Air, and Monsters swimming in the Sea. And again in his Georgicks, where after
these words, -- Deum namque ire per omnes
Terrasque Tractusque Maris, Coelumque profundum,
That God passes, through all Tracts, of Earths, Seas, and Heavens, He
subjoyneth, Hinc Pecudes, Armenta, Viros, genus omne Ferarum
Quemque sibi tenues nascentem arcessere Vitas.
Scilicet huc Reddi deinde and Resoluta Referri,
Omnia, nec Morti esse locum.
And from Hence, not only Men, but also all manner of Brute Animals and Beasts,
when produced into this world, do every one derive their Lives or Souls, as
also at their Deaths they render the same back again, to him, in whose hand or
custody they remain undestroyed; so that there is no place any where in the
world, left for Death. This was therefore undoubtedly, the Genuine Doctrine of
the Ancient Theists, however some of late, have Deviated and Swerved from it;
That no Life was Generated out of Matter, but all Created by the Deity, or
Derived from it, the Sole Fountain of Lives and Souls.

And it is a Truth so evident, That Life being Substantial, and not a mere
Accidental thing Generated and Corrupted, there must therefore of Necessity, be
Some Eternal Unmade Life and Mind, from whence all other Lives and Minds are
derived, That the Hylozoick Atheists themselves (in this far wiser than the
Atomicks) were fully convinced thereof: Nevertheless being strongly possessed
with that Atheistick Prejudice, that there is no other Substance besides Body,
they Attribute this first Original Unmade Life and Understanding, to all Matter
as such, (but without Animal Consciousness) as an Essential part thereof, or
Inadequate Conception of it. From which Fundamental Life of Nature in Matter,
Modified by Organization, they fancy the Lives of all Animals and Men, to have
proceeded. So that though the Modificated Lives of Animals and Men, as such,
according to them be Accidental things, Generated and Corrupted, produced out
of Nothing and reduced to Nothing again, yet this Fundamental Life of Matter,
which is the Basis upon which they stand, being Substantial, is also Eternal
and Incorruptible. These Hylozoists therefore, to avoid a Deity, Suppose every
Atom of Senseless Matter, to have been from all Eternity, Infallibly Omniscient,
that is, to know all things without either Error or Ignorance, and to have a
Knowledge before Sense; and Vnderived from Sensibles (quite contrary to the
Doctrine of the Atomick Atheists, who make all Knowledge Sense, or the Product
thereof) though without any Animal Consciousness and Self- Perception.

But as nothing can be more Prodigiously Absurd, than thus to attribute
Infallible Omniscience, to every Atom of Matter; so is it also directly
Contradictious, to suppose Perfect Knowledge, Wisdom, or Understanding, without
any Consciousness or Self Perception; Consciousness being Essential to
Cogitation: as also, that the Substantial and Fundamental Life in men and other
Animals, should never Perish, and yet Notwithstanding their Souls and
Personalities, in Death, utterly vanish into Nothing. Moreover this Hypothesis,
can never possibly Salve the Phenomenon of Men and Animals neither; not only
because no Organization or Modification of Matter whatsoever, could ever
produce Consciousness and Self- Perception, in what was before Inconscious; but
also because every Smallest Atom thereof being supposed to be a Percipient by
it self, and to have a Perfect Life and Understanding of its own, there must be
in every one Man and Animal, not one, but a Heap or Commonwealth of innumerable
Percipients. Lastly, whereas these Hylozoick Atheists, make every Atom of
Matter Omniscient, but nothing at all Omnipotent, or assert Perfect Knowledge,
without any Perfect Power, a Knowledge without Sense and Vnderived from
Sensibles; we demand of them, where the Intelligibles, or Objects of this
Knowledge are? and whence the Ideas thereof are derived? for since they proceed
not in a way of Passion from Sensibles Existing without, nor could result from
those Atoms neither as Comprehending themselves; they must needs Come from
Nothing, and many of them at least, be the Conceptions of Nothing. There cannot
possibly be any other Original by the wit of man devised, of Knowledge and
Understanding, than from an Absolutely Perfect and Omnipotent Being,
Comprehending it self, and the Extent of its own Infinite Power, or all
Possibilities of things, that is, all Intelligibles. But there can be but One
such Omnipotent Being, and therefore no more, than One Original, and Eternal
Unmade Mind, from whence all the other Minds are Derived. Wherefore this
Hylozoick Atheism, is nothing but the Breaking and Crumbling of the Simple
Deity, One Perfect Understanding Being, into Matter, and all the several Atoms
of it.

And now have we made it manifest, that these Atheists, are so far from being
able to disprove a God, from this Topic of Cogitation, Knowledge or
Understanding, that they cannot possibly Salve the Phenomenon thereof, without
a God; it indeed affording Invincible Arguments of his Existence. For First; If
no Life or Cogitation, Soul or Mind, can possibly Spring out of Matter or Body,
devoid of Life and Understanding; and which is nothing but a Thing Extended,
into Length, Breadth and Thickness; then is it so far from being True, that all
Life and Understanding is Junior to Senseless Matter, and the Offspring
thereof; that of necessity, either all Lives and Souls, were Self-Existent from
Eternity, or else there must be One Perfect Unmade Life and Mind, from whence
all other Imperfect ones were derived: there must be an Eternal Knowledge,
before Sense and Sensibles; which is that that has printed the Stamps and
Signatures of it self, upon the Matter of the whole world. Indeed nothing can
be more certain than this, that all Knowledge and Understanding in Our selves,
is not a mere Passion from Singular Sensibles, or Bodies Existing without us,
as the forementioned Atheists also conclude; (from whence they would again
Infer, that Knowledge as such, is in its own Nature Junior to Sensibles, and
the mere Creature of them, and Consequently no Creator.) There being nothing
which comes to us, from the Objects of Sense without, but Only Local Motion and
Pressure, and there being other Objects of the Mind, besides Singular
Sensibles; not only all Vniversals, but also such Intelligibles, as never were
nor can be in Sense. Now if our Humane Knowledge and Understanding be not a
Passion from things Existing without us; then can it have no other Original,
than in way of Participation, from a Perfect Mind, the Mind of an Infinitely
Fecund and Powerful Being, comprehending It self, and in It self all things;
all the Possibilities of things before they were Made, their Respects and the
Verities belonging to them. So that a Perfect Omnipotent Being together with
the Possibilities of things contained in it; is the First (...), Intelligible,
or Object of Mind and Understanding, by which all other Singulars are
Understood. And were there no such Perfect, Infinitely Fecund, and Powerful
Being, there could have been, no Mind or Understanding at all. As also, were
there no Perfect Mind, viz. That of an Omnipotent Being Comprehending It self,
and all Possibilities of things vertually contained in it; all the Knowledge,
and Intelligible Ideas, of our Imperfect Minds, must needs have Sprung from
Nothing. And thus is the Existence of a God, again Demonstrated, from that
Phenomenon of Knowledge or Understanding.

HAving quite Routed and Vanquished the Atheists Main Body, we shall now blow
away the Remainder of their weaker and scattered Forces ( viz. Their Objections
against Providence, their Queries, and their Arguments from Interest) with a
Breath or two. Their First Objection is against Providence, as to the Fabric
of the World, from the Faultiness of the Mundane System, Intellectually
considered, and in Order to Ends; Quia tanta stat Praedita Culpa; That Because
it is so Ill-Made, therefore it could not be made by a God. Where the Atheist
takes it for granted, that whosoever asserts a God, or a Perfect Mind to be the
Original of all things, does therefore ipso facto suppose All things to be Well
Made, and as they Should be. And this doubtless was the Sense of all the
Ancient Theologers; however some Modern Theists deviate there from; these
Concluding the Perfection of the Deity, not at all to consist in Goodness; but
in Power and Arbitrary Will only. As if to have a Will determined by a Rule or
Reason of Good, were the Virtue of Weak, Impotent, and Obnoxious Beings only,
or of such as have a Superior over them to give Law to them, that is of
Creatures; but the Prerogative of a Being Irresistibly Powerful, to have a Will
absolutely Indifferent to all things, and Undetermined by any thing but it
self; or to Will nothing because it is Good, but to make its own Arbitrary or
Contingent and Fortuitous Determination, the Sole Reason of all its Actions,
nay the very Rule or Measure, of Goodness, Justice, and Wisdom it self. And
this is supposed by them, to be the Liberty, Sovereignt^, and Dominion of the
Deity. Wherefore such Theists as these, would think themselves altogether
Unconcerned, in these Atheistick Objections against Providence, or in
Defending, the Fabric of the World, as Faultless; they being as ready as the
Atheists themselves, to acknowledge, that the World might really have been much
better made, than now it is; (Only that it must be said to be Well, because so
made) but pretending nevertheless, that this is no Impeachment at all of the
Existence of a God, Quia Deus non tenetur ad Optimum, Because God is No way
Bound or Obliged to the B^st; he being indeed according to them, nothing but
Arbitrary Will Omnipotent. But what do these Theists here else, then whilst
they deny, the Fortuitous Motion of Senseless Matter, to be the First Original
of all things, themselves in the mean time, Enthrone Fortuitousness and
Contingency, in the Will of an Omnipotent Being, and there give it an Absolute
Sovereignty and Dominion over all? So that the Controversy betwixt the
Atheists, and these Theists, seems to be no other than this; Whether Senseless
Matter Fortuitously Moved, or a Fortuitous Will Omnipotent, such as is
altogether undetermined, by Goodness, Justice and Wisdom, be the Sovereign
Numen, and Original of all things. Certainly, we Mortals could have little
better Ground, for our Faith and Hope, in such an Omnipotent Arbitrary Will as
this, then we could have in the Motions of Senseless Atoms, furiously agitated;
or of a Rapid Whirlwind. Nay one would think, that of the Two, it should be
more desirable, to be under the Empire of Senseless Atoms, Fortuitously moved,
then of a Will altogether Undetermined by Goodness, Justice, and Wisdom, armed
with Omnipotence; because the Former could harbor no Hurtful or Mischievous
Designs, against any, as the Latter might. But this Irrational Will, altogether
Undetermined by Goodness, Justice, and Wisdom, is so far from being the
Highest, Liberty, Sovereignty and Dominion; the Greatest Perfection, and the
Divinest thing of all; that it is indeed nothing else but Weakness and
Impotency it self, or Brutish Folly and Madness. And therefore those Ancients
who affirmed, that Mind was Lord over all, and the Supreme King of Heaven and
Earth, held at the Same time, that Good was the Sovereign Monarch of the
Universe, Good Reigning in Mind and together with it; because Mind is that
which orders all things for the Sake of Good, and whatsoever does otherwise,
was according to them, not (...), but (...), not Men's, but Dementia, and
Consequently no God. And thus does Celsus in Origin declare the Nature of God,
(...), P. 240.
God is not the President or Head of Irregular and Irrational Lust or Appetite,
and of loose Erratick Disorderliness, but of the Just and Righteous Nature. And
though this were there misapplied by him, against the Christian Doctrine of the
Resurrection (not understood) yet is the Passage highly approved by Origin; he
adding further in Confirm^tion thereof, and that as the general Sense of
Christians too, (...)^ We Christians (who hold the Resurrection) say as well
as you, that God can do nothing, which is in it self Evil, Inept, or Absurd; no
more than he is able not to be God. For if God do any Evil he is no God. So
likewise. p. 247. (...). According to Us also, God can do nothing that is
Absurd, or besides Reason.
And again, (...), God wills nothing Vnbecoming himself, or what is truly
Indecorous; for as much as this is inconsistent with his Godship. And to the
same purpose Plotinus, P. 265.
(...); The Deity acts according to its own Nature and Essence; and its
Nature and Essence displaieth Goodness and Justice: For if these Things be not
there, where should they else be found? And again elsewhere, P, 743.
(...)^ God is Essentially That which Ought to be; and therefore he did not
Happen to be such as he is: and this First Ought to be, is the Principle of all
things whatsoever, that Ought to be. Wherefore the Deity is not to be
conceived, as mere Arbitrariness, Humor, or Irrational Will and Appetite
Omnipotent, (which would indeed be but Omnipotent Chance) but as an Overflowing
Fountain of Love and Goodness, Justly and Wisely dispensing it self, and
Omnipotently reaching all things. The Will of God, is Goodness, Justice, and
Wisdom; or Decorousness, Fitness, and Ought it self, Willing; so that the
(...), that which is Absolutely The Best, is (...), an Indispensable Law to it,
because its Very Essence. God is (...), an Impartial Balance, lying Even Equal
and Indifferent to all things, and Weighing out Heaven and Earth, and all the
Things therein, in the most just and exact Proportions, and not a Grain too
much or too little of any thing. Nor is the Deity therefore Bound or Obliged to
do the Best, in any way of Servility (as men fondly imagine this to be contrary
to his Liberty) much less by the Law and Command of any Superior (which is a
Contradiction) but only by the Perfection of its own Nature, which it cannot
possibly deviate from, no more than Ungod it self. In Conclusion therefore, we
acknowledge the Atheists Argument to be thus far Good; that If there be a God,
then of Necessity must all things be Well made, and as they Should be; and vice
versa. But no Atheist will ever be able to prove, that either the Whole System
of the World, could have been Better Made, or that so much as any one thing
therein is Made Ineptly.

There are indeed many things in the Frame of Nature, which we cannot reach to
the Reasons of, they being made by a Knowledge far Superior and Transcendent,
to that of Ours, and our Experience and Ratiocination, but Slowly discovering
the Intrigues and contrivances of Providence therein; Witness the Circulation
of the Blood, the Milkie and Lymphatick Vessels, and other things, (without
which the Mechanic Structure of the Bodies of Animals cannot be understood)
all but so lately brought to light: wherefore we must not conclude, that
whatsoever we cannot find out the Reason of, or the use that it serves to, is
therefore Ineptly Made. We shall give one Instance of this; The Intestinum
Coecum, in the Bodies of Men and other Animals seems at first sight, to be but
a mere Botch or Bungle of Nature, and an Odd impertinent Appendix; neither do
we know that any Anatomist or Physiologer, has given a Rational Account
thereof, or discovered its Use, and yet there being a Valve at the Entrance of
it, these Two both together, are a most Artificial Contrivance of Nature, and
of great advantage for Animals, to hinder the Regurgitation of the Faeces
upward, toward the Ventricle.

The First Atheistick Instance of the Faultiness of things, in the Frame of
Nature, is from the Constitution of the Heavens, and the Disposition of the
Equator and Ecliptic, intersecting each other in an Angle, of Three and
Twenty Degrees and upwards; whereby as they pretend, the Terrestrial Globe, is
rendered much more Uninhabitable, than otherwise it might be. But this is built
upon a False Supposition of the Ancients, that the Torrid Zone, or all between
the Tropicks, was utterly Uninhabitable by reason of the Extremity of Heat. And
it is certain, that there is nothing which does more demonstrate a Providence
than this very thing, it being the most Convenient Site or Disposition, that
could be devised, as will appear if the Inconveniences of other Dispositions be
considered, especially these Three; First, If the Axes of those Circles should
be Parallel, and their Plains Coincident; Secondly, If they should Intersect
each other in Right Angles; and Thirdly, (which is a Middle betwixt both) If
they should cut one another in an Angle of Forty Five Degrees. For it is
evident, that each of these Dispositions would be attended with far greater
Inconveniences to the Terrestrial Inhabitants, in respect of the Length of Days
and Nights, Heat and Cold. And that these two Circles should continue thus, to
keep the same Angular Intersection, when Physical and Mechanic Causes, would
bring them still nearer together; this is a farther Eviction of a Providence
also.

In the next place, the Atheist supposes, that according to the general
Persuasion of Theists, the world and all things therein, were Created only for
the Sake of Man, he thinking to make some advantage for his Cause from hence.
But this seems, at first, to have been an Opinion only, of some strait-laced
Stoics, though afterward indeed recommended to others also, by their own
Self-love, their Over- Weaning, and Puffy Conceit of themselves. And so Fleas
and Lice, had they Understanding, might conclude the Bodies of other greater
Animals and Men also, to have been made only for them. But the Whole was not
properly made for any Part, Thus Plato, (...). De Leg. p. 903.
but the Parts for the Whole, and the Whole for the Maker thereof. And yet may
the things of this Lower World, be well said, to have been M^de, Principally,
(though not Only) for Man. For we ought not to Monopolize the Divine Goodness
to our selves, there being other Animals Superior to us, that are not
altogether Unconcerned neither in this Visible Creation: and it being
reasonable to think, that Even the Lower Animals likewise, and whatsoever, has
Conscious Life; was made partly also, to Enjoy it self. But Atheists, can be no
Fit Judges, of Worlds being made Well or Ill, either in general, or
respectively to Mankind, they having no Standing Measure for Well and Ill,
without a God and Morality, nor any True Knowledge of themselves, and what
their own Good or Evil Consists in. That was at first but a Froward Speech,
of some sullen discontented Persons, when things falling not out agreeably, to
their own Private, Selfish, and Partial Appetites, they would Revenge
themselves, by Railing upon Nature, (that is, Providence) and calling her a
Stepmother only to Mankind, whilst she was a Fond, Partial, and Indulgent
Mother to other Animals; and though this be Elegantly set off by Lucretius, yet
is there nothing but Poetic Flourish, in it all, without any Philosophic
Truth. The Advantages of Mankind being so notoriously conspicuous above those
of Brutes.

But as for Evils in general, from whence the Atheist would conclude, the God
of the Theist, to be either Impotent or Envious; it has been already declared,
that the True Original of them, is from the Necessity of Imperfect Beings, and
the Incompossibility of things; but that the Divine Art and Skill, most of all
appears, in Bonifying these Evils, and making them like Discords in Music,
to contribute to the Harmony of the Whole, and the Good of Particular Persons.

Moreover a great part of those Evils, which men are afflicted with, is not
from the Reality of Things, but only from their own Fancy and Opinions,
according to that of the Moralist, (...), It is not Things themselves that
disturb men, but only their Own Opinions concerning things; and therefore it
being much in our own Power to be freed from these, Providence is not to be
Blamed upon the account of them. Pain, is many times nearly linked with
Pleasure, according to that Socratick Fable, That when God could not reconcile
their Contrary Natures (as he would) he Tied them Head and Tail together. And
good men know that Pain is not the Evil of the Man, but only of the Part so
affected, (as Socrates also) (...), It goes no further than the Leg where it
is. But this is many times very Serviceable, to free us from the Greater Evils
of the Mind; upon which all our Happiness depends. To the Atheists who
acknowledge no Malum Culpae, No Evil of Fault, (Turpitude, or Dishonesty) Death
is the Greatest and most Tragical of all Evils. But though this according to
their forlorn Hypothesis, be nothing less than an Absolute Extinction of Life;
yet according to the Doctrine of the Genuine Theists, which makes all Souls
Substantial, no Life of it self (without Divine Annihilation) will ever quite
Vanish into Nothing, any more than the Substance of Matter does. And the
Ancient Pythagoreans and Platonists have been here so Kind, even to the Souls
of Brutes also, as that they might not be left in a State of Inactivity and
Insensibility after Death, as to bestow upon them certain Subtle Bodies, which
they may then continue to Act in. Nor can we think otherwise, but that
Aristotle from this Fountain, derived that Doctrine of his in his Second Book,
De Genesis An. c. 3. where after he had declared the Sensitive Soul, to be
Inseparable from Body, he adds, (...)^ All Souls therefore, seem to have
another Body, and Diviner than that of the Elements; and as themselves differ
in Dignity and Nobility, so do these Bodies of theirs, differ from one another.
And afterward calling this Subtle Body (...), or a Spirit, he affirms it to
be, (...), Analogous to the Element of the Stars. Only as Galen, and S. Austin,
and others have conceived, Aristotle deviated here from the Pythagoreans in
this, that he supposed the Sensitive Soul it self, to be really nothing else,
but this Very Subtle and Star-like Body, and not a distinct Substance from it,
using it only as a Vehicle. Nevertheless he there plainly affirms the Mind or
Rational Soul, to be really distinct from the Body, and to come into it From
Without Pre-Existing; and consequently* should acknowledge also its
After-Immortality. But whatsoever Aristotle's Judgment were (which is not very
Material) it is Certain that Dying, to the Rational or Humane Soul, is nothing
but a withdrawing into the Tyring-house, and putting off the Clothing of this
Terrestrial Body. So that it will still continue after death, to live to God,
whether in a Body, or without it. Though according to Plato's Express Doctrine,
De Leg. 10. p. 903.
the Soul is never quite Naked of all Body, he writting thus, (...)^ the Soul
is always conjoined with a Body, but sometimes of one kind, and sometimes of
another; which many Christian Doctors also, as is before declared, have thought
highly probable. However our Christian Faith, assures us, that the Souls of
Good men, shall at length be clothed, with Spiritual and Heavenly Bodies, such
as are, in Aristotle's Language, (...), Analogous to the Element of the Stars.
Which Christian Resurrection therefore, to Life and Immortality, is far from
being, as Celsus reproched it, (...), The Mere Hope of Worms. And thus much
shall suffice, in way of Confutation, of the First Atheistick Objection against
Providence, which is the Twelfth Argumentation propounded, in the Second
Chapter.

The Thirteenth Atheistick Argument, or Second Objection against Providence; is
from the Seeming Confusion of Humane Affairs; That all things fall alike to
all; the Innocent and the Nocent, the Pious and the Impious, the Religious and
the Profane: nay, That many times the Worser Causes and Men, prevail against
the Better, as is intimated in that Passage of the Poet, though in the Person
of a Theist, Victrix Causa Deo placuit, sed Victa Catoni; And That the Unjust
and Ungodly, often flow in all kind of Prosperity, whilst the Innocent and
Devout Worshippers of the Deity, all their Lives long, conflict with Adversity.
Whereas were there a God and Providence, as they conceive, Profane and
Irreligious Persons would be presently Thunderstruck from Heaven, or otherwise
made remarkable Objects of Divine Vengeance, as also the Pious Miraculously
protected and rescued from Evil and Harms.

Now we grant indeed, that this Consideration has too much puzzled and
staggered Weak Minds in all Ages. Because Sentence against an Evil Work is not
executed speedily, therefore is the heart of the Sons of men fully set in them
to do Evil. And the Psalmist himself, was sometime much perplexed with this
Phenomenon, the Prosperity of the Ungodly; who set their Mouths against
Heaven, and whose Tongue walks through the Earth; so that he was Tempted to
think, He had cleansed his Heart in Vain, and Washed his hands in Innocence;
(till at length entering into the Sanctuary of God, his Mind became Illuminated,
and his Soul fixed in a firm Trust and Confidence upon Divine Providence; Whom
have I in Heaven but thee, etc. My Flesh and my Heart fails, but God is the
Strength of my Heart, and my Portion for ever.) For as some will from hence be
apt to infer, That there is no God at all, but that blind Chance and Fortune
steer all ( the Fool has said in his heart, there is no God;) So will others
conclude, That though there be a God, yet he either does not know things done
here below, ( How does God Know? and is there Knowledge in the most High? Thus
did some in Plato from hence conclude, (...). De. Leg. 10.
) or else will not so far Humble himself, or Disturb his own Ease and Quiet, as
to concern himself in our Low Humane Affairs.

First of all therefore we here say, That it is altogether unreasonable, to
require that Divine Providence should Miraculously interpose upon every turn,
in Punishing the Ungodly and Preserving the Pious, and thus perpetually
interrupt the Course of Nature, (which would look but like a Botch or Bungle,
and a violent business) but rather carry things on (...), in a Still and Silent
Path, and show his Art and Skill, in making things of themselves fairly unwind,
and clear up at last into a Satisfactory Close. Passion and Self- Interest is
blind, or short sighted; but that which steers the whole world is no Fond,
Pettish, Impatient and Passionate thing; but an Impartial, Disinteressed, and
Vncaptivated Nature. Nevertheless it is certain, that sometimes we have not
wanted Instances, in Cases extraordinary, of a (...), God appearing, as it were
Miraculously upon the Stage, and manifesting himself in taking immediate
Vengeance upon Notorious Malefactors, or delivering his Faithful Servants from
imminent Dangers or Evils Threatened; as the same is often done also, by a
secret and Undiscerned overruling, of the things of Nature. But it must be
granted, that it is not always thus, but the Periods of Divine Providence, here
in this World, are commonly Longer, and the Evolutions thereof Slower:
According to that of Euripides, which yet has a Tange of Profaneness in the
Expression, (...), The Deity is Slow or Dilatory, and this is the Nature of it.
For it is not from Slackness and Remisness in the Deity, but either from his
Patience and Long-suffering, he willing that men should Repent, or else to
teach us Patience by his Example (as Plutarch suggesteth) or that all things
may be carried on with the more Pomp and Solemnity; or Lastly, for other
particular Reasons, as Plutarch ventures to assign one, why it might not be
expedient, for Dionysius the Tyrant, though so Profane and Irreligious a
Person, to have been cut off suddenly. But Wicked and Ungodly Persons often
times fail not, to be met withal at last, and at the long run, here in this
Life, and either in Themselves or Posterity to be notoriously Branded with the
Marks of Divine Displeasure: according to that of the Poet, Raro antecedentem
Scelestum, etc. It is seldom that Wickedness altogether scapes Punishment;
though it come slowly after, limping with a Lame Foot; and those Proverbial
Speeches amongst the Pagans, (...). Mills of the Gods, do slowly wind,
But they at length to powder grind.
And; Divine Justice steals on Softly with Woollen Feet, but Strikes at last
with Iron Hands.

Nevertheless we cannot say, that it is always thus neither, but that Wicked
Persons, may possibly sometimes, have an Uninterrupted Prosperity here in this
Life, and no visible Marks of Divine Displeasure upon them: but as the
generously virtuous, will not Envy them upon this account, nor repine at their
own condition they knowing, that (...), There is neither any thing truly Evil
to the Good, nor Good to the Evil; so are they so far from being staggered
herewith, in their Belief of a God and Providence, that they are rather the
more confirmed, in their Persuasions of a Future Immortality and Judgment after
Death, when all things shall be set straight and right, and Rewards and
Punishments Impartially Dispensed. That of Plutarch therefore, is most true
here, (...), That there is a Necessary Connection betwixt those Two things,
Divine Providence, and the Permanence or Immortality of Humane Souls, one and
the same Reason confirming them both; neither can one of these be taken alone
without the other. But they who because Judgment is not presently Executed upon
the Ungodly, blame the Management of things as Faulty, and Providence as
Defective, are like such Spectators of a Dramatick Poem, as when wicked and
injurious Persons are brought upon the Stage, for a while Swaggering and
Triumphing; impatiently cry out against the Dramatist, and presently condemn
the Plot: whereas if they would but expect the winding up of things, and stay
till the last Close, they should then see them come off with shame and
sufficient punishment. The Evolution of the World, as Plotinus calls it, is
(...), a Truer Poem, and we men Histrionical Acters upon the Stage, who
notwithstanding insert something of our Own into the Poem too; but God
Almighty, is that Skilful Dramatist, who always connecteth that of ours which
went before, with what of his follows after, into good Coherent Sense; and will
at last make it appear, that a Thread of exact Justice did run through all, and
that Rewards and Punishments are measured out in Geometrical Proportion.

Lastly, it is in it self Fit, that there should be some where, a Doubtful and
Cloudy State of things, for the better Exercise of Virtue and Faith. For as
there could have been no Hercules, had there not been Monsters to subdue, so
were there no such Difficulties to encounter with, no Puzles and Entanglements
of things, no Temptations and Trials to assault us; Virtue would grow Languid;
and that Excellent Grace of Faith, want due Occasions and Objects to exercise
it self upon. Here have we therefore, such a State of things, and this World is
as it were a Stage erected, for the more Difficult part of Virtue to Act upon;
and where we are to Live by Faith and not by Sight: That Faith, which is the
Substance of Things to be Hoped for, and the Evidence of things not Seen; a
Belief in the Goodness, Power, and Wisdom of God, when all things are Dark and
Clowdy round about us. The Just shall live by his Faith.

We have now sufficiently Confuted, the Second Atheistick Objection also,
against Providence, as to the Conduct and Economy of Humane Affairs.
Nevertheless this is a large Field, and much more might be said in Defense of
Providence, both as to these and other Instances, had we room here to Expatiate
in. Wherefore, for a Supplement of what remains, we shall refer the Reader, to
the Writings of others, who have professedly undertaken, Apology's for
Providence, both as to the Fabric, and Economy of the World; but especially
the Learned and Ingenious Author of the Divine Dialogues. Only we shall here
add Some few Considerations not so much for the Confutation of Atheists, as for
the better Satisfaction of such Religionists, who too easily Concluding, That
all Things might have been much Better than they are; are thereupon apt to call
in Question the Divine Attribute of Goodness in its full Extent; which yet is
the only Foundation of our Christian Faith.

First, therefore we say, that in Judging of the Works of God, we ought not to
consider, the Parts of the World alone by themselves; and then because we could
Fancy much Finer things, thereupon blame the Maker of the Whole. As if one
should attend only to this Earth, which is but the Lowest and most Dreggy Part
of the Universe; or blame Plants, because they have not Sense, Brutes because
they have not Reason, Men because they are not Demons or Angels, and Angels
because they are not Gods, or want Divine Perfection. Upon which Account, God
should either have made nothing at all, since there can be nothing besides
himself Absolutely Perfect; or else nothing but the Higher Rank of Angelical
Beings, free from Mortality and all those other Evils, that attend mankind; or
such Fine things, as Epicurus his Gods were feigned to be, living in certain
delicious Regions, where there was neither Blustering Winds, nor any Lowering
Clouds; nor Nipping Frosts, nor Scorching Heat, nor Night nor Shadow; but the
Calm and Unclouded Ether always, Smiling with gentle Serenity. Whereas were
there but one kind of thing, (the Best) thus made; there could have been no
Music nor Harmony at all, in the World for want of Variety. But We ought in
the first place, to consider the Whole, Whether that be not the Best, that
Could be Ma^^, having all that belongs to it; and then the Parts in reference
to the Whole, whether they be not in their several Degrees and Ranks, Congruous
and Agreeable thereunto. But this is a thing which has been so well insisted
upon by Plotinus, that we cannot speak better to it, than in his Words. (...).
P. 256.
God made the Whole most Beautiful, Entire, Complete, and Sufficient; all
agreeing friendly with it self and its parts; both the Nobler and the meaner of
them being alike Congruous thereunto. Whosoever therefore, from the Parts
thereof will blame the whole, is an Absurd and Unjust Censurer. For we ought to
Consider the Parts, not alone by themselves, but in reference to the whole,
whether they be Harmonious and Agreeable to the same. Otherwise we shall not
blame the Universe, but some of its Parts only, taken by themselves; as if one
should blame the Hair or Toes of a man, taking no notice at all of his Divine
Visage and Countenance; or omitting all other Animals, one should attend only
to the most contemptible of them: or lastly overlooking all other men, consider
only the most Deformed Thersites. But that which God made was the Whole as one
thing; which he that attends to, may hear it speaking to him after this manner.
God Almighty has made me, and from thence came I, Perfect and Complete, and
standing in need of nothing, because in me are contained all things; Plants and
Animals, and Good Souls, and Men happy with Virtue; and innumerable Demons, and
many Gods. Nor is the Earth alone in me adorned, with all manner of Plants, and
Variety of Animals; or does the Power of Soul, extend at most no further than
to the Seas; as if the whole Air and Ether and Heaven, in the mean time, were
quite devoid of Soul, and altogether unadorned with Living Inhabitants.
Moreover all things in me desire Good, and every thing reaches to it, according
to its Power and Nature. For the whole World depends upon that First and
Highest Good, the Gods themselves who reign in my several parts, and all
Animals and Plants, and whatsoever seems to be Inanimate in me. For Some things
in me, partake only of Being, some of Life also, some of Sense, some of Reason,
and some of Intellect above Reason. But no man ought to require Equal things
from Unequal; nor that the Finger should see, but the Eye; it being enough for
the Finger to be a Finger, and to perform its own Office. And again afterward,
(...)^ As an Artificer would not make all things in an Animal to be Eyes; so
neither has the Divine (...), or Spermatick Reason of the World made all things
Gods; but some Gods, and some Demons, and some Men, and some Lower Animals. Not
out of Envy, but to display its own Variety and Fecundity. But we are like
Unskillful Spectators of a Picture, who condemn the Limner, because he has not
put bright Colors every where: whereas he had suited his Colors to every part
respectively, giving to each such as belonged to it. Or else are we like those
who would blame a Comedy or Tragedy, because they were not all Kings or Heroes
that acted in it, but some Servants and Rustic Clowns, introduced also,
talking after their Rude fashion. Whereas the Dramatick Poem would neither be
Complete, nor Elegant and Delightful, were all those Worser Parts taken out of
it.

Again; We cannot certainly conclude that the Works of God and his Creation do
not transcend those narrow Limits, which Vulgar Opinion and Imagination sets
them; that commonly terminates the Universe, but a little above the Clouds, or
at most supposes the Fixed Stars, being all fastened in One Solid Sphere, to be
the Utmost Wall, or Arched Roof, and Rolling Circumference thereof. Much less
ought we, upon such Groundless Suppositions, to infer, That the World might
therefore have been made much Better than it is, because it might have been
much more Roomy and Capacious. We explode the Atheistick Infinity of Distant
Worlds; nor can we admit that Cartesian, seemingly more Modest, Indefinite
Extension of one Corporeal Universe, which yet really according to that
Philosophers meaning, has Nullos Fines, no Bounds nor Limits at all. For We
persuade our selves that the Corporeal World, is as Incapable of a Positive
Infinity of Magnitude, as it is of Time; there being no Magnitude so Great, but
that more still might be Added to it. Nevertheless, as we cannot possibly
Imagine the Sun, to be a Quarter, or an Hundredth Part so big as we know it to
be; so much more may the whole Corporeal Universe, far transcend those narrow
Bounds, which our Imagination would circumscribe it in. The New Celestial
Phenomenon, and the late Improvements of Astronomy and Philosophy made
thereupon, render it so probable, that even this Dull Earth of ours is a
Planet, and the Sun a Fixed Star, in the Center of that Vortex, wherein it
moves, that many have shrewdly suspected, that there are other Habitable
Globes, besides this Earth of ours, (which may be Sailed round about in a year
or two) as also more Suns, with their respective Planets, than One. However the
Distance of all the Fixed Stars from us, being so Vast, that the Diameter of
the Great Orb, makes no discernible Parallax in the Site of them; from whence
it is also probable, that the other Fixed Stars are likewise vastly distant
from one another; This, I say, widens the Corporeal Universe to us, and makes
those Flammantia Moenia Mundi, as Lucretius calls them, Those Flaming Walls of
the World, to fly away before us. Now it is not reasonable to think, that all
this Immense Vastness, should lie Waste, Desert, and Uninhabited, and have
nothing in it, that could Praise the Creator thereof, save only this One Small
Spot of Earth. In my Father's House, (says our Savior) are Many Mansions. And
Baruch ( Chap. 3. appointed by our Church to be read publicly) O Israel, how
great is the House of God, and how large is the place of his Possession? Great
and has no End, High and Unmeasurable. Which yet we understand not, of an
Absolute Infinity, but only such an Immense Vastness, as far transcends Vulgar
Opinion and Imagination.

We shall add but one thing more; That to make a right Judgment of the Ways of
Providence, and the Justice thereof, as to the Economy of mankind, we must
look both Forwards and Backwards; or besides the Present, not only upon the
Future; but also the Past Time. Which Rule is likewise thus set down by
Plotinus, P. 264.
(...)^ Neither is that Doctrine of the Ancients to be neglected, that to give
an Account of Providence, we ought to look back upon former Periods, as well as
forward, to What is Future. Indeed he and those other Philosophers, who were
Religious, understood this so, as to conclude a Pre-Existent State of all
Particular Souls, wherein they were at first Created by God Pure; but by the
Abuse of their own Liberty Degenerated, to be a Necessary Hypothesis, for the
Salving that Phenomenon, of the Depraved State of Mankind in general here in
this Life. And not only so, but they endeavored in like manner to give an
account also, of those Different Conditions of Particular Persons as to
Morality, from their Infancy, and their other different Fates here, deriving
them all, (...), from their several Demeanors heretofore in a Pre-Existent
State. And there have not wanted Christian Doctors, who have complied with
these Philosophers in both. But our Common Christianity only agrees thus far;
as to suppose a Kind of Imputative Pre-Exstence in Adam, in whom all were
created Pure, and so consequently involved in his after miscarriage, to salve
the Pravity of Humane Nature; upon which account we are all said to be* Thus
Hierocles, (...), 157.
(...), by Nature Children of Wrath. But as for the different Conditions of
Persons, and their several Fates, more disadvantageous to some than others this
indeed the Generality of Christian Doctors, have been content to resolve, only
into an Occult, but Just Providence. And thus does Origin himself sometimes
modestly pass it over. As in his Third Book against Celsus, P. 134.
(...)^ It happens to many; so to have been brought up from their very
Childhood, as that, by one means or other, they could have no opportunity at
all of thinking of the Better things, etc. And it is very probable, that there
are Causes of these things in the Reasons of Providence, though they do not
easily fall under Humane Notice.

But there is yet a Third Atheistick Objection against Providence behind; That
is is impossible, any One Being should Animadvert and Order all things in the
Distant places of the world at once; and were this possible, yet would such
Infinite Negotiosity be very Uneasy and Distractious to it, and altogether
Inconsistent with Happin^ss. Nor w^^ld a Being Irresistibly Powerful, concern
it self in the Good or Welfare of any thing else; it standing in Need of
nothing; and all Benevole^ce and Good will arising from Indigency and
Imbecility. Wherefore such a Being, would wholly be taken up in the Enjoyment
of it self, and its own Happiness; utterly Regardless of all other things.

To which the Reply is, First; That though our selves and all Created Beings,
have but a Finite Animadversion, and Narrow Sphere of Activity, yet does it not
therefore follow, that the Case must be the same with the Deity, supposed to be
a Being Infinitely Perfect, (...), that has no manner of Defect, either of
Knowledge or Power in it. But this is a mere Idolum Specus, an Idol of the Cave
or Den, Men Measuring the Deity, by their own Scantling, and Narrowness. And
indeed were there Nothing at all, but what we our selves could fully
Comprehend, there could be no God. Were the Sun an Animal, and had Life
Co-Extended with its Rays and Light, it would see and perceive every Atom of
Matter, that its out stretched Beams reached to, and touched. Now all Created
Beings, are themselves in some sense, but the Rays of the Deity; which
therefore cannot but Feel and Sensibly Perceive, all these its own Effluxes and
Emanations. Men themselves can order and manage Affairs, in several distant
Places at once, without any Disturbance, and we have innumerable Notions of
things in our Mind, that lie there easily together, without Crowding one
another, or Causing any Distraction to us.

Nevertheless the Minds of weak Mortals may here be somewhat eased and helped
by considering, what has been before suggested. That there is no necessity,
God Almighty should (...), do all things himself Immediately and Drudgingly;
but he may have his Inferior Ministers and Executioners under him, to
discharge him of that Supposed Encumberment. As First of all, an Artificial
Plastic Nature, which without Knowledge and Animal Consciousness, disposes the
Matter of the Universe, according to the Platform or Idea of a Perfect Mind,
and forms the Bodies of all Animals. And this was the Reason why we did before
insist so much upon this Artificial Regular and Methodical Nature; namely that
Divine Providence, might neither be excluded, from having an Influence upon all
things in this Lower World, as resulting only from the Fortuitous Motions of
Senseless Matter, unguided by any Mind; nor yet the Deity be supposed to do
every thing it self Immediately and Miraculously, without the Subservient
Ministry of any Natural Causes; which would seem to us Mortals, to be not only
a Violent, but also an Operose, Cumbersom, and Moliminous Business. And thus
did Plato acknowledge, that there were, (...)^ Certain Causes of a Prudent,
that is, Artificial and Orderly Nature, which God makes use of, as Subservient
to himself, in the Mundane Economy. Besides which those Instincts also
impressed upon Animals, and which they are Passive to, directing them to Act
for Ends either not understood, or not attended to by them, in order to their
own Good and the Good of the Universe, are another part of that Divine Fate,
which inserted into things themselves, is the Servant and Executioner of
Providence. Above all which there are yet other Knowing and Understanding
Ministers, of the Deity, as its Eyes and Hands; Demoniack; or Angelick Beings,
appointed to preside over Mankind, all Mundane Affairs, and the Things of
Nature, they having their several distinct Offices and Provinces assigned them.
Of which also Plato thus, (...)^ P. 903*
There are certain Rulers or Presidents appointed by that Supreme God, who
Governs the whole world, over all the several things and Parts therein, even to
the smallest Distribution of them. All which Inferior Causes, are constantly
over looked and supervised by the Watchful Eye of God Almighty, himself, who
may also sometimes Extraordinarily Interpose.

We need not therefore, restrain and confine Divine Providence, to a Few
Greater things only, as some do, that we may thereby consult the ease of the
Deity, and its Freedom from Distraction, but may and ought to Extend it, to all
things whatsoever, Small as well as Great. And indeed the Great things of the
World cannot well be ordered neither, without some regard to the Small and
Little: (...)^ As Architects affirm, that great stones cannot be well placed
together in a Building, without little. Neither can Generals of Armies, nor
Governors of Families, nor Masters of Ships, nor Mechanic Artificers,
discharge their several Functions, and do their Works respectively as they
ought, did they not mind the Small things also as well as the Great, (...)
(says the forementioned Philosopher) (...)^ Let us not therefore make God
Almighty Inferior to Mortal Opificers who by one and the same Art, can order
Small things as well as Great: and so suppose him to be Supine and negligent.
Nevertheless the Chief Concernment and Employment of Divine Providence in the
World; is the Economy of Souls, or Government of Rational Beings; which is by
Plato contracted into this Compendium, (...), P. 903.
etc. There is no other work left, for the Supreme Governor of all, then only
to Translate Better Souls into Better places and Conditions, and Worser into
Worser: or, as he after adds, to dispose of every one in the world in such a
manner as might best render, (...), Virtue victorious, and triumphant over
Vice. And thus may the slow and Imperfect wits of Mortals, be satisfied; that
Providence to the Deity, is no Moliminous, Laborious, and Distractious thing.

But that there is no higher Spring of Life in Rational Animals, than
Contracted Self Love, and that all Good Will and Benevolence, arises only from
Indigency and Imbecility, and That no Being whatsoever is concerned in the
welfare of any other thing, but only what it self stands in Need of; and Lastly
therefore, That what is Irresistibly Powerful and Needs nothing; would have no
manner of Benevolence, nor concern it self in the Good and Welfare of any thing
whatsoever; This is but another Idol of the Atheists Den; and only argues their
Bad Nature, Low-sunck Minds, and Gross Immorality. And the same is to be said
also of that other Maxim of theirs, That what is perfectly Happy, would have
nothing at all To Do, but only enjoy its own Ease and Quiet: whereas there is
nothing more troublesome to our selves, than this (...), this having Nothing to
Do; and the Activity of the Deity or a Perfect Being, is altogether as Easy to
it, as its Essence.

The Atheistick Queries come next to be Answered; which being but Three, are
Naturally to be disposed in this order: First, If there were a God or Perfect
Being, who therefore was sufficiently Happy in the enjoyment of himself, Why
would he go about to make a World? Secondly, If he must needs make a World, why
did he not make it sooner? this Late production thereof, looking, as if he had
but newly awaked out out of a long sleep, throughout Infinite Past Ages, or
else had in length of time contracted a Satiety of his Solitude. Thirdly and
Lastly, What Tools or Instruments? what Machines or Engines had be? or How
could he move the Matter of the whole world; especially if Incorporeal; because
then he would run through all things, and could not lay hold nor fasten upon
any thing.

To the First therefore, we say, That the reason why God made the World, was
from his own Overflowing and Communicative Goodness, that there might be other
Beings also Happy besides him, and enjoy themselves. Nor does this at all
clash, with God's making of the world, for his own Glory and Honor, though
Plotinus were so shy of that, (...), It is ridiculous to say, that God made the
world, that he might be Honored; this being to transfer the affections of
humane Artificers and Statuaries upon him. But the chief Reason of his saying
so, was, because that Philosopher conceived, the World to have proceeded, not
so much from the Will of the Deity, as the Necessity of its Nature. Though this
be true also, that God did not make the World, merely to Ostentate his Skill
and Power; but to communicate his Goodness, which is chiefly and properly his
Glory, as the Light and Splendour of the Sun, is the Glory of it. But the
Atheist demands, What hurt had it been for us, never to have been made? and the
Answer is easy, we should then never have enjoyed any Good; or been capable of
Happiness; and had there been no Rational Creatures at all made, it must have
been either from Impotent Sterility in the Deity, or else from an Invidious,
Narrow and Contracted Selfishness; or want of Benignity, and Communicative
Goodness; both which are Inconsistent with a Perfect Being. But the Argument
may be thus Retorted upon these Atheists; What Hurt would it be for us, to
Cease to Be, or Become Nothing? And why then are these Atheists as well as
others, so Unwilling to Die?

But then in the next place they Urge; Why was not the World made Sooner, since
this Goodness of God was without Date, and from Everlasting? But this Question
may be taken in two different Senses, Either, Why was not the world from
Eternity, as God and his Goodness are Eternal? or else Secondly, If the World
could not be from Eternity, yet notwithstanding Why was it not sooner, but so
lately made? In both which Queries the Atomick Atheists take it for granted,
that the System of the World was not from Eternity, but had a beginning. Now we
say, That the Reason why the world was not Made from Eternity, was not from any
Defect of Goodness in the Divine Will, but because there is an Absolute
Impossibility in the thing it self; or because the Necessity and Incapacity of
such an Imperfect Being hindered. For we must confess, that for our parts, we
are prone to believe, That could the world have been from Eternity, it should
certainly have been so. And just thus does Philoponus, in his Confutation of
Proclus his Arguments for the World's Eternity, declare himself, and no
otherwise. P. 4.
(...)^ Our selves also supposing, the world not to have been Eternal, do
neither ascribe this to any Defect either of Godness or of Power in the Deity,
but only to the Impossibility of the Thing it self. Where in the following
words, he gives a Two fold Account of this Impossibility* of the worlds
Eternity, (...)^ First because, There can be nothing Actually Infinite, and yet
Run through, as all the Past Duration of the World has been; and Secondly,
because that which is Made or brought into Being by another, as a distinct
thing from it, cannot be Coeternal with its Maker. Where it is probable, that
Philoponus being a Christian, designed not to oppose the Eternal Generation of
the Son of God, but only to assert, that Nothing which was properly Made or
Created by God, and nothing which was not it self God, could be from Eternity,
or without Beginning. And now we see, How those Atheistick Exceptions against
the Novity of the Divine Creation, as if God must therefore either have Slept
from Eternity, or else have at length contracted a Satiety of his former
Solitude, and the like; do of themselves quite vanish into Nothing. But then as
to the Second Sense of the Question, Why the World, though it could not
possibly be from Eternity, yet was no sooner, but so lately made? we say, that
this is an Absurd Question; both because Time was made together with the World,
and there was no Sooner or Later, before Time; and also because, Whatsoever had
a beginning, must of necessity be once but a Day Old. Wherefore the World could
not possibly have been so Made by God in time, as not to be once, but Five or
Six Thousand years old, and no more; as now it is.

And as for the Third and Last Query; How God could move and command the Matter
of the whole World? especially If Incorporeal? We Reply; First, That all other
things being derived from God as their only Fountain and Original, and
Essentially depending on him, who by his Absolute Power also, could Annihilate
whatsoever he Created; he must needs have a Despotick Power over all; and every
thing whatsoever be Naturally Subject and Obsequious to him. And since no Body
can possibly Move it self, that which first moved Matter, must of nec^ssity be
Incorporeal; nor could it move it by Local Motion, as one Body moves another,
or as Engines and Machines move, by Trusion or Pulsion, they being before
moved, but must do it by another kind of Action, such as is not Local Motion,
nor Heterocinesie, but Autocinesie; that is, by Cogitation. Wherefore that
Conceit of the Atheists, that an Incorporeal Deity could not possibly move the
Matter of the World, because it would run through it, and could not fasten or
lay hold thereupon; is Absurd, because this moves Matter not Mechanically, but
Vitally, and by Cogitation only. And that a Cogitative Being as such, has a
Natural Imperium over Matter and Power of Moving it, without any Engines or
Machines, is unquestionably certain, even from our own Souls; which move our
Bodies and Command them every way, merely by Will and Thought. And a Perfect
Mind, presiding over the Matter of the whole world, could much more
irresistibly, and with Infinitely more ease, move the whole Corporeal Universe,
merely by Will and Cogitation; then we can our Bodies.

The Last Head of Atheistick Argumentation, is from Interest. And First, the
Atheists would persuade, that it is the Interest of mankind in General, and of
every particular person, that there should be no God, that is, no Being
Infinitely Powerful, that has no Law, but its own Will; and therefore may
punish whom he pleases Eternally after Death.

To which our First Reply is; That if there be a God, and Souls be Immortal,
then is it not any man's Thinking otherwise, that will alter the Case, nor
afford the Atheists any Reli^f against those two Imagined Evils of theirs. For
Things are Sullen, and will be as they are, what ever we Think them, or Wish
them to be: and men will at last discover their Error, when perhaps it may be
too late. Wishing is no Proving; and therefore this Atheistick Argument, from
Interest, is no Argument at all against the Existence of a God, it being
nothing but the ignorant wish, and vain desire of Besotted Atheists.

In the next place this Wish of Atheists, is altogether founded, upon a
Mistaken Notion of God Almighty too, That he is nothing but Arbitrary Will
Omnipotent; which indeed is not the most Desirable thing. But as it has been
often declared, the Will of God is the Will of Goodness, Justice, and Wisdom it
self Omnipotent. His Will is not mere Will, such as has no other Reason
besides it self; but it is Law, Equity and Chancery; it is the (...), or Ought
it self, Decreeing, Willing, and Acting. Neither does God Punish any, out of a
delight in Punishment, or in the Evil and Suffering of the Persons Punished;
but to those who are not (...), altogether Incurable, (...), his Punishment is
Physic, in order to their recovery and amendment; so that the Sourse and
Fountain thereof is Goodness to the Persons themselves Punished. But to such as
are Incurable, the Punishment inflicted on them, is Intended for the Good of
the Whole. So that this Attribute of Justice in God, does not at all Clash,
with the Attribute of Goodness, it being but a Branch thereof or particular
Modification of the same. Goodness and Justice in God, are always Complicated
together; neither his Goodness being Fondness, nor his Justice Cruelty; but he
being both Good in Punishing, and Just in Rewarding and Dispensing Benefits.
Wherefore, it can be the Interest of none, that there should be no God nor
Immortality, unless perhaps of such Desperately and Incurably Wicked persons,
who abandoning their true Interest of being Good, have thereupon no other
Interest now left them, than Not to be, or become Nothing.

To be without a God, is to be without Hope in the World, for Atheists can have
neither Faith nor Hope, in Senseless Matter, and the Fortuitous Motions thereof.
And though an understanding Being, have never so much Enjoyment of it self for
the present, yet could it not possibly be Happy, without Immortality, and
Security of the Future Continuance thereof. But the Atheists conclude, that
there is Nothing Immortal, and that all Life Perishes and Vanishes into
Nothing; and consequently also, that (...), Happiness is a thing, that has no
Existence in Nature; a mere Figment and Chimaera, or Idle Wish and vain Dream
of Mortals. Wherefore it cannot be the Interest of Mankind, that this
Hypothesis should be True, which thus plainly cuts off all Hope from men; and
leaves them in an utter Impossibility of being ever Happy.

God is such a Being, as if he could be supposed not to be, there is nothing
which any who are not desperately engaged in Wickedness, no not Atheists
themselves, could possibly more Wish for, or Desire. To Believe a God, is to
Believe the Existence of all Possible Good and Perfection in the Universe; It
is to Believe, That things are as they Should be, and That the World is so well
Framed and Governed, as that the Whole System thereof, could not Possibly have
been Better. For Peccability, arises from the Necessity of Imperfect Freewilled
Beings, left to themselves, and therefore could not by Omnipotence it self have
been excluded; and though Sin Actual might perhaps have been kept out by Force
and Violence; yet all things Computed, it was doubtless most for the Good of
the Whole, that it should not be thus Forcibly Hindered. There is Nothing,
which cannot be Hoped for, by a Good man, from the Deity; Whatsoever Happiness
his Being is Capable of; and such things as Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard,
nor can now enter into the Heart of man to Conceive. Infinite Hopes lie before
us, from the Existence of a Being Infinitely Good and Powerful, and our Own
Souls Immortality: and nothing can Hinder or Obstruct these Hopes, but our own
Wickedness of Life. To Believe a God, and Do well, are Two, the most Hopeful,
Cheerful, and Comfortable things, that possibly can be. And to this purpose is
that of Linus, (...)^
(...).
Wherefore as for Democritus and Epicurus, whose Encomiums the Atheists here so
loudly sing forth; we say, That however they have made so great a noise in the
World, and have been so much cried up of late, yet were they really no better,
than a Couple of Infatuated Sophists, or Witty Fools; and Debauchers of Mankind.

And now come we to the Last Atheistick Argumentation; wherein they endeavor
to recommend their Doctrine to Civil Sovereigns; and to persuade them, that
Theism or Religion, is absolutely Inconsistent with their Interest: Their
Reasons for which are these Three following. First, Because the Civil Sovereign
Reigns only in Fear, and therefore if there be any Power and Fear, greater than
the Power and Fear of the Leviathan, Civil Authority can signify little.
Secondly, Because Sovereignty, is in its own nature absolutely Indivisible, and
must be either Infinite, or None at all: so that Divine Laws (Natural and
Revealed) Superior to it, circumscribing it, would consequently Destroy it.
Wherefore Religion and Theism, must of necessity be Displaced, and Removed out
of the way, to make room for the Leviathan, to Roll and Tumble in. Thirdly and
Lastly, Private Judgment of Good and Evil, Just and Unjust, is also
Contradictious to the very Being of a Body Politic; which is One Artificial
Man, made up of many Natural men United under One Head; having one Common
Reason, Judgment and Will, ruling over the whole. But Conscience, which
Religion introduces, is Private Judgment of Good and Evil, Just and Unjust,
and therefore altogether Inconsistent with true Politics; that can admit of no
Private Consciences, but only One Public Conscience of the Law.

In way of Answer to the First of which, we must here briefly Vnravel the
Atheistick Ethics and Politics. The Foundation whereof is first laid, in the
Villanizing of Humane Nature; as that which has not so much as any the least
Seeds, either of Politicalness, or Ethicalness at all in it; nothing of Equity
and Philanthropy; (there being no other Charity or B^nevolence any where
according to them, save what resulteth from Fear, Imbecility, and Indigency)
nothing of Public and Common Concern, but all Private and Selfish. Appetite,
and Vtility, or the Desires of Sensual Pleasure, and Honor, Dominion, and
Precellency before others, being the only Measures of Good in Nature. So that
there can be nothing Naturally Just or Unjust, nothing in it self Sinful or
Unlawful, but every man by Nature has Jus ad omnia, a Right to Every thing,
whatsoever his Appetite inclines him unto, or himself judges Profitable; even
to other men's Bodies and Lives. Si occidere Cupis, Jus babes; If thou Desire
to Kill, thou have then Naturally, a Right thereunto; that is, a Liberty to
Kill without any Sin or Injustice. For Jus and Lex, or Justitia, Right and Law
or Justice in the Language of these Atheistick Politicians, are directly
contrary to one another; their Right being a Belluine Liberty, not Made, or
Left by Justice, but such as is Founded in a Supposition, of its Absolute
Nonexistence. Should therefore a Son not only murder his own Parents, who had
tenderly brought him up, but also Exquisitely torture them, taking pleasure in
beholding their rusul Looks, and hearing their lamentable Shreiks and Outcries;
there would be Nothing of Sin or Injustice at all in this, nor in any thing
else; because Justice is no Nature, but a mere Facticious and Artificial thing,
Made only by Men and Civil Laws. And according to these men's Apprehensions,
Nature has been very kind and indulgent to mankind herein, that it has thus
brought us into the World, without any Fetters or Shackles upon us, Free from
all Duty and Obligation, Justice and Morality, these being to them nothing but
Restraints and Hindrances of True Liberty. From all which it follows, that
Nature absolutely Dissociates and Segregates men from one another, by reason of
the Inconsistency of those Appetites of theirs, that are all Carried out only
to Private Good, and Consequently that every man is by Nature, in a State of
War and Hostility, against every man.

In the next place therefore, these Atheistick Politicians further add; that
though this their State of Nature which is a Liberty from all Justice and
Obligation, and a Lawless, Loose, or Belluine Right to every thing, be in it
self Absolutely the Best, yet nevertheless by reason of men's Imbecility, and
the Equality of their Strengths, and Inconsistency of their Appetites, it
proves by Accident the Worst: this War with every one, making men's Right or
Liberty to every thing, indeed a Right or Liberty to Nothing: they having no
security of their Lives, much less of the Comfortable enjoyment of them. For as
it is not possible, that all men should have Dominion (which were indeed the
most desirable thing according to these Principles) so the Generality must
needs be sensible of more Evil in such a State of Liberty with an Universal War
against all, than of Good. Wherefore when men had been a good while Hewing, and
Slashing, and Justling against one another, they became at length all weary
hereof, and conceived it necessary by Art to help the Defect of their own Power
here, and to choose a Lesser Evil, for the avoiding of a Greater, that is, to
make a Voluntary Abatement, of this their Infinite Right, and to Submit to
Terms of Equality with one another, in order to a Sociable and Peaceable
Cohabitation: and not only So, but also for the Security of all, that others
should observe such Rules as well as themselves, to put their Necks under the
Yoke of a Common Coercive Power, whose Will being the Will of them all, should
be the very Rule, and Law, and Measure of Justice to them.

Here therefore these Atheistick Politicians, as they first of all Slander
Humane Nature, and make a Villain of it; so do they in the next place, reproach
Justice and Civil Sovereignty also, making it to be nothing but an Ignoble and
Bastardly Brat of Fear; or else a Lesser Evil, submitted to, merely out of
Necessity; for the avoiding of a Greater Evil, that of War with every one, by
reason of men's Natural Imbecility. So that according to this Hypothesis,
Justice and Civil Government are plainly things not Good in themselves, nor
Desirable, (they being a Hinderance of Liberty, and Nothing but Shackles and
Fetters,) but by Accident only, as Necessary Evils: And thus do these
Politicians themselves sometimes distinguish betwixt Good and Just, that Bonum
Amatur Per Se, Justum Per Accidens; Good is that which is Loved for it self,
but Just by Accident. From whence it follows unavoidably, that all men must of
necessity be (...), Unwillingly Just, or not with a full and perfect, but Mixed
Will only: Just being a thing that is not Sincerely Good, but such as has a
great Dash or Dose of Evil blended with it. And this was the Old Atheistick
Generation of Justice, and of a Body Politic, Civil Society, and Sovereignty.
For though a Modern Writer affirm this Hypothesis (which he looks upon as the
only true Scheme of Politics) to be a New Invention, as the Circulation of the
Blood, and no older than the Book De Cive, yet is it Certain, that it was the
commonly received Doctrine of the Atheistick Politicians and ^hilosophers
before Plato's time; who represents their Sense concerning the Original of
Justice, and Civil Society in this manner, De Rep. L. 2. p. 358, 359.
(...)^ I am to declare first what Justice is, according to the sense of these
Philosophers, and from whence it was Generated. They say therefore, that by
Nature, Lawless Liberty, and to do that which is now called Injustice, and
Injury, to other men is Good; but to Suffer it from others is Evil. But of the
two, there is more of Evil in suffering it, than of Good in doing it: Whereupon
when men had Clashed a good while, Doing and Suffering Injury, the Greater
part, who by reason of their Imbecility were not able to take the Former
without the Latter, at length Compounded the business amongst themselves, and
agreed together, by Pacts and Covenants neither to Do nor Suffer Injury, but to
Submit to Rules of Equality and make Laws by Compact, in order to their
Peaceable Cohabitation, they calling that which was required in those Laws by
the Name of Just. And then is it added; (...)^ And this is according to these
Philosophers, the Generation and Essence of Justice, as a certain Middle thing
betwixt the Best and the Worst. The Best, to exercise a Lawless Liberty of
doing whatsoeves one please to other men without Suffering any inconvenience
from it; And the Worst to Suffer Evil from others without being able to revenge
it. Justice therefore, being a Middle thing betwixt both these, is Loved, not
as that which is Good in it self, but only by reason of men's Imbecility, and
their Inability to do Injustice. For as much as he that had sufficient Power
would never enter into such Compacts and Submit to Equality, and Subjection. As
for Example, if a man had Gyges his Magical Ring, that he could do whatsoever
he listed, and not be seen or taken Notice of by any, such a one would
certainly never Enter into Covenants, nor Submit to Laws of Equality and
Subjection. Agreeably whereunto, it has been concluded also by some of these
Old At^eistick Philosophers, that Justice was (...), Not properly and directly,
ones own Good, the Good of him that is Just, but another man's Good, partly of
the Fellow Citizens, but chiefly of the Ruler, whose Vassal he is. And it is
well Known, that after Plato's Time, this Hypothesis concerning Justice, that
it was a mere Factitious thing, and sprung only from men's Fear and Imbecility,
as a Lesser Evil, was much insisted on by Epicurus also.

But let us in the next place see, how our Modern Atheistick Philosophers and
Politicians, will manage and carry on this Hypothesis, so as to Consociate men
by Art, into a Body Politic, that are Naturally Dissociated from one another,
as also M^ke Justice, and Obligation Artificial, when there is none in Nature.
First of all therefore* these Artificial Justice-Makers, City-M^k^rs, and
Authority-M^kers, tell us, that though men have an Infinite Right by Nature,
yet may they Alienate this Right or part thereof, from themselves, and either
Simply Renounce it, or Transfer the same upon some other Person; by means
whereof it will become Unlawful for themselves, afterward, to make use
thereof. Thus late Writer, M^n may by Signs D^cl^re, Velle se non Licitum sibi
amplius fore, certum aliquid facere quod Jure antea fecisse poterant. That it
is their Will, it shall no longer be Lawful for them, to do something which
before they had a Right to do; and this is called by him, a Simple Renunciation
of Right; and ^urther says he, they may declare again, Velle se non Licitum
sibi amplius fore ali^ui Resistere, etc. That it is their Will, it shall be no
longer Lawful for them, to Resist this or that particular Person, whom before
they might Lawfully h^ve resisted; and this is called a Translation of Right.
But if there be Nothing in its own Nature Unlawful, then cannot this be
Vnl^wful for a man afterward, to make use of such Liberty as he had before in
Words Renounced or Abandoned. Nor can any man by his mere Will, make any thing
Unlawful to him, which was not so in it self; but only Suspend the Exercise of
so much of his Liberty, as he thought good. But however, could a man by his
Will, Oblige himself, or make any thing Unlawful to him, there would be Nothing
got by this, because then might he by his Will, Disoblige himself again, and
make the same Lawful as before. For what is Made merely by Will, may be
Destroyed by Will. Wherefore these Politicians will yet urge the business
further, and tell us, That no man can be Obliged but by his own Act, and that
the Essence of Injustice, is Nothing else, but Dati Repetitio, The taking away
of that, which one had before given. To which we again Reply, that were a man
Naturally Vnobliged to any thing, then could he no way be Obl^ged, to stand to
his own Act, so that it should be Really Unjust and Unlawful for him, at any
time upon Second thoughts, Voluntarily to undo, what he had before voluntarily
done. But the Atheists here plainly Render Injustice, a mere Ludicrous thing;
when they tell us, that it is Nothing but such an Absurdity in Life, as it is
in Disputation, when a man Denies a Proposition that he had before Granted.
Which is no Real Evil in him as a Man, but only a thing Called an Absurdity, as
a Disputant, That is, Injustice is no Absolute Evil of the Man; but only a
R^lative Incongruity in him, as a Citizen. As when a man speaking L^tine,
observes not the Laws of Grammar, this is a kind of Injustice in him, as a
Latinist or Grammarian; so when one who lives in Civil Society, observes not
the Laws and Conditions thereof, this is, as it were. The False Latin of a
Citizen, and nothing else. According to which Notion of Injustice, there is no
such Real Evil or Hurt in it, as can any way withstand, the Force of Appetite
and Private Vtility, and Oblige men to Civil Obedience, when it is Contrary to
the same. But these Political Juglers and Enchanters, will here cast yet a
further Mist before men's Eyes with their Pacts and Covenants. For men by their
Covenants, say they, may Unquestionably Oblige themselves, and make things
Unjust and Unlawful to them, that were not so before. Wherefore Injustice is
again Defined by them, and that with more Speciousness, to be the Breach of
Covenants But though it be true, that if there be Natural Justice; Covenants
will Oblige; yet upon the Contrary Supposition, that there is Nothing Naturally
Unjust; this cannot be Unjust, neither to Break Covenants. Covenants without
Natural Justice, are nothing but mere Words and Breath; (as indeed these
Atheistick Politicians themselves, agreeably to their own Hypothesis, call
them) and therefore can they have no Force to Oblige. Wherefore these
Justice-Makers, are themselves at last necessita^ed, to fly to Laws of Nature,
and to Pretend, this to be a Law of Nature, That men should Stand to their
Pacts and Covenants. Which is plainly to Contradict their main Fundamental
Principle, that by Nature nothing is Unjust or Vlaw^ul; for if it be so, then
can there be no Laws of Nature; and if there be Laws of Nature, then must there
be something Naturally Unjust and Unlawful. So that this is not to Make
Justice, but clearly to Unmake their own Hypothesis, and to suppose Justice to
have been already Made by Nature, or to be in Nature; which is a Gross
Absurdity in Disputation; to Affirm what one had before Denied. But these their
Laws of Nature are indeed nothing but Juggling Equivocation, and a mere Mockery;
themselves again acknowledging them to be no Laws, because Law is nothing but
the Word of him, who has Command over others; but only Conclusions or Theorems
concerning what conduces to the Conservation and Defense of themselves; upon
the Principle of Fear; that is, indeed the Laws of their own Timorous, and
Cowardly Complexion: for they who have Courage and Generosity in them,
according to this Hypothesis, would never Submit to such sneaking Terms of
Equality, and Subjection, but venture for Dominion; and resolve either to Win
the Saddle, or Loose the Horse. Here therefore do our Atheistick Politicians
plainly dance round in a Circle; they first deriving the Obligation of Civil
Laws, from that of Covenants, and then that of Covenants from the Laws of
Nature; and Lastly, the Obligation both of these Laws of Nature, and of
Covenants themselves, again, from the Law, Command, and Sanction of the Civil
Sovereign; without which neither of them would at all Oblige. And thus is it
manifest, how vain the Attempts of these Politicians are, to Make Justice
Artificially, when there is no such thing Naturally; (which is indeed no less
than, to make Something out of Nothing) and by Art to Consociate into Bodies
Politic, those whom Nature had Dissociated from one another: a thing as
impossible as to Ty Knots in the Wind or Water; or to build up a Stately Palace
or Castle out of Sand. Indeed the Ligaments, by which these Politicians would
tie the Members of their huge Leviathan, or Artificial Man together, are not so
good as Cobwebs; they being really nothing, but mere Will and Words. For if
Authority and Sovereignty be made only by Will and Words, then is it plain,
that by Will and Words, they may be Unmade again at pleasure.

Neither indeed are these Atheistick Politicians themselves, altogether unaware
hereof, that this their Artificial Justice and Obligation, can be no firm
Vinculum of a Body Politic, to Consociate those together, and Unite them into
One, who are Naturally Dissociated and Divided from one another; they
acknowledging, that Covenants without the Sword, being but Words and Breath,
are of no strength, to hold the Members of their Leviathan, or Body Politic
together. Wherefore they plainly betake themselves at length, from Art to Force
and Power, and make their Civil Sovereign, really to Reign only in Fear. And
this must needs be their meaning, when they so constantly declare, All
Obligation, Just and Unjust, to be derived only from Law; they by Law there
understanding, a Command directed, to such as by reason of their Imbecility
are not able to Resist: so that the Will and Command of the more Powerful,
Obliges by the Fear of Punishment Threatened. Now if the only Real Obligation to
obey Civil Laws, be from the Fear of Punishment, then could no man be Obliged
to hazard his Life for the Safety of his Prince and Country, and they, who
could reasonably promise themselves Impunity, would be altogether Disobliged,
and Consequently, might Justly break any Laws, for their Own Advantage. An
Assertion so extravagant, that these Confounded Politicians themselves, are
ashamed plainly to own it, and therefore Disguise it, what they can by
Equivocation; themselves sometimes also confessing, so much of Truth, that
Poena non Obligat, sed Obligatum tenet, Punishment does not Oblige, but only
hold those to their Duty, who were before Obliged. Furthermore, what is Made by
Power and Force only, may be Unmade by Power and Force again. If Civil
Sovereigns Reign only in the Fear of their own Sword, then is that Right of
theirs so much talked of, indeed nothing else but Might, and their Authority,
Force; and consequently Succesful and Prosperous Rebellion, and whatsoever can
be done by Power, will be ipso facto thereby Justified. Lastly, were Civil
Sovereigns and Bodies Politic, mere Violent and Contra-Natural things, then
would they all quickly Vanish into nothing, because Nature will prevail against
Force and Violence: Whereas men constantly every where fall into Political
Order, and the Corruption of one Form of Government, is but the Generation of
another.

Wherefore since it is plain, that Sovereignty and Bodies Politic can neither
be merely Artificial, nor yet Violent things, there must of necessity be some
Natural Bond or Vinculum to hold them together, such as may both really Oblige
Subjects to Obey the Lawful Commands of Sovereigns, and Sovereigns in
Commanding, to seek the Good and

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. Containing an Account of the Atomick Physiology, as made the
Foundation of the Atheistick Fate, or the Material Necessity of all things.
I. THREE Fatalisms; (or, The Necessity of all Human Actions and Events,
maintained upon Three several Grounds) which are so many False Hypotheses, of
the Intellectual System of the Universe. Page 3 II. Concerning the
Mathematical, or Astrological Fate. Page 4 III. Of the Opinion of those, who
supposed a Fate Superior to the Highest Deity. Page 5 IV. The Moderation of
the Intended Discourse, concerning Liberty and Necessity. Page 6 V. The
Atheistical Hypothesis, or Democritick Fate, as founded upon the Atomick
Physiology; which therefore briefly Described. Page 7 VI. The Antiquity of this
Atomick Physiology, with the Account given thereof by Aristotle. Page 8 VII. A
clear and full Record of the same Physiology in Plato, not commonly taken
notice of. Page 10 VIII. That neither Protagoras, nor Democritus, nor
Leucippus, nor any Atheist, was the first Inventour or Founder of this Atomick
Physiology: and the Necessity of being thoroughly acquainted therewith, in
order to the Confutation of the Modern Atheism. Page 11 IX. The Tradition of
Posidonius the Stoic, that Moschus an Ancient Phoenician, before the Trojan
War, was the first Inventour of this Atomical Physiology, briefly suggested.
Page 12 X. That this Moschus, the Inventour of the Atomical Physiology, was
Probably the same with Mochus the Physiologer in Iamblichus; with whose
Successors, Priests and Prophets, Pythagoras conversed at Sidon. ibid. XI.
Other Probabilities for this, that Pythagoras was acquainted with the Atomick
Physiology. Page 13 XII. That Pythagoras his Monads were sometimes taken for
Corporeal Atoms; from Ecphantus in Stobaeus and Aristotle. ibid. XIII. Proved
clearly, that Empedocles, who was a Pythagorean, Physiologized Atomically. Page
14 XIV. The same further evinced, from Plato, Aristotle and Plutarch. Page 15
XV. That Anaxagoras, (Senior to Democritus,) was a Spurious or Bungling
Atomist, and an Unskillful Imitatour of that Physiology, before in use. Page 16
XVI. That Ecphantus the Pythagorean, Xenocrates, Diodorus and Metrodorus Chius,
were all Ancient Asserters of the Atomick Physiology; together with Aristotle's
Testimony, That the Generality of Former Physiologers went that way. ibid.
XVII. How Aristotle is to be reconciled with himself, and the Credit of other
Writers to be Salved, when they impute this Philosophy to Leucippus and
Democritus; That these were the first Atheizers thereof, and consequently the
Founders of that Philosophy, which is Atheistically Atomical. Page 17 XVIII.
That the Atomists before Democritus, were Asserters of a Deity and Substance
Incorporeal. Page 18 XIX. A Confutation of those Neotericks, who deny
Incorporeal Substance, to have been asserted by any of the Ancients. The
Antiquity of that Doctrine proved from Plato, who also professedly maintained
it. Page 18 XX. Aristotle likewise an Asserter of Incorporeal Substance. Page
19 XXI. That Epicurus confuteth this Opinion, as that which had been before
maintained by Plato and other Ancients. Page 20 XXII. That all those
Philosophers, who before Plato, held the Immortality of the Soul, and a Deity
Distinct from the world, were undoubtedly Incorporealists; as particularly
Pythagoras, who also maintained a Trinity of Divine Hypostases. ibid. XXIII.
Parmenides, a Strenuous Asserter of Incorporeal Substance, together with those
who held, That all things did not Flow, but some things Stand. Page 22 XXIV.
Empedocles vindicated from being either an Atheist, or Corporealist, at large.
ibid. XXV. Anaxagoras, an open and professed Asserter of an Incorporeal Mind.
Page 26 XXVI. Inferred from all this, That the Ancient Atomists before
Democritus, were both Theists and Incorporealists: and this further confirmed.
ibid. XXVII. That there is not only no Inconsistency, betwixt Atomology and
Theology, but also a Natural Cognation, proved from the Origin of the Atomical
Physiology, which proceeded in general, from the Victory and Triumph of Reason
over Sense. Page 27 XXVIII. A more Particular Account of the Origin of this
Atomical Philosophy, from that one Principle of Reason, That in Nature, Nothing
comes from Nothing, nor goes to Nothing. And that the ancient Atomology was
built upon this Foundation, proved at large. Page 29 XXIX. That this self-same
Principle, which made the Ancient Atomists discard Qualities and Substantial
Forms, made them also assert Incorporeal Substance. Page 35 XXX. And with it
Immortality of Souls. Page 37 XXXI. That the Doctrine of Pre-existence and
Transmigration of Souls, had also the same Original. Page 38 XXXII. This not
Confined by those Ancients to Human Souls only, but Extended to all Souls and
Lives whatsoever. Page 39 XXXIII. All this proved from Empedocles, who plainly
asserted the Pre-existence, as well as the Post-existence of all Souls, from
this Fundamental Principle, That Nothing can come from Nothing, nor go to
Nothing. Page 40 XXXIV. A Censure of this Doctrine, That from this Ground may
be solidly proved, the Future Immortality of Human Souls, but not their
Pre-existence: because all Souls must be Created by God, some time or other.
Page 43 XXXV. An Hypothesis to Salve the Incorporeity of the Souls of Brutes,
without their Post-existence, and Successive Transmigrations. Page 44 XXXVI.
And, That this will not Prejudice the Immortality of Human Souls. Page 45
XXXVII. But that the Empedoclean Hypothesis, is indeed of the Two, more
Rational, than the Opinion of those, who make the Souls of Brutes all
Corporeal. ibid. XXXVIII. Moreover, that the Constitution of the Atomical
Physiology, is such in it self, as that whosoever Entertains it, thoroughly
understanding the same, must needs hold Incorporeal Substance; in Five
Particulars. Page 46 XXXIX. Two great Advantages of the Atomical or Mechanical
Physiology; the First whereof is this, That it renders the Corporeal world
Intelligible, which no other Philosophy does. Page 48 XL. The Second Advantage
of it, that it prepares an easy and clear way, for the Demonstration of
Incorporeal Substance. ibid. XLI. Concluded from all these Premises, That the
Ancient Moschical Philosophy, was Integrated and Made up of these Two Parts,
Atomical Physiology, and Theology or Pneumatology. Page 50 XLII. But that this
Entire Philosophy, was afterward Mangled and Dismembered, some taking one Part
thereof alone, and some the other. Page 51 XLIII. That Leucippus and
Democritus, being Atheistically inclined, took the Atomical Physiology alone,
endeavoring to Atheize the same, and so begat a Mongrill and Spurious
Philosophy, Atheistically Atomical or Atomically Atheistical: and their
Vnsuccessfulness herein. Page 51 XLIV. That Plato took the Theology or
Pneumatology of the Ancients alone, rejecting their Atomical Physiology; and
upon what Prejudices he did so. Page 52 XLV. That Aristotle followed Plato
herein. A Commendation of his Philosophy, (together with an Impartial Censure)
and a Deserved Preference thereof, before the Democritick and Epicurean. Page
53
CHAP. II. Wherein are contained, all the Pretended Grounds of Reason, for the
Atheistick Hypothesis.
I. THat the Democritick Philosophy, made up of Corporealism and Atomism
complicated together, is Essentially Atheistical. Page 59 II. Though Epicurus,
who was an Atomical Corporealist, pretended to assert a Democracy of Gods, yet
was he for all that an Absolute Atheist. And that Atheists commonly equivocate
and disguise themselves. Page 60 III. That the Democritick Philosophy, which
makes Senseless Atoms, not only the first Principles of Bodies (as the ancient
Atomology did) but also of All things whatsoever in the Universe, and therefore
of Soul and Mind, is nothing else but a System of Atheology, or Atheism
swaggering under a Pretense to Wisdom and Philosophy. And though there be
another opposite Form of Atheism, which we call Stratonical, yet is the
Democritick Atheism chiefly considerable; all the Dark Mysteries whereof will
be here revealed. Page 61 IV. That we being to treat concerning the Deity, and
to bring all those Profane and Unhallowed Mysteries of Atheism into light, in
order to a Confutation of them; the Divine Assistence and Direction ought to be
implored; as it commonly was by Pagans themselves in such Cases. Page 63 V.
That we are both to discover the Atheists Pretended Grounds of Reason against
the Deity, and their Attempts to Salve all the Phenomenon without a God. The
First of their Grounds, That no man can have an Idea or Conception of God, and
therefore he is but an Incomprehensible Nothing. ibid. VI. A Second Atheistick
Argumentation, That there can be no Creation out of Nothing, nor Omnipotence;
because Nothing can come from Nothing; and therefore whatsoever Substantially
is, was from all Eternity, Of it Self, Uncreated by any Deity. Page 64 VII. A
Third Pretended Ground of Reason against a Deity; That the strictest Notion of
a God implying him to be Incorporeal, there can be no such Incorporeal Deity,
there being no other Substance besides Body. Because whatsoever Is is extended,
and whatsoever is extended, is either empty Space, or Body. Page 65 VIII. The
Atheists Pretense, That the Doctrine of Incorporeal Substance sprung from a
ridiculous mistake, of Abstract Names and Notions for Realities. Their
Impudence in making the Deity but the chief of Specter, an Oberon or Prince of
Fayries and Phancies. This the Fourth Atheistick Argument, That to suppose an
Incorporeal Mind to be the Original of all things, is nothing else, but to make
the Abstract Notion of a mere Accident to be the First Cause. Page 67 IX. A
Fifth Pretended Ground of Atheism, That an Incorporeal Deity being already
confuted, a Corporeal one may be disproved also, from the Principles of
Corporealism in General; Because Matter being the only Substance, and all
other Differences of things nothing but the Accidents thereof, Generable and
Corru^tible; no Living Understanding Being, can be Essentially Incorruptible.
The Stoical God Incorruptible only by Accident. Page 69 X. Their further
Attempt to do the same Atomically, That the First Principle of all things
whatsoever in the Universe being Atoms, or Corpuscula, devoid of all manner of
Qualities, and consequently of Sense and Understanding (which sprung up
afterward from a certain Composition or Contexture of them) Mind or Deity,
could not therefore be the First Original of all. Page 70 XI. A farther
Atheistick Attempt to impugn a Deity, by disproving the World's Animation, or
its being governed by a Living Understanding Animalish Nature, presiding over
the whole; Because forsooth, Sense and Understanding are peculiar Appendices to
Flesh, Blood, and Brains; and Reason is no where to be found but in Human
Form. Page 73 XII. An Eighth Atheistick Instance, That God being taken by all,
for a Most Happy, Eternal and Immortal Animal (or Living Being) there can be no
such thing; because all living Beings are Concretions of Atoms that were at
first generated, and are liable to Death and Corruption by the Dissolution of
their Compages. Life being no Simple Primitive Nature, but an Accidental
Modification of compounded Bodies only, which upon the Disunion of their
Parts, or Disturbance of their Contexture, vanishes into Nothing. Page 75
XIII. A Ninth Pretended Atheistick Demonstration, That by God is meant a First
Cause or Mover, and such as was not before moved by any thing else without it;
but Nothing can move it self, and therefore there can be no unmoved Mover, nor
any First in the Order of Causes, that is, a God. Page 76 XIV. Their farther
Improvement of the same Principle, That there can be no Action whatsoever,
without some external Cause; or that, Nothing takes Beginning from it self,
but from the Action of some other Agent without it; so that no Cogitation can
arise of it self without a Cause; all Action and Cogitation being really
nothing but Local Motion: from whence it follows, that no Thinking Being could
be a First Cause any more than a Machin or Automaton. Page 76. XV. Another
Grand Mystery of Atheism, That all Knowledge and Mental Conception is the
Information of the things themselves known existing without the Knower, and a
mere Passion from them; and therefore the world must needs have been before any
Knowledge or Conception of it, but no Knowledge or Conception before the world,
as its Cause. Page 77 XVI. A Twelfth Atheistick Argumentation, That things
could not be made by a God; because they are so Faulty and Ill made. That they
were not contrived for the Good of Man, and that the Deluge of Evils which
overflows all, shows them not to have proceeded from any Deity. ibid. XVII. A
Thirteenth Instance of Atheists, from the Defect of Providence, That in Human
Affairs all is Tohu and Bohu, Chaos and Confusion. Page 79 XVIII. A Fourteenth
Atheistick Objection, That it is impossible for any one Being to Animadvert and
Order all things in the distant places of the whole world at once; But if it
were possible, That such Infinite Negotiosity would be absolutely inconsistent
with Happiness. Page 80 XIX. Quaeries of Atheists, Why the world was not made
sooner? and, What God did before? Why it was made at all, since it was so long
unmade? and, How the Architect of the world could rear up so huge a Fabric?
Page 81 XX. The Atheists Pretense, That it is the great Interesse of Mankind,
There should be no God: And that it was a Noble and Heroical Exploit of the
Democriticks, to Chase away that Affrightfull Spectre out of the world, and to
free men from the Continual Fear of a Deity, and Punishment after Death,
Embittering all the Pleasures of Life. Page 83 XXI. The Last Atheistick
Pretense, That Theism is also inconsistent with Civil Sovereignty, it
introducing a Fear greater than the Fear of the Leviathan: and that any other
Conscience, besides the Civil Law (being Private Judgment) is Ipso Facto a
Dissolution of the Body Politic, and a Revolt to the State of Nature. Page 84
XXII. The Atheists Conclusion from all the former Premises, (as it is set down
in Plato and Lucretius,) That all things sprung Originally from Nature and
Chance, without any Mind or God, or proceeded from the Necessity of Material
Motions Vndirected for Ends. And that Infinite Atoms Devoid of all Life and
Sense, Moving in Infinite Space from Eternity, did by their Fortuitous
Rencounters and Entanglements, produce the System of this whole Universe, and
as well all Animate as Inanimate things. Page 97
CHAP. III. An Introduction to the Confutation of the Atheistick Grounds;
wherein is contained a particular Account of all the Several Forms of Atheism,
together with a necessary Digression, concerning a Plastic or Artificial
Nature.
I. THat the Grounds of the Hylozoick Atheism could not be insisted on by us in
the former Chapter, together with those of the Atomick, they being directly
opposite each to other; with a farther Account of this Hylozoick Atheism. P.
104. II. A Suggestion in way of Caution, for the Preventing of all mistakes,
That every Hylozoist must not therefore be presently condemned as an Atheist,
or but a mere Counterfeit Histrionical Theist. Page 105 III. That nevertheless
such Hylozoists, as are also Corporealists, or acknowledge no other Substance
besides Body, can by no means be excused from the Imputation of Atheism, for
Two Reasons. Page 106 IV. That Strato Lampsacenus (commonly called Physicus)
was probably the First Asserter of the Hylozoick Atheism, he acknowledging no
other God, but the Life of Nature in Matter. Page 107 V. Further Proved, that
this Strato was an Atheist, and of a different Form from Democritus, he
attributing an Energetick Nature, but without Sense and Animality, to all
Matter. Page 108 VI. That Strato, not deriving all things from a mere
Fortuitous Principle, as the Democritick Atheists did, nor yet acknowledging
any one Plastic Nature to preside over the whole, but deducing the Original of
things from a Mixture of Chance and Plastic Nature both together, in the
several parts of Matter; must therefore needs be an Hylozoick Atheist. ibid.
VII. That the Famous Hippocrates, was neither an Hylozoick nor Democritick
Atheist, but rather an Heraclitick Corporeal Theist. Page 109 VIII. That Plato
took no notice of the Hylozoick Atheism, nor of any other, save what derives
the Original of all things from a mere Fortuitous Nature; and therefore either
the Democritical, or the Anaximandrian Atheism, which Latter will be next
declared. Page 110 IX. That it is hardly Imaginable, There should have been no
Philosophic Atheists in the world before Democritus and Leucippus: Plato
observing also, that there have been some or other in all ages sick of the
Atheistick Disease: And Aristotle affirming, many of the first Philosophers to
have assigned only a Material Cause of the mundane System, without either
Intending, or Efficient Cause. They supposing Matter to be the only Substance,
and all other things, nothing but the Passions and Accidents thereof, Generable
and Corruptible. Page 111 X. The Doctrine of which Materialists may be more
fully understood from those Exceptions which Aristotle makes against them. His
First Exception; That they assigned no Cause of Motion, but introduced it into
the world Vnaccomptably. Page 112 XI. Aristotle's Second Exception, That these
Materialists assigned no Cause, (...), of Well and Fit; that is, gave no
Account of the Orderly Regularity of things. Anaxagoras said to be the First
Ionick Philosopher who made Mind and Good a Principle of the Universe. ibid.
XII. Concluded from hence, That these Materialists in Aristotle were downright
Atheists, not merely because they held all Substance to be Body, forasmuch as
Heraclitus and Zeno did the like, and yet are not therefore numbered amongst
the Atheists (these supposing the whole World to be an Animal, and their Fiery
Matter Originally Intellectual) but because they made Stupid Matter, devoid of
all Understanding and Life, to be the only Principle. Page 113 XIII. And
supposed every thing, besides the bare Substance of Matter, to be Generable and
Corruptible, and consequently, That there could be no other God, than such as
was Native and Mortal. That those Ancient Theologers and Theogonists, who
Generated all the Gods out of Night and Chaos without exception, were only
Verbal Theists, but Real Atheists; Senseless Matter being to them the Highest
Numen. ibid. XIV. The Difference observed betwixt Aristotle's Atheistical
Materialists and the Italick Philosophers; the former determining all things,
besides the bare Substance of Matter, to be Made or Generated; but the latter,
that no Real Entity was either Generated or Corrupted; they thereupon both
destroying the Qualities and Forms of Bodies, and asserting the Ingenerability
and Incorporeity of Souls. Page 114 XV. How Aristotle's Atheistick Materialists
endeavored to baffle and elude that Axiom of the Italick Philosophers, That
Nothing can come from Nothing nor go to Nothing. And that Anaxagoras was the
First amongst the Ionicks, who yielded so far to that Principle, as from thence
to assert Incorporeal Substance, and the Pre-existence of Qualities and Forms:
he conceiving them to be things Really distinct from the Substance of Matter.
Page 116 XVI. The Error of some Writers, who from Aristotle's affirming, That
the Ancient Philosophers did generally conclude the World to have been Made,
from thence infer them, to have been all Theists, and that Aristotle
contradicts himself in representing many of them as Atheists. That the Ancient
Atheists did generally (...), assert the World to have been Made, or have had a
Beginning; as on the other hand, some Theists did maintain its Ante-Eternity,
but in a way of Dependency upon the Deity. That we ought therefore here to
distinguish betwixt the System of the World, and the bare Substance of the
Matter; All Atheists contending the Matter to have been not only Eternal, but
also such Independently upon any other Being. Page 117 XVII. Some of the
Ancients concluded this Materialism, or Hylopathian Atheism, to have been at
least as old as Homer; who made the Ocean (or Fluid Matter) the Father of all
the gods: and that this was indeed the Ancientest of all Atheisms, which
verbally acknowledging gods, yet derives the Original of them all from Night
and Chaos. A Description of this Atheistick Hypothesis in Aristophanes; That
Night and Chaos first laid an Egg, out of which sprung forth Love, which
afterward mingling again with Chaos, begat Heaven and Earth, Animals and all
the Gods. Page 120 XVIII. That notwithstanding this, in Aristotle's Judgment,
not only Parmenides, but also Hesiod, and other Ancients, who made Love,
Senior to the Gods, were to be exempted out of the number of Atheists; they
understanding by this Love an Active Principle or Cause of Motion in the
Universe: which therefore could not result from an Egg of the Night, nor be the
Offspring of Chaos, but must be something in order of Nature Before Matter.
Simmias Rhodius his Wings, a Poem in Honor of this Divine or Heavenly Love.
This not that Love neither which was the Offspring of Penia and Porus in Plato.
In what Rectified and Refined Sense it may pass for True Theology; That Love is
the Supreme Deity, and Original of all things. Page 121 XIX. That however
Democritus and Leucippus be elsewhere taxed by Aristotle for this very thing,
the assigning only a Material Cause of the Universe; yet were they not the
Persons intended by him, in the forementioned Accusation, but certain Ancienter
Philosophers, who also were not Atomists, but Asserters of Qualities, or
Hylopathians. Page 123 XX. That Aristotle's Atheistick Materialists, were
indeed all the First Ionick Philosophers before Anaxagoras, Thales being the
Head of them. But that Thales being acquitted from this Imputation of Atheism,
by several Good Authors, his next Successor, Anaximander, is rather to be
accounted the (...) or Prince of this Atheistick Philosophy. ibid. XXI. A
Passage out of Aristotle Objected, which at first sight, seems to make
Anaximander a Divine Philosopher, and therefore has led both Modern and
Ancient Writers into that Mistake. But that this well considered, proves the
Contrary, That Anaximander was the Chief of the old Atheistick Philosophers.
Page 124 XXII. That it is no wonder, if Anaximander called Senseless Matter
(...), or The Divinity, since to all Atheists, that must needs be the Highest
Numen. And how this may be said to be Immortal, and to Govern all: with the
concurrent Judgment of the Greek Scholiasts upon this Place. Page 126 XXIII. A
further account of the Anaximandrian Philosophy, from whence it appears to
have been Purely Atheistical. Page 127 XXIV. That as the vulgar have always
been ill Judges of Theists and Atheists, so have learned men commonly supposed
fewer Atheists than indeed there were. Anaximander and Democritus Atheists both
alike, though Philosophizing different ways: and that some Passages in Plato,
respect the Anaximandrian Form of Atheism, rather than the Democritical. Page
129 XXV. The reason why Democritus and Leucippus, New-modell'd Atheism into
this Atomick Form. Page 131 XXVI. That besides the Three Forms of Atheism
already mentioned, we sometimes meet with a Fourth, which supposes the Universe
to be, though not an Animal, yet a kind of Plant or Vegetable, having one
Regular Plastic Nature in it, but devoid of Understanding and Sense, which
disposes and orders the whole. Page 131 XXVII. That this Form of Atheism, which
makes One senseless Plastic and Plantal Nature to preside over the whole, is
different from the Hylozoick, in that it takes away all Fortuitousness;
Subjecting all things Universally to the Fate of this One Methodical Unknowing
Nature. Page 132 XXVIII. Possible, that some in all ages might have entertained
this Atheistical Conceit, That all things are dispensed by One Regular and
Methodical Senseless Nature; nevertheless it seems to have been chiefly
asserted by certain Spurious Heracliticks and Stoics. Upon which account this
Cosmo-plastick Atheism may be called Pseudo-zenonian. Page 133 XXIX. That,
besides the Philosophic Atheists, there have been always in the World
Enthusiastic and Fanatic Atheists; though indeed all Atheists may in some
sense be said to be both Enthusiasts and Fanatics, as being merely led by an
(...), or Irrational Impetus. Page 134 XXX. That there cannot easily be any
other Form of Atheism besides these Four already mentioned; because all
Atheists are Corporealists, and yet not all Corporealists Atheists; but only
such of them as make the First Principle not to be Intellectual. ibid. XXXI. A
Distribution of Atheisms Producing the forementioned Quaternio, and showing the
Difference that is betwixt them. Page 136 XXXII. That they are but mere
Bunglers at Atheism, who talk of Sensitive and Rational Matter, Specifically
Differing. And that the Canting Astrological Atheists, are not at all
considerable, because not Understanding themselves. Page 137 XXXIII. Another
Distribution of Atheisms, That they either derive the Original of all things,
from a merely Fortuitous Principle, and the Unguided Motion of Matter, or else
from a Plastic, Regular and Methodical, but Senseless Nature. What Atheists
denied the Eternity of the World, and what asserted it. Page 138 XXXIV. That of
these Four Forms of Atheism, the Atomick or Democritical, and the Hylozoick or
Stratonical, are the Principal: which Two being once confuted, all Atheism will
be confuted. Page 142 XXXV. These Two Forms of Atheism, being contrary to each
other, that we ought in all Reason to insist rather, upon the Atomick:
nevertheless we shall elsewhere confute the Hylozoick also; and further prove
against all Corporealists, that no Cogitation nor Life can belong to Matter.
Page 145 XXXVI. That in the mean time, we shall not neglect the other Forms of
Atheism, but Confute them all together, as they agree in one Principle. As also
by way of Digression here insist largely upon the Plastic Life of Nature, in
order to a fuller Confutation, as well of the Hylozoick, as the Cosmo-plastick
Atheism. Page 146 1. That these Two Forms of Atheism, are not therefore
Condemned by us, merely because they suppose a Life of Nature, distinct from
the Animal Life: however this be a thing altogether Exploded by some professed
Theists, therein symbolizing too much with the Democritick Atheists. ibid. 2.
That if no Plastic Artificial Nature be admitted, then one of these two things
must be concluded; That either all things come to pass by Fortuitous Mechanism
or Material Necessity (the Motion of Matter Unguided) or else that God does
(...) do all things Himself Immediately and Miraculously; framing the Body of
every Gnat and Fly, as it were, with his own hands: forasmuch as Divine Laws
and Commands cannot execute themselves, nor be alone the proper Efficient
Causes of things in Nature. Page 147 3. To suppose the Former of these, that
all things come to pass Fortuitously, by the Unguided Motion of Matter, and
without the Direction of any Mind, a thing altogether as Irrational as Impious:
there being many Phenomenon both Above the Mechanic Powers, and Contrary to
the Laws thereof. That the Mechanic Theists make God but an Idle Spectatour of
the Fortuitous Motions of Matter, and render his Wisdom altogether useless and
insignificant. Aristotle's Judicious Censure of this Fortuitous Mechanism, and
his Derision of that Conceit, that Material and Mechanical Reasons, are the
only Philosophical. Page 148 4. That it seems neither Decorous in respect of
God, nor Congruous to Reason, that he should (...), do all things Himself
Immediately and Miraculously, without the Subserviency of any Natural Causes.
This further Confuted from the Slow and Gradual Process of things in Nature, as
also from those Errors and Bungles, that are Committed, when the Matter proves
Inept and Contumacious, which argue the Agent not to be Irresistible. Page 149
5. Reasonably inferred from hence, That there is an Artificial or Plastic
Nature in the Universe, as a Subordinate Instrument of Divine Providence, in
the Orderly Disposal of Matter: but not without a Higher Providence also
presiding over it; forasmuch as this Plastic Nature cannot Act Electively or
with Discretion. Those Laws of Nature concerning Motion, which the Mechanic
Theists themselves suppose, Really Nothing else, but a Plastic Nature, or
Spermatick Reasons. Page 150 6. The Argeeableness of this Doctrine with the
Sentiments of the best Philosophers of all Ages. Anaxagoras though a professed
Theist, severely Censured both by Plato and Aristotle as an encourager of
Atheism, merely because he used Material and Mechanical Causes, more than
Mental and Final. Physiologers and Astronomers, for the same Reason also,
vulgarly suspected of Atheism in Plato's time. Page 151 7. The Plastic
Artificial Nature, no Occult Quality, but the only Intelligible Cause of that
which is the Grandest of all Phenomenon, the Orderly Regularity and Harmony of
Things; which the Mechanic Theists, however pretending to Salve all
Phenomenon, give no account of. A God or Infinite Mind asserted by these, in
vain and to no purpose. Page 154 8. Two things here to be Performed, To give an
account of the Plastic Artificial Nature; and then, To show how the Notion
thereof is Mistaken and Abused by Atheists. The First General Account of this
Nature according to Aristotle, That it is to be conceived as Art it self acting
Inwardly and Immediately upon the Matter; as if Harmony Living in the Musical
Instruments should move the Strings thereof without any External Impulse. Page
155 9. Two Preeminences of Nature above Humane Art; First, That whereas Humane
Art acts upon the Matter without, Cumbersomely or Moliminously, and in a way of
Tumult or Hurlyburly; Nature, acting upon the same from Within more
Commandingly, does its work Easily, Cleverly and Silently. Humane Art acts on
Matter Mechanically, but Nature Vitally and Magically. Page 155 10. The Second
Preeminence of Nature, That whereas Human Artists are often to seek and at a
loss, Anxiously Consult and Deliberate, and upon Second thoughts Mend their
former work; Nature is never to seek or Vnresolved what to do, nor does she
ever Repent of what she has done, and thereupon correct her Form^r Course.
Human Artists themselves Consult not as Artists, but always for want of Art;
and therefore Nature, though never Consulting nor Deliberating, may
notwithstanding act Artificially and for Ends. Concluded, that what is by us
called Nature, is Really the Divine Art. Page 156 11. Nevertheless, That Nature
is not the Divine Art Pure and Abstract, but Concreted and Embodied in Matter:
the Divine Art not Archetypal but Ectypal. Nature differs from the Divine Art
or Wisdom, as the Manuary Opificer from the Architect. Page 155 12. Two
Imperfections of Nature, in respect whereof it falls short of Humane Art.
First, That though it act for Ends Artificially, yet it self neither Intends
those Ends, nor Understands the Reason of what it does; for which cause it
cannot act Electively. The Difference betwixt Spermatick Reasons and Knowledge.
That Nature does but Ape or Mimick the Divine Art or Wisdom; being it self not
Master of that Reason, according to which it acts, but only a Servant to it,
and Drudging Executioner thereof. Page 156 13. Proved that there may be such a
thing as acts Artificially, though it self do not comprehend that Art and
Reason by which its Motions are Governed. First from Musical Habits; the Dancer
resembles the Artificial Life of Nature. Page 157 14. The same further Evinced
from the Instincts of Brute Animals, Directing them to act Rationally and
Artificially, in order to their own Good and the Good of the Universe, without
any Reason of their own. These Instincts in Brutes, but Passive Impresses of
the Divine Wisdom, and a kind of Fate upon them. Page 158 15. The Second
Imperfection of Nature, that it Acts without Animal Fancy, (...), Con-sense,
or Consciousness, and has no express Self-Perception and Self-Enjoyment. ibid.
16. Whether this Energy of the Plastic Nature, be to be called Cogitation or
no, Nothing but a Logomachy, or Contention about Words. Granted that what moves
Matter Vitally, must needs do it by some Energy of its own, distinct from Local
Motion; but that there may be a Simple Vital Energy, without that Duplicity
which is in Synaesthesis, or clear and express Consciousness. Nevertheless,
that the Energy of Nature, may be called, a certain Drousie, Unawakened, or
Astonished Cogitation. Page 159 17. Several Instances which render it
probable, that there may be a Vital Energy without Synaesthesis, clear and
express Con-sense or Consciousness. Page 160 18. Wherefore the Plastic Nature,
acting neither Knowingly nor Phantastically, must needs act Fatally, Magically
and Sympathetically. The Divine Laws and Fate, as to Matter, not mere
Cogitation in the Mind of God, but an Energetick and Effectual Principle in it.
And this Plastic Nature, the True and Proper Fate of Matter, or of the
Corporeal World. What Magic is, and that Nature which acts Fatally, acts
also Magically and Sympathetically. P. 161 19. That Nature, though it be the
Divine Art, or Fate, yet for all that, is neither a God, nor Goddess, but a Low
and Imperfect Creature, it acting Artificially and Rationally, no otherwise
than Compounded Forms of Letters, when Printing Coherent Philosophic Sense;
nor for Ends, than a Saw or Hatchet in the hands of a skillfull Mechanic. The
Plastic and Vegetative Life of Nature, the Lowest of all Lives, and Inferior
to the Sensitive. A Higher Providence, than that of the Plastic Nature,
governing the Corporeal World it self. ibid. 20. Notwithstanding which,
forasmuch as the Plastic Nature is a Life, it must needs be Incorporeal. One
and the self same thing, having in it an entire Model and Platform of the
Whole, and acting upon several Distant parts of Matter, cannot be a Body. And
though Aristotle himself do no where declare this Nature to be either Corporeal
or Incorporeal, (which he neither clearly does concerning the Rational Soul,)
and his Followers commonly take it to be Corporeal, yet, according to the
Genuine Principles of that Philosophy, must it needs be otherwise. Page 165 21.
The Plastic Nature being Incorporeal must either be a Lower Power lodged in
Souls, which are also Conscious, Sensitive or Rational; or else a distinct
Substantial Life by it Self, and Inferior Soul. That the Platonists affirm
Both; with Aristotle's agreeable Determination; That Nature is either Part of a
Soul, or not without Soul. ibid. 22. The Plastic Nature as to the Bodies of
Animals, a Part, or Lower Power, of their respective Souls. That the Phenomenon
prove a Plastic Nature or Archeus in Animals; to make which a distinct thing
from the Soul, would be to Multiply Entities without Necessity. The Soul endued
with a Plastic Nature, the Chief Formatrix of its own Body, the contribution
of other Causes not excluded. Page 166 23. That, besides the Plastic in
Particular Animals, Forming them as so many Little Worlds, there is a General
Plastic or Artificial Nature in the Whole Corporeal Universe, which likewise,
according to Aristotle, is either a Part and Lower Power of a Conscious Mundane
Soul, or else something depending thereon. Page 167 24. That no less according
to Aristotle, than Plato and Socrates, Our selves partake of Life from the Life
of the Universe, as well as we do of Heat and Cold from the Heat and Cold of
the Universe. From whence it appears, that Aristotle also held the World's
Animation, which is further Undeniably proved. An Answer to Two the most
considerable Places in that Philosopher objected to the contrary. That
Aristotle's First Immovable Mover was no Soul, but a Perfect Intellect
abstract from Matter, which he supposed to move only as a Final Cause, or as
Being Loved; and besides this, a Mundane Soul and Plastic Nature to move the
Heavens Efficiently. Neither Aristotle's Nature nor Mundane Soul the Supreme
Deity. However, though there be no such Mundane Soul, as both Plato and
Aristotle conceived, yet may there be notwithstanding, a Plastic or Artificial
Nature depending upon a Higher Intellectual Principle. Page 168 25. No
Impossibility of other Particular Plasticks; and though it be not reasonable to
think every Plant, Herb and Pile of Grass, to have a Plastic or Vegetative
Soul of its own, nor the Earth to be an Animal, yet may there possibly be one
Plastic Artificial Nature presiding over the Whole Terraqueous Globe, by which
Vegetables may be severally organized and framed, and all things performed,
which transcend the Power of Fortuitous Mechanism. Page 171 26. Our Second
Undertaking, which was to Show, How grossly those Atheists (who acknowledge this
Artificial Plastic Nature, without Animality,) Misunderstand it, and Abuse the
Notion, to make a Counterfeit God Almighty, or Numen of it; to the exclusion of
the True Deity. First, In their Supposing, That to be the First and Highest
Principle of the Universe, which is the Last and Lowest of all Lives, a thing
as Essentially Derivative from, and Dependent upon, a Higher Intellectual
Principle, as the Echo on the Original Voice. Secondly, In their making Sense
and Reason in Animals to emerge out of a Senseless Life of Nature, by the mere
Modification and Organization of Matter. That no Duplication of Corporeal
Organs can ever make One Single Inconscious Life to advance into Redoubled
Consciousness and Self-Enjoyment. Thirdly, In attributing (some of them)
Perfect Knowledge and Understanding to this Life of Nature, which yet
themselves suppose to be devoid of all Animal Sense and Consciousness. Lastly,
In making this Plastic Life of Nature to be merely Corporeal: The Hylozoists
contending, That it is but an Inadequate Conception of Body as the only
Substance, and fondly dreaming that the Vulgar Notion of a God, is Nothing but
such an Inadequate Conception of the Matter of the whole Universe, Mistaken for
an Entire Substance by it self the Cause of all things. And thus far the
Digression. Page 172 XXXVIII. That though the Confutation of the Atheistick
Grounds, according to the Laws of Method, ought to have been reserved for the
last part of this Discourse, yet we, having reason to violate those Laws, crave
the Reader's Pardon for this Preposterousness. A considerable Observation of
Plato's, That it is not only Gross Sensuality which inclines men to Atheize,
but also an Affectation of seeming Wiser than the Generality of mankind. As
likewise, that the Atheists making such Pretense to Wit, it is a seasonable and
proper Undertaking, to Evince, that they Fumble in all their Ratiocinations.
And we hope to make it appear, that the Atheists are no Conjurers: and that all
Forms of Atheism are Nonsense and Impossibility. Page 174
CHAP. IV. The Idea of God declared, in way of Answer to the First Atheistick
Argument; and the Grand Objection against the Naturality of this Idea (as
Essentially including Unity or Oneliness in it) from the Pagan Polytheism,
removed. Proved, That the Intelligent Pagans Generally acknowledged One Supreme
Deity. A fuller Explication of whose Polytheism and Idolatry intended; in order
to the better giving an Account of Christianity.
I. THE either Stupid Insensibility, or Gross Impudence of Atheists, in denying
the Word God to have any Signification; or that there is any other Idea
answering to it, besides the mere Phantasm of the Sound. The Disease called by
the Philosopher, (...), The Petrification, or Dead Insensibility, of the Mind.
Page 192 II. That the Atheists themselves must needs have an Idea of God in
their Minds, or otherwise, when they deny his Existence, they should deny the
Existence of Nothing. That they have also the same Idea of him in General with
the Theists; the One Denying the very same thing which the Others Affirm. Page
194 III. A Lemma or Preparatory Proposition to the Idea of God, That though
some things be Made or Generated, yet it is not possible that all things should
be Made, but something must of necessity Exist of it Self from Eternity Unmade,
and be the Cause of those other things that are Made. ibid. IV. The Two most
Opposite Opinions concerning what was Self-Existent from Eternity, or Unmade,
and the Cause of all other things Made; One, That it was Nothing but Senseless
Matter, the Most Imperfect of all things. The Other, That it was Something Most
Perfect, and therefore Consciously Intellectual. The Asserters of this Latter
opinion, Theists, in a Strict and Proper Sense; of the Former, Atheists. So
that the Idea of God in General is A Perfect Consciously Understanding Being,
(or Mind,) Self-Existent from Eternity, and the Cause of all other things. Page
194, 195. V. Observable, That the Atheists, who deny a God according to the
True Idea of him, do Notwithstanding often Abuse the Word, calling Senseless
Matter by that name; they meaning Nothing else thereby but only a First
Principle, or Self-Existent Unmade thing: according to which Notion of the word
God, there can be no such thing at all as an Atheist, no man being able to
persuade himself, That all things sprung from Nothing. Page 195 VI. In order to
a more Punctual Declaration of this Divine Idea, the Opinion of those taken
notice of who suppose Two Self-Existent Unmade Principles, God and Matter:
according to which, God not the Principle of all things, nor the Sole
Principle, but only the Chief. Page 196, 197. VII. These Materiarians,
Imperfect and Mistaken Theists. Not Atheists, because they suppose the World
Made and Governed by an Animalish, Sentient and Understanding Nature; whereas
no Atheists acknowledge Conscious Animality to be a First Principle, but
conclude it to be all Generable and Corruptible: Nor yet Genuine Theists,
because they acknowledge not Omnipotence in the full Extent thereof. A Latitude
therefore in Theism; and none to be condemned for Absolute Atheists, but such
as deny an Eternal Unmade Mind the Framer and Governor of the whole World.
Page 198, 199. VIII. An Absolutely Perfect Being, the most Compendious Idea of
God: Which Includes in it, not only Necessary Existence, and Conscious
Intellectuality, but also Omni-Causality, Omnipotence, or Infinite Power.
Wherefore God the Sole Principle of all things, and Cause of Matter. The True
Notion of Infinite Power. And that Pagans commonly acknowledged Omnipotence, or
Infinite Power, to be included in the Idea of God. Page 200, 201. IX. That
Absolute Perfection implies yet something more than Knowledge and Power. A
Vaticination in men's Minds, of a Higher Good than either. That, according to
Aristotle, God is better than Knowledge; and has Morality in his Nature,
wherein also his Chief Happiness consists. This borrowed from Plato, to whom
the Highest Perfection, and Supreme Deity, is Goodness it self Substantial,
above Knowledge and Intellect. Agreeably with which, the Scripture makes God,
and the Supreme Good, Love. This not to be understood of a Soft, Fond, and
Partial Love; God being rightly called also, an Impartial Law, and the Measure
of all things. Atheists also suppose Goodness to be included in the Idea of
that God whose Existence they deny. This Idea here more largely declared. Page
202, 203, etc. X. That this forementioned Idea of God, Essentially Includes
Unity, Oneliness, or Solitariety in it: since there cannot possibly be more
than One Absolutely Supreme, One Cause of All things, One Omnipotent, and One
Infinitely Perfect. Epicurus and his Followers professedly denied a God
according to this Notion of him. Page 207 XI. The Grand Objection against the
Idea of God, as thus Essentially Including Oneliness and Singularity in it,
from the Polytheism of all Nations formerly, (the Jews excepted) and of all the
Wisest men, and Philosophers. From whence it is Inferred, that this Idea of
God, is not Natural, but Artificial, and owes its Original, to Laws and
Arbitrary Institutions only. An Enquiry therefore here to be made concerning
the True Sense of the Pagan Polytheism: the Objectors securely taking it for
granted, that the Pagan Polytheists universally asserted Many, Unmade,
Self-Existent, Intellectual Beings, and Independent Deities, as so many Partial
Causes of the World. Page 208, 209. XII. The Irrationality of which Opinion,
and its manifest Repugnancy to the Phenomenon, render it less probable to have
been the Belief of all the Pagan Polytheists. Page 210 XIII. That the Pagan
Deities were not all of them Universally looked upon as so many Unmade,
Self-Existent Beings, Unquestionably Evident from hence; Because they Generally
held a Theogonia, or Generation of Gods. This Point of the Pagan Theology
insisted upon by Herodotus, the most ancient Prosaick Greek Writer. In whom the
meaning of that Question, Whether the Gods were Generated, or Existed all from
Eternity, seems to have been the same with this of Plato's, Whether the World
were Made or Unmade. Page 211 Certain also, that amongst the Hesiodian Gods,
there was either but One Self-Existent, or else None at all. Hesiod's Love
supposed to be the Eternal God, or the Active Principle of the Universe. Page
212 That the Valentinian Thirty Gods or Aeons (having the greatest appearance
of Independent Deities) were all derived from One Self-Originated Being, called
Bythus, or an Unfathomable Depth. Page 213 That, besides the Manichaeans, some
Pagans did indeed acknowledge a Ditheism, or Duplicity of Unmade Gods, One the
Principle of Good, the Other of Evil. (Which the nearest Approach, that can be
found, to the supposed Polytheism.) Plutarchus Chaeronensis, One or the Chief
of these; though not so commonly taken notice of by Learned men. His Reasons
for this Opinion Proposed. Page 213, etc. Plutarch's Pretense, That this was
the General Persuasion of all the Ancient Philosophers and Pagan Nations. His
Grounds, for Imputing it to Plato, Examined and Confuted. Page 218, etc. The
True Account of the Platonic Origin of Evils, from the Necessity of Imperfect
things. Page 220 Pythagoras, and other Philosophers, Purged likewise from this
Imputation. Page 221 That the Egyptians probably did but Personate Evil, (the
Confusion, and Alternate Vicissitude of things in this Lower World,) by Typhon.
The only Question concerning the Arimanius of the Persian Magi. This, Whether
a Self-Existent Principle, or no, Disputed. Page 222 Plutarch and Atticus, the
only Professed Asserters of this Doctrine among the Greek Philosophers;
(besides Numenius in Chalcidius) Who therefore probably, the Persons Censured
for it by Athanasius. Page 223, 224 Aristotle's Explosion and Confutation of
(...), Many Principles. Page 225 That a better Judgment may be made of the
Pagan Deities, a General Survey of them. They all Reduced to Five Heads; The
Souls of men Deceased or Hero's, The Animated Stars and Elements, Demons,
Accidents and Things of Nature Personated, And lastly, several Personal Names,
given to One Supreme God, according to the several Manifestations of his Power
and Providence in the World; mistaken, for so many Substantial Deities, or
Self-existent Minds. Page 226, etc. Pagans acknowledging Omnipotence, must
needs suppose One Sovereign Numen. Faustus the Manichaean his Conceit, that the
Jews and Christians Paganized, in the Opinion of Monarchy. With S. Austin's
Judgment of the Pagans thereupon. Page 231, 232 XIV. Concluded, That the Pagan
Polytheism, must be understood of Created Intellectual Beings, Superior to
men, Religiously Worshipped. So that the Pagans held, both Many Gods, and One
God, in different senses; Many Inferior Deities, subordinate to One Supreme
Thus Onatus the Pythagorean in Stobaeus. The Pagans Creed, in Maximus Tyrius;
One God the King and Father of all, and Many Gods the Sons of God. The Pagan
Theogonia, thus to be understood, of Many Gods Produced by One God. Page 233,
234 This Pagan Theogonia, Really one and the same thing with the Cosmogonia.
Plato's Cosmogonia a Theogonia. Page 234, etc. Hesiod's Theogonia, the
Cosmogonia. Page 238 The Persians and Egyptians in like manner, holding a
Cosmogonia, called it a Theogonia. Page 239 This Pagan Theogonia, how by some
mistaken. ibid. Both this Theogonia, and Cosmogonia of the Ancient Pagans, to
be understood of a Temporary Production. ibid. That Plato Really asserted the
Newness or Beginning of the World. Page 240, 241 Amongst the Pagans, Two sorts
of Theogonists, Atheistick and Divine. Plato a Divine Theogonist. Page 242, 243
Other Pagan Theogonists, Theists, or asserters of One Unmade Deity. Page 244,
245, etc. These Divine Theogonists also, made Chaos and Night senior to the
Gods; that is, to the Generated ones. Page 248 The Orphick Cabbala of the
Worlds Production, from Chaos (or Night) and Love; Originally Mosaical. Page
249 Other Pagan Theists neither Theogonists nor Cosmogonists: they holding the
Eternity of the World, and of the Gods: as Aristotle and the Junior Platonists.
Page 250, etc. These notwithstanding acknowledged all their Eternal Gods save
One, to be (...), that is, to have been Derived from that One; and that there
was in this sense, but (...), One only Unmade, or Self-existent God. Page 253,
254 Necessary here to show, how the Pagans did put a difference, betwixt the
One Supreme Unmade Deity, and their other Many Inferior Generated Gods. Page
255 This done, both by Proper Names, and Appellatives emphatically used, Page
256, etc. (...) or Gods, often put for Inferior Gods only, in way of
distinction from the Supreme. Page 261 (...), and (...) also, the Supreme
Deity. Page 263 Other Full and Emphatical Descriptions of the Supreme God,
amongst the Pagans. Page 264, 265 XV. Further Evidence of this, that the
Intelligent Pagan Polytheists, held only a Plurality of Inferior Deities
subordinate to One Supreme. First, because after the Emersion of Christianity
and its contest with Paganism, no Pagan ever asserted Many Independent Deities,
but all professed to acknowledge One Sovereign or Supreme. Page 265 Apollonius
Tyanaeus, set up amongst the Pagans for a Rival with our Savior Christ. Page
266, etc. He, though styled by Vopiscus a true Friend of the Gods, and though a
stout Champion for the Pagan Polytheism, yet a professed acknowledger of One
Supreme Deity. Page 269, 270 Celsus the First public Writer against
Christianity, and a zealous Polytheist; notwithstanding freely declares for
One First and Greatest Omnipotent God. ib. The next and most Eminent Champion
for the Pagan Cause, Porphyrius, an undoubted asserter of One Supreme Deity.
Who in Proclus not only opposes that Evil Principle of Plutarch and Atticus,
but also contendeth, that even Matter it self was derived from One Perfect
Being. Page 271 Hierocles the next Eminent Antagonist of Christianity, and
Champion for the Pagan Gods, did in the close of his Philalethes, (as we learn
from. Lactantius) highly Celebrate the Praises of the One Supreme God, the
Parent of all things. Page 271, etc. Julian the Emperor, a zealous contender
for the Restitution of Paganism, plainly derived all his Gods from One. Page
274, 275 This true of all the other Opposers of Christianity, as Iamblichus,
Syrianus, Proclus, Simplicius, etc. Maximus Madaurensis a Pagan Philosopher in
S. Austine, his profession of One Sovereign Numen above all the Gods. The same
also the sense of Longinianus. Page 275, 276 The Pagans in Arnobius universally
disclaim the Opinion of Many Unmade Deities, and profess the Belief of an
Omnipotent God. Page 276, 277 These Pagans acknowledged by others of the
Fathers also, to have held One Sovereign Numen. Page 279, etc. But of this more
afterward, when we speak of the Arians. XVI. That this was no Refinement or
Interpolation of Paganism, made after Christianity (as might be suspected) but
that the Doctrine of the most Ancient Pagan Theologers, and greatest Promoters
of Polytheism, was consonant hereunto: which will be proved from unsuspected
Writings. Page 281 Concerning the Sibylline Oracles, Two Extremes. Page 282,
etc. That Zoroaster the Chief Promoter of Polytheism in the East, Professed the
acknowledgment of One Sovereign Deity, (and that not the Sun neither, but the
maker thereof) proved from Eubulus in Porphyry. Page 285, 286 Zoroasters
Supreme God Oromasdes. Page 287 Of the Triplasian Mithras. Page 288 The Magic,
or Chaldaick Trinity. Page 289 The Zoroastrian Trinity, Oromasdes, Mithras and
Arimanes. Thus the Persian Arimanes, no Substantial Evil Principle, or
Independent God. Page 290 Concerning the Reputed Magic or Chaldaick Oracles.
Page 292, 293 XVII. That Orpheus, Commonly called by the Greeks, The Theologer,
and the Father of the Grecanick Polytheism, clearly asserted One Supreme Numen.
The History of Orpheus, not a mere Romance. Page 294, 295 Whether Orpheus were
the Father of the Poems called Orphical. Page 296, 297 Orpheus his Polytheism.
Page 298 That Orpheus notwithstanding, asserted a Divine Monarchy; Proved from
Orphick Verses, Recorded by Pagans. There being other Orphick Verses,
Counterfeit. Page 300, 301 In what sense Orpheus and other Mystical Theologers
amongst the Pagans, called God (...), Hermaphrodite, or of both Sexes, Male and
Female together. Page 304 Orpheus his Recantation of his Polytheism a Fable; He
at the same time acknowledging, both One Unmade God, and Many Generated Gods
and Goddesses. Page 305 That besides the Opinion of Monarchy, a Trinity of
Divine Hypostases subordinate, was also another Part of the Orphick Cabbala.
Orpheus his Trinity, Phanes, Uranus, and Chronus. Page 306 The Grand Arcanum of
the Orphick Theology, that God is All things; but in a different sense from the
Stoics. Page 306, 307 God's being All; made a Foundation of Pagan Polytheism
and Idolatry. Page 308 XVIII. That the Egyptians themselves, the most
Polytheistical of all Nations, had an Acknowledgment amongst them of One
Supreme Deity. The Egyptians the First Polytheists. That the Greeks and
Europeans derived their Gods from them, and as Herodotus affirms, their very
Names too. A Conjecture that (...) of the Greeks was (...) or (...), the
Tutelar God of the City Sais; a Colony whereof the Athenians are said to have
been. And that Neptune the Roman Sea-god, was derived from the Egyptian
Nephthus, signifying the Maritime parts. Of the Egyptians worshipping Brute
Animals. Page 309, 310 Notwithstanding this multifarious Polytheism and
Idolatry of the Egyptians, that they had an Acknowledgment of One Supreme God,
probable First, from that great Fame which they had for their Wisdom. Egypt a
School of Literature before Greece. Page 311 The Egyptians, though Attributing
more Antiquity to the World than they ought, yet of all Nations the most
constant Asserters of the Cosmogonia or Novity and Beginning of the World: Nor
did they think the World to have been made by Chance, as the Epicureans;
Simplicius calling the Mosaic History of the Creation, an Egyptian Fable. Page
312, 313 That besides the Pure and Mixed Mathematics, the Egyptians had another
Higher Philosophy, appears from hence; because they were the first Asserters of
the Immortality and Transmigration of Souls, which Pythagoras from them derived
into Greece. Certain therefore, that the Egyptians held Incorporeal Substance.
Page 313, 314 That the Egyptians besides their Vulgar and Fabulous, had another
Arcane and Recondite Theology. Their Sphinges, and Harpocrates, or Sigalions,
in their Temples. Page 314, 315 This Arcane Theology of the Egyptians,
concealed from the Vulgar two manner of ways, by Allegories and Hieroglyphics.
This doubtless a kind of Metaphysics concerning God, as One Perfect Being the
Original of all things. Page 316 An Objection from Chaeremon, (cited by
Porphyrius, in an Epistle to Anebo an Egyptian Priest,) fully answered by
Iamblichus in the Person of Abammo, in his Egyptian Mysteries. Page 317, 318
That Monarchy was an Essential Part of the Arcane and True Theology of the
Egyptians, may be proved from the Trismegistick Writings; though not all
Genuine; (as the Poemander, and Sermon in the Mount concerning Regeneration)
Because though they had been all Forged by Christians never so much, yet being
divulged in those Ancient times, they must needs have something of Truth in
them; this at least, That the Egyptians acknowledged One Supreme Deity, or
otherwise they would have been presently Exploded. Page 319, 320 That Casaubon,
from the Detection of Forgery in two or three at most of these Trismegistick
Books, does not Reasonably infer them to have been all Christian Cheats: those
also not Excepted, that have been cited by Ancient Fathers, but since lost.
Page 320, 321 That there was one Theuth or Thoth, (called by the Greeks Hermes)
an Inventor of Letters and Sciences amongst the Ancient Egyptians, not
reasonably to be doubted. Besides whom, there is said to have been a Second
Hermes, surnamed Trismegist, who left many Volumes of Philosophy and Theology
behind him, that were committed to the Custody of the Priests. Page 321, etc.
Other Books also written by Egyptian Priests, in several Ages successively,
called Hermaical, (as Iamblichus informs us) because Entitled ( Pro more) to
Hermes, as the President of Learning. Page 322 That some of those old Hermaick
Books remained in the Custody of the Egyptian Priests, till the times of
Clemens Alexandrinus. Page 323 Hermaick Books taken notice of formerly, not
only by Christians, but also by Pagans and Philosophers. Iamblichus his
Testimony of them, that they did Really contain Hermaical Opinions, or Egyptian
Learning. Fifteen of these Hermaick Books published together at Athens before
S. Cyril's time. Page 324, 325 All the Philosophy of the Present Hermaick Books
not merely Grecanick, as Casaubon affirms. That Nothing perishes; old
Egyptian Philosophy, derived by Pythagoras, together with the Transmigration of
Souls, into Greece. Page 326, 327 The Asclepian Dialogue, or Perfect Oration,
(said to have been translated into Latin by Apuleius) vindicated from being a
Christian Forgery. Page 328 An answer to two Objections made against it; the
latter whereof from a Prophecy taken notice of by S. Austin; That the Temples
of the Egyptian Gods, should shortly be full of the Sepulchers of dead men.
ibid. Petavius his further Suspicion of Forgery, because as Lactantius and S.
Austin have affirmed, the Christian Logos is herein called a Second God, and
the First begotten Son of God. The Answer, that Lactantius and S. Austin were
clearly Mistaken, this being there affirmed only of the Visible and Sensible
World. Page 329, 330 That besides the Asclepian Dialogue, others of the present
Trismegistick Books, contain Egyptian Doctrine. Nor can they be all proved to
be Spurious and Counterfeit. This the rather insisted on, for the Vindication
of the Ancient Fathers. Page 331, 332 Proved that the Egyptians, besides their
Many Gods acknowledged One First Supreme, and Universal Deity, from the
Testimonies of Plutarch, Horus Apollo, Iamblichus, (affirming that Hermes
derived all things, even Matter it self, from One Divine Principle) lastly of
Damascius declaring that the Egyptian Philosophers at that time, had found in
the Writings of the Ancients, That they held One Principle of all things,
Praised under the name of the Unknown Darkness. Page 334, etc. The same thing
Proved from their Vulgar Religion and Theology; Hammon being a proper Name for
the Supreme God amongst them; and therefore Styled the Egyptian Jupiter. Page
337 Though this word Hammon were probably at first the same with Ham or Cham
the Son of Noah, yet will not this hinder, but that it might be used afterward
by the Egyptians for the Supreme God. Page 338 The Egyptian God Hammon, neither
confined by them to the Sun, nor to the Corporeal World, but according to the
Notation of the word in the Egyptian Language, a Hidden and Invisible Deity.
This farther confirmed from the Testimony of Iamblichus. Page 339 This Egyptian
Hammon more than once taken notice of in Scripture. Page 339, 340 That the
Egyptians acknowledged one Universal Numen, further proved from that Famous
Inscription upon the Saitick Temple, I Am all that Was, Is, and Shall be, and
my Veil no Mortal has ever yet Uncovered. That this cannot be Understood of
Senseless Matter, nor of the Corporeal Universe, but of a Divine Mind or
Wisdom diffusing it self thorough all. The Peplum or Veil cast over the
Statue, as well of the Saitick as Athenian Minerva; Hieroglyphically signified
the Invisibility and Incomprehensibility of the Deity which is Veiled in its
works. From what Proclus adds to this Inscription beyond Plutarch, And the
Sun was the Fruit which I produced; Evident, that this was a Demiurgical Deity,
the Creator of the Sun and of the World. Page 341, 342 How that passage of
Hecataeus in Plutarch is to be Understood, That the Egyptians supposed the
First God, and the Universe, to be the same, viz. Because the Supreme Deity
diffuseth it self thorough all things. (...) a Name of God also amongst the
Greek Philosophers. Page 343 That Pan to the Arcadians and other Vulgar Greeks,
was not the Corporeal World, as Senseless and Inanimate, but as proceeding from
an Intellectual Principle diffusing it self through all; from Macrobius and
Phornutus. Socrates his Prayer to Pan, as the Supreme God, in Plato's Phaedrus.
Page 343, 344 Our Savior Christ called the Great Pan by Demons. Page 345 How
the old Egyptian Theology, That God is All things, is every where insisted upon
in the Trismegistick Writings. Page 346, 347 That the Supreme God was sometimes
worshipped by the Egyptians under other Proper Personal names, as Isis, Osiris,
and Serapis, etc. Page 349, etc. Recorded in Eusebius, from Porphyrius, that
the Egyptians acknowledged one Intellectual Demiurgus, or Maker of the World,
under the name of Cneph, whom they pictured, putting forth an Egg out of his
Mouth. This Cneph said to have produced another God, whom the Egyptians called
Phtha, the Greeks, Vulcan; the Soul of the World, and Artificial Plastic
Nature. The Testimony of Plutarch, That the Thebaites worshipped only One
Eternal and Immortal God under this name of Cneph. Page 412 Thus, according to
Apuleius, the Egyptians worshipped One and the same Supreme God under many
different Names and Notions. ibid. Probable, that the Egyptians distinguished
Hypostases in the Deity also. Kircherus his Egyptian Hieroglyphick of the
Trinity. An Intimation in Iamblichus of an Egyptian Trinity, Eiction, Emeph, or
Hemphta, (which is the same with Cneph,) and Phtha. Page 413 The Doctrine of,
God's being All, made by the Egyptians a Foundation of Polytheism and Idolatry,
they being led hereby to Personate and Deify the several Parts of the World,
and Things of Nature; (which in the Language of the Asclepian Dialogue, is, To
call God by the name of every thing, or every thing by the name of God,) the
wise amongst them nevertheless understanding, that all was but one Simple
Deity, worshipped by Piece-Meale. This Allegorically signified by Osiris his
being dismembered and cut in pieces by Typhon, and then made up One again by
Isis. Page 354, 355 XIX. That the Poets many ways depraved the Pagan Theology,
and made it to have a more Aristocratical Appearance. Page 355, etc.
Notwithstanding which, they did not really assert Many Self-Existent and
Independent Gods, but One only Unmade; and all the rest Generated or Created.
Homer's Gods not all Eternal and Unmade, but Generated out of the Ocean; that
is, a Watery Chaos. Homer's Theogonia, as well as Hesiod's, the Cosmogonia; and
his Generation of Gods, the same thing with the Production or Creation of the
World. Page 357, 358 Nevertheless, Homer distinguished, from all those
Generated Gods, One Unmade God, the Father, or Creator, of them, and of the
World. Page 359 Homer thus understood by the Pagans themselves; as Plutarch,
Proclus, and Aristotle. Page 359, 360 Though Hesiod's Gods, properly so called,
were all of them Generated, yet did He suppose also One Unmade God, the Maker
of them, and of the World. Page 360, 361 Pindar likewise, a Divine Theogonist;
an Asserter of One Unmade Deity (and no more) the Cause of all things; yet
nevertheless of Many Generated Gods besides His One God to be worshipped far
above all the other Gods. Page 361, 362 The Suspicion which Aristotle sometime
had of Hesiod, and Plato of Homer, seems to have proceeded from their not
Understanding that Mosaic Cabbala, followed by them both, of the World's being
Made out of a Watery Chaos. Page 362 That famous Passage of Sophocles,
concerning One God the Maker of Heaven, Earth, and Seas, (cited by so many
Ancient Fathers) defended as genuine. Page 363 Clear places in the extant
Tragedies of Euripides to the same purpose; with other remarkable ones cited
out of his now inextant Tragedies: Besides the Testimonies of other Greek
Poets. Page 363, etc. The Consent of Latin Poets also, in the Monarchy of the
whole. Page 365 XX. After the Poets of the Pagans, their Philosophers
considered. That Epicurus was the only reputed Philosopher, who pretending to
acknowledge Gods, yet professedly opposed Monarchy, and verbally asserted a
Multitude of Eternal Unmade Deities, but such as had Nothing to do, either
with the Making or Governing of the World. He therefore clearly to be reckoned
amongst the Atheists. All the Pagan Philosophers who were Theists, (a few
Ditheists excepted) Universally asserted a Mundane Monarchy. Page 369, 370.
Pythagoras, a Polytheist as much as the other Pagans, nevertheless a plain
Acknowledger of one One Supreme God, the Maker of the Universe. Page 371
Pythagoras his Dyad, no Evil God or Demon Self-existent, as Plutarch supposed.
Page 372 But this Dyad of his, whether Matter or no, derived from a Monad, One
Simple Unity, the Cause of all things. Page 372, 373 That Pythagoras,
acknowledging a Trinity of Divine Hypostases, did therefore sometimes describe
God as a Monad, sometimes as a Mind, and sometimes as the Soul of the World.
Page 373 The Pythagorick Monad and First God, the same with the Orphick Love,
Seniour to Japhet and Saturn, and the Oldest of all the Gods, a Substantial
thing. But that Love which Plato would have to be the Youngest of the Gods,
(the Daughter of Penia, or Indigency, and a Parturient thing,) Nothing but a
Creaturely affection in Souls, Personated and Deified. Parmenides his Love, the
First Created God, or Lower Soul of the World; before whose Production,
Necessity is said to have reigned; that is, the Necessity of Material Motions
undirected for Ends, and Good. Page 374, 375. That Pythagoras called the
Supreme Deity, not only a Monad, but a Tetrad or Tetractys also. The Reasons
for this given, from the Mysteries in the Number Four, trifling. More
probability of a late Conjecture, that the Pythagorick Tetractys, was the
Hebrew Tetragrammaton, not altogether unknown to the Hetrurians and Latins.
Page 375, 376 Xenophanes a plain Asserter both of Many Gods, and of One God,
called by him, One and All. Simplicius his clear Testimony for this Theosophy
of Xenophanes, out of Theophrastus. Xenophanes misrepresented by Aristotle, as
an Asserter of a Spherical Corporeal God. Page 377, 378 Heraclitus, though a
Cloudy and Confounded Philosopher, and one who could not conceive of any thing
Incorporeal, yet both a hearty Moralist, and a zealous Asserter of One Supreme
Deity. Page 378, 379 The Ionick Philosophers before Anaxagoras, being all of
them Corporealists, and some of them Atheists; that Anaxagoras was the First
who asserted an Incorporeal Mind to be a Principle, and though not the Cause of
Matter, yet of Motion, and of the Regularity of things. The World, according to
him, not Eternal, but Made, and out of Pre-Existent Similar Atoms, and that not
by Chance, but by Mind or God. This Mind of his, purely Incorporeal, as
appears from his own words, cited by Simplicius. Page 380 Probable, that
Anaxagoras admitted none of the Inferior Pagan Gods. He Condemned by the
Vulgar for an Atheist, because he Ungodded the Stars, denying their Animation,
and affirming the Sun to be but a Mass of Fire, and the Moon an Earth. This
disliked also by Plato, as that which in those times would dispose men to
Atheism. Page 381 Anaxagoras farther Censured, both by Plato and Aristotle,
because though asserting Mind to be a Principle, he made much more use of
Material than of Mental and Final Causes; which was looked upon by them as an
Atheistick Tang in him. Nevertheless Anaxagoras a better Theist than those
Christian Philosophers of later times, who quite banish all Mental Causality
from the World. Page 382, 383 XXI. Parmenides his acknowledgment of One God the
Cause of Gods. Which Supreme Deity, by Parmenides styled, One-All-Immovable.
That this is not to be taken Physically, but Metaphysically and Theologically;
Proved at large. The First Principle of all, to these Ancients, One, a Simple
Unity or Monad. This said to be All, because virtually Containing All, and
Distributed into All; or because All things are distinctly displayed from it.
Lastly, the same said to be Immovable, and Indivisible, and without Magnitude,
to distinguish it from the Corporeal Universe. Page 383, etc. (...), One All,
taken in different Senses; by Parmenides and Xenophanes, etc. Divinely, for the
Supreme Deity, (One most Simple Being the Original of all things:) but by
others in Aristotle, Atheistically, as if all things were but One and the same
Matter diversely Modified. But the One-All of these Latter, not Immovable, but
Moveable; it being nothing else but Body; whereas the One-All-Immoveable, is an
Incorporeal Deity. This does Aristotle, in his Metaphysics, close with, as
good Divinity, That there is one Incorporeal Immovable Principle of all
things. Simplicius his Observation, That though diverse Philosophers maintained
a Plurality or Infinity of Moveable Principles, yet none ever asserted more
than One Immovable. Page 385, 386 Parmenides in Plato distinguishes three
Divine Hypostases, The First whereof called by him, (...), One-All; the Second,
(...), One All things; and the Third, (...), One and All things. Page 386, etc.
But that Parmenides by his One-All-Immoveable really understood the Supreme
Deity, yet farther unquestionably evident from the Verses cited out of him by
Simplicius; Wherein there is also attributed thereunto a Standing Eternity, or
Duration, different from that of Time. Page 388 The only Difference betwixt
Parmenides and Melissus, that the Former called his, One-All-Immoveable,
Finite; the Latter, Infinite; this in Words rather than Reality: The
Disagreeing Agreement of these two Philosophers fully declared by Simplicius.
Melissus his Language more agreeable with our present Theology. Though
Anaximander's Infinite were nothing but Senseless Matter, yet Melissus his
Infinite was the True Deity. Page 389 That Zeno Eleates, by his
One-All-Immoveable, meant not the Corporeal World neither, no more than
Melissus, Parmenides, and Xenophanes; but the Deity; evident from Aristotle.
Zeno's Demonstrations of One God, from the Idea of a most Powerful and Perfect
Being, in the same Aristotle. Page 390 Empedocles his First Principle of All
things, (...), or a Unity likewise, besides which he supposed Contention and
Friendship to be the Principles of all Created Beings; not only Plants,
Brutes, and Men, but Gods also. Page 391, etc. Empedocles his Original of all
the Evil both of Humane Soul and Demons, from this (...), Discord and
Contention, together with the Ill use of their Liberty. Page 393 XXII. The
Doctrine of diverse other Pythagoreans also the same; as Philolaus, Archytas,
Ocellus, Aristaeus, etc. Timaeus Locrus his God the Creator of Gods. Onatus
his Many Gods, and his One God, the Coryphaeus of the Gods. Euclides Megarensis
his One the Very Good. Antisthenes his Many Popular Gods, but One Natural God.
Diogenes Sinopensis his God that Fills all things. Page 393, etc. XXIII. That
Socrates asserted One Supreme God undeniable from Xenophon. Page 398, 399 But
that he disclaimed all the other Inferior Gods of the Pagans, and died, as a
Martyr, for One only God, in this Sense, a Vulgar Error. Page 400 What the
Impiety imputed to him by his Adversaries, appears from Plato's Euthyphro,
viz. That he freely and openly Condemned those Fables of the Gods wherein
Wicked and Unjust Actions were imputed to them. Page 401 That Plato really
asserted One only God and no more, a Vulgar Error likewise; and that
Thirteenth Epistle to Dionysius, wherein he declared himself, to be Serious
only when he began his Epistles with God, and not with Gods, (though exstant
in Eusebius his time,) Spurious and Supposititious. He worshipping the Sun and
other Stars also (supposed to be animated) as Inferior Gods. Page 402
Nevertheless, Undeniably evident, that Plato was no Polyarchist, but a
Monarchist, no Asserter of Many Independent Gods, or Principles, but of One
Original of all things; One First God, One Greatest God, One Maker of the World
and of the Gods. Page 403, 404 In what Sense the Supreme God, to Plato, the
Cause and Producer of Himself; (out of Plotinus) and this notion not only
entertained by Seneca and Plotinus, but also by Lactantius, That Plato really
asserted a Trinity of Universal Divine Hypostases, that have the Nature of
Principles. The First Hypostasis in Plato's Trinity properly (...), The
Original Deity, the Cause and King of all things: which also said by him to be
(...), or (...), Above Essence. Page 407 Xenophon, though with other Pagans, he
acknowledged a Plurality of Gods, yet a plain Asserter also of One Supreme and
Universal Numen. Page 408 XXIV. Aristotle a frequent Acknowledger of Many Gods.
And whether he believed any Demons or no, which he sometimes mentions (though
sparingly) and insinuates them to be a kind of Aerial Animals, more Immortal
than Men; yet did he unquestionably look upon the Stars, or their
Intelligences, as Gods. Page 408, etc. Notwithstanding which, Aristotle does
not only often speak of God Singularly, and of the Divinity Emphatically, but
also professedly opposes that Imaginary Opinion of Many Independent Principles,
or Unmade Deities. He confuting the same from the Phenomena or the Compages of
the World, which is not (...), but all Uniform, and agreeably Conspiring into
one Harmony. Page 410, 411 Aristotle's Supreme Deity, the First Immovable
Mover. The difference here betwixt Plato, and Aristotle; Plato's Original of
Motion, a Self-moving Soul, Aristotle's an Immovable Mind. But this Difference
not so great as at first sight it seems; because Aristotle's Immovable Mind,
does not Move the Heavens Efficiently, but only Finally, or As being Loved.
Besides which, he must needs suppose, another immediate Mover, which could be
nothing, but a Soul of them. Page 412 Aristotle's Immovable Mind, not only
the Cause of Motion, but also of Well and Fit; all the Order, Pulchritude and
Harmony, that is in the world Called therefore by Aristotle, the Separate Good
thereof. This together with Nature, (its Subordinate Instrument) the Efficient
Cause of the whole Mundane System: which however Coeternal with it, yet is, in
Order of Nature, Junior to it. Page 413, 414 Aristotle and other Ancients, when
they affirm Mind to have been the Cause of all things, Understood it thus, That
all things were made by an Absolute Wisdom, and after the Best Manner. The
Divine Will according to them, not a mere Arbitrary, Humoursome, and Fortuitous
thing, but Decency and Fitness it self. Page 415 From this passage of
Aristotle's, That the Divinity is either God, or the Work of God; Evident, that
he supposed All the Gods, to have been derived from One, and therefore his
Intelligences of the Spears. Page 415 That according to Aristotle, this
Speculation of the Deity, constitutes a Particular Science by it self, distinct
from Physiology and Geometry: the Former whereof ( Physiology) is Conversant
about what was Inseparable and Movable, the Second ( Geometry) about things
Immovable, but not Really Separable, but the Third and Last (which is Theology)
about that which is both Immovable and Separable, an Incorporeal Deity. Page
416 Four Chief Points of Aristotle's Theology or Metaphysics, concerning God;
First, that though all things are not Eternal and Unmade, yet something must
needs be such, as likewise Incorruptible, or otherwise all might come to
Nothing. Secondly, that God is an Incorporeal Substance, separate from
Sensibles, Indivisible and devoid of Parts and Magnitude. Thirdly, that the
Divine Intellect, is the same with its Intelligibles, or contains them all
within it self; because the Divine Mind, being Senior to all things, and
Architectonical of the World, could not then look abroad for its Objects
without it self. The contrary to which supposed by Atheists. Lastly, that God
being an Immovable Substance; his Act and Energy is his Essence; from whence
Aristotle would infer the Eternity of the World. Page 416, 417 Aristotle's
Creed and Religion contained in these Two Articles, first That there is a
Divinity which comprehends the whole Nature, or Universe. And Secondly, that
besides this, There are other Particular Inferior Gods; But that all other
things, in the Religion of the Pagans, were Fabulously superadded hereunto for
Political Ends. Page 417 Speusippus, Xenocrates and Theophrastus, Monarchists.
Page 418 XXV. The Stoics no better Metaphysicians than Heraclitus, in whose
footsteps they trod, admitting of no Incorporeal Substance. The Qualities of
the Mind also, to these Stoics, Bodies. Page 419, 420 But the Stoics, not
therefore Atheists; they supposing an Eternal Unmade Mind, (though lodged in
Matter) the Maker of the whole Mundane System. Page 420 The Stoical
Argumentations for a God not Inconsiderable, and what they were. Page 421, 422
The Stoical God, not a mere Plastic and Methodical, but an Intellectual Fire.
The World according to them, not a Plant, but Animal; and Jupiter the Soul
thereof. From the supposed Oneliness of which Jupiter, they would sometimes
infer, the Singularity of the World: (Plutarch on the Contrary affirming,
that though there were Fifty, or an Hundred Worlds, yet would there be for all
that, but one Zeus or Jupiter.) Page 423 Nevertheless the Stoics as
Polytheistical as any Sect. But so, as that they supposed all their Gods save
One, to be not Only Native, but also Mortal; made out of that One, and
resolved into that One again: these Gods, being all Melted into Jupiter, in the
Conflagration. Page 424, 425 Wherefore during the Intervals of Successive
Worlds, the Stoics acknowledged but one Solitary Deity, and no more; Jupiter
being then left all alone, and the other Gods Swallowed up into him. Who
therefore not only, the Creator of all the other Gods, but also the
Decreatour of them. Page 425, 426 The Stoics notwithstanding this, Religious
Worshippers of their Many Gods; and thereby sometime derogated from the Honor
of the Supreme, by sharing his Sovereignty amongst them. Page 426, 427
Nevertheless, the Supreme God, praised and extolled by them far above all the
other Gods; and acknowledged to be the Sole Maker of the World. Page 427, etc.
Their Professing Subjection to his Laws as their greatest Liberty. Page 430 And
to submit their Wills to his Will in every thing, so as to know no other Will,
but the Will of Jupiter. ibid. Their Pretending to Look to God, and to do
nothing without a Reference to him; as also to Trust in him and Rely upon him.
Page 431 Their Praising him as the Author of all Good. ibid. Their Addressing
their Devotions to him Alone, without the conjunction of any other God; and
particularly imploring his Assistence against Temptations. Page 432 Cleanthes
his Excellent and Devout Hymn, to the Supreme God. Page 433 XXVI. Cicero,
though affecting to write in the way of the New Academy, yet no Sceptick as to
Theism. Nor was he an Asserter of Many Independent Deities. Cicero's Gods (the
Makers of the World) the same with Plato's Eternal Gods, or Trinity of Divine
Hypostases Subordinate. This Language, the Pagans in S. Cyrill, would Justify,
from that of the Scripture, Let us make Man. Page 434, 435, etc. Varro's
Threefold Theology, The Fabulous, the Natural, and the Civil or Popular;
agreeably to Scaevola the Pontifex, his Three Sorts of Gods, Poetical,
Pholosophical, and Political. The Former condemned by him as False, the Second,
though True, said to be above the Capacity of the Vulgar: and therefore a
Necessity, of a Third or Middle betwixt both; Because many things True in
Religion, not fit for the Vulgar to know. Varro's Supreme Numen, the great Soul
or Mind of the whole World: his Inferior Gods, Parts of the World Animated.
Image Worship Condemned by him, as disagreeable to the Natural Theology. Page
438, 439 Seneca a Pagan Polytheist, but plain asserter of One Supreme Numen,
excellently described by him. That in his Book of Superstition (now lost) he
did as freely Censure the Civil Theology of the Romans, as Varro had done the
Fabulous or Theatrical. Page 440 Quintilian, Pliny, Apuleius, their clear
acknowledgments of One Sovereign Universal Deity. Symmachus, (a great stickler
for Paganism) his Assertion, That it was One and the Same thing, which was
Worshipped in all Religions, though in different ways. Page 440, 441 The Writer
De Mundo, though not Astotle, yet a Pagan. His Cause that contains All
things, and God from whom all things are. Which Passage being left out in
Apuleius his Latin Version, gives occasion of suspicion, that he was infected
with Plutarch's Ditheism, or at least held Matter to be Unmade. Page 442
Plutarch a Priest of Apollo, however unluckily engaged in those Two False
Opinions, of an Evil Principle, and Matter Unmade, yet a Maintainer of One Sole
Principle of all Good. Page 443 Dio Chrysostomus a Sophist, his clear
Testimony, (...), That the whole World was under a Kingly Government or
Monarchy. ibid. Galen's True Hymn to the praise of him that made us, in his
Book De usu Partium. Page 444 Maximus Tyrius his short Account of his own
Religion; One Supreme God, the Monarch of the whole World, and Three
Subordinate Ranks of Inferior Gods, the Sons and Friends of God, and his
Ministers in the Government of the World. Page 444, 445 A most full and
Excellent Description of the Supreme God in Aristides his First Oration or Hymn
to Jupiter, wherein he affirms, all the several kinds of Gods, to be but a
Defluxion and Derivation from Jupiter. Page 445, 446 All the Latter
Philosophers after Christianity, (though maintainers of the Worlds Eternity,
yet) agreed in One Supreme Deity, the Cause of this World, and of the other
Gods. Excellent Speculations in them concerning the Deity, especially Plotinus;
who though deriving Matter and all from One Divine Principle, yet was a
Contender for Many Gods; he supposing, the Grandeur and Majesty of the Supreme
God, to be declared by the Multitude of Gods under him. Themistius; That the
Same Supreme God, was worshipped by Pagans, Christians, and all Nations, though
in different Forms; and that God was delighted with this Variety of Religions.
Page 446, 447 The full Testimony of S. Cyril, That the Greek Philosophers
universally acknowledged One God, the Maker of the Universe, from whom were
produced into Being, certain other Gods, both Intelligible and Sensible. ibid.
XXVII. This not only the Opinion of Philosophers and Learned men, but also the
General Belief of the Vulgar amongst the Pagans. A Judgment of the Vulgar and
Generality, to be made from the Poets. Dio Chrysostom. his Affirmation, That all
the Poets acknowledged One First and Greatest God the Father of all the
Rational Kind, and the King thereof. Page 447 The Testimony of Aristotle, That
all men acknowledged Kingship or Monarchy amongst the Gods: of Maximus Tyrius,
That notwithstanding so great a Discrepancy of Opinion in other things, yet
throughout all the Gentile World, as well the Unlearned as Learned did
universally agree in this, That there was One God the King and Father of all,
and Many Gods the Sons of that One God: Of Dio Chrysostomus also to the same
purpose; he intimating likewise that of the two, the acknowledgment of the One
Supreme God, was more General than that of the Many Inferior Gods. Page 448,
Page 449 That the sense of the Vulgar Pagans herein is further evident from
hence, because all Nations had their several Proper Names for the One Supreme
God; as the Romans Jupiter, the Greeks Zeus, the Africans and Arabians Hammon,
the Scythians Pappaeus, the Babylonians Bell, etc. Page 449 True, that Origin,
though allowing Christians to use the Appellative Names for God in the
Languages of the several Nations, yet accounted it unlawful for them to call
him by those Proper Names; because not only given to Idols, but also
contaminated with wicked Rites and Fables: according to which, they should be
judged rather the Names of a Demon than of a God. Notwithstanding which, he
does not deny, those Pagans ever to have meant the Supreme God by them, but
often acknowledge the same. But Lactantius indeed denies the Capitoline Jupiter
to be the Supreme God, and that for two Reasons. First, because he was not
worshipped without the Partnership of Minerva and Juno, his Daughter and Wife.
Granted here, that there was a Mixture of the Fabulous or Poetical Theology
with the Natural to make up the Civil. But that Wise men understood these to be
but Three several Names or Notions of One Supreme God. This confirmed from
Macrobius. Page 450 Vossius his Conjecture, that in this Capitoline Trinity
there was a further Mystery aimed at, of Three Divine Hypostases. This Roman
Trinity derived from the Samothracian Cabiri. Which word being Hebraical, gives
Cause to suspect this Tradition of a Trinity amongst the Pagans, to have sprung
from the Hebrews. Page 451 Lactantius his Second Reason, Because Jupiter being
Juvans Pater, was a name below the Dignity of the Supreme God. The Answer, that
the true Etymon thereof was Jovis Pater, the Hebrew Tetragrammaton. ibid. That
the Capitoline Jupiter was the Supreme God, evident from those Titles of
Optimus, Maximus; and of Omnipotens by the Pontifices in their Public
Sacrifices. Seneca's Testimony that the ancient Hetrurians, by Jupiter meant
the Mind and Spirit, Maker and Governor of the whole World. The Roman
Soldiers Acclamation in Marcus Aurelius his German Expedition, ( To Jove the
God of Gods, who alone is Powerful) according to Tertullian, a Testimony to
the Christians God. Page 452, 453 That as the Learned Pagans in their Writings,
so likewise the Vulgar in their common Speech, when most serious, often used
the word God, Singularly and Emphatically, for the Supreme, proved from
Tertullian, Minucius Felix, and Lactantius: together with the Testimony of
Proclus, that the One Supreme God, was more universally believed throughout the
World than the Many Gods. Page 453, 454 That Kyrie Eleeson, was anciently a
Pagan Litany to the Supreme God, proved from Arianus. The Supreme God often
called by the Pagans also (...), or the Lord. Page 454, 455 That even the most
sottishly Superstitious, Idolatrous, and Polytheistical amongst the Pagans, did
notwithstanding generally acknowledge One Supreme Deity; fully attested and
elegantly declared by Aurelius Prudentius in his Apotheosis. Page 455 However
some of the Ancient Pagans were said to have acknowledged none but Visible and
Corporeal Gods, yet as they conceived these to be endued with Life and
Understanding, so did they suppose One Supreme amongst them, as either the
whole Heaven or Ether Animated, or the subtle Fiery Substance that pervadeth
all things, the God of the Heracliticks and Stoics; or the Sun the Cleanthaean
God. Page 455, 456 Though Macrobius refer so many of the Pagan Gods to the Sun,
and doubtless himself looked upon it as a Great God, yet does he deny it to be
Omnipotentissimum Deum, the Most Omnipotent God of all; he asserting a Trinity
of Divine Hypostases Superior to it, in the Platonic way. Page 456, 457 That
the Persians themselves, the most Notorious Sun-worshippers, did
notwithstanding acknowledge a Deity Superior to it, and the Maker thereof;
proved from Eubulus. As also that the Persians Countrey-Jupiter, was not the
Sun, confirmed from Herodotus, Xenophon, Plutarch, and Curtius. Cyrus his Lord
God of Heaven, who commanded him to build him a house at Jerusalem; the same
with the God of the Jews. Page 458 That as (besides the Scythians) the
Ethiopians in Strabo, and other Barbarian Nations, anciently acknowledged One
Sovereign Deity; so is this the Belief of the generality of the Pagan World to
this very day. Page 458, 459 XXVIII. Besides Themistius and Symmachus,
asserting One and the same Thing to be worshipped in all Religions, though
after different ways, and that God Almighty was not displeased with this
Variety of his Worship; Plutarch's Memorable Testimony, That as the same Sun,
Moon, and Stars, are common to all, so were the same Gods. And that not only
the Egyptians, but also all other Pagan Nations worshipped One Reason and
Providence ordering all: together with its Inferior Subservient Powers and
Ministers, though with different Rites and Symbols. Page 459, 460 Titus Livius
also of the same Persuasion, That the Same Immortal Gods were Worshipped every
where (namely One Supreme, and his Inferior Ministers) however the Diversity
of Rites, made them seem Different. Page 460 Two Egyptian Philosophers,
Heraiscus and Asclepiades, professedly insisting upon the same thing, not only
as to the Egyptians, but also the other Pagan Nations: the Latter of them, (
Asclepiades) having written a Book Entitled, The Symphony or Harmony of all
Theologies or Religions, To wit, in these Two Fundamentalls, That there is One
Supreme God, and besides him, Other Inferior Gods, his Subservient Ministers
to be worshipped. From whence Symmachus, and other Pagans concluded, That the
Differences of Religion were not to be scrupulously stood upon, but every man
ought to worship God according to the Law and Religion of his own Country. The
Pagans Sense thus declared by Stobaeus, That the Multitude of Gods, is the work
of the Demiurgus, made by Him together with the World. Page 461 XXIX. That the
Pagan Theists, must needs acknowledge One Supreme Deity, further Evident from
hence; Because they generally believed the whole World to be One Animal,
Actuated and Governed by One Soul. To deny the Worlds Animation, and to be an
Atheist; all one, in the sense of the Ancient Pagans. Against Gassendus, that
Epicurus denied the Worlds Animation, upon no other account, but only because
he denied a Providential Deity. This whole Animated World, or the Soul thereof,
to the Stoics, and others, The (...), The First and Highest God. Page 462
Other Pagan Theologers, who though asserting likewise, the Worlds Animation,
and a Mundane Soul, yet would not allow this to be the Supreme Deity, they
conceiving the First and Highest God, to be no Soul, but an Abstract and
Immovable Mind Superior to it. And to these, the Animated World and Mundane
Soul, but (...), A Second God. Page 463 But the Generality of those who went
Higher than the Soul of the World, acknowledged also a Principle Superior to
Mind or Intellect, called, (...), and (...), The One, and The Good: and so
asserted, a Trinity of Divine Hypostases Subordinate, Monad, Mind, and Soul. So
that the Animated World or Soul thereof, was to some of these, but (...), The
Third God. ibid. The Pagans, whether holding Soul, or Mind, or Monad, to be the
Highest, acknowledged only One in each of those several Kinds, as the Head of
all; and so always reduced the Multiplicity of things to a Unity, or under a
Monarchy. Page 464 Observed, That to the Pagan Theologers Universally, the
World was no Dead Thing, or mere Machin and Automaton, but had Life or Soul
diffused thorough it all: Those being taxed by Aristotle as Atheists, who made
the world to consist of nothing, but Monads or Atoms, Dead and Inanimate. Nor
was it quite Cut off from the Supreme Deity, how much soever Elevated above the
same: the Forementioned Trinity, of Monad, Mind, and Soul, being supposed to be
most intimately united together, and indeed all but One Entire Divinity;
Displayed in the World, and Supporting the same. Page 464, 465 XXX. The Sense
of the Hebrews in this Controversy. That according to Philo, the Pagan
Polytheism consisted not in worshipping Many Independent Gods, and Partial
Creators of the World, but besides the One Supreme, other Created Beings
Superior to men. Page 465, 466 That the same also, was the Sense of Flavius
Josephus, according to whom, This the Doctrine of Abraham; That the Supreme God
was alone to be Religiously Worshipped, and no Created thing with him.
Aristaeus his Assertion in Josephus, That the Jews and Greeks worshipped one
and the same Supreme God, called by the Greeks Zene, as giving Life to all.
Page 466, 467 The Latter Rabbinical Writers, generally of this Persuasion, That
the Pagans acknowledging One Supreme and Universal Numen, worshipped all their
Other Gods, as his Ministers, or as Mediators and Intercessors betwixt him and
them. And this Condemned by them for (...) Strange Worship or Idolatry. The
first Commandment thus interpreted by Maimonides, and Baal Ikkarim; Thou shall
not set up besides me, any Inferior Gods as Mediators, nor Religiously Worship
my Ministers or Attendants. The Miscarriage of Solomon and other Kings of
Israel and Judah, This, That believing the Existence of the One Supreme God,
they thought it was for his Honor that his Ministers also should be
worshipped. Abravanel his Ten Species of Idolatry, all of them but so Many
several Modes of Creature-Worship; and no mention amongst them made, of many
Independent Gods. Page 467, etc. Certain Places of Scripture also, Interpreted
by Rabbinical Writers to this purpose; That the Pagan Nations generally
acknowledged, One Sovereign Numen. Page 469, 470 The Jews, though agreeing with
the Greeks, and other Pagans in this, That the Stars were all Animated,
nevertheless denied them any Religious Worship. Page 470, 471 XXXI. This same
thing, plainly confirmed, from the New Testament; That the Gentiles or Pagans,
however Polytheists and Idolaters, were not Unacquainted with the True God.
First from the Epistle to the Romans, where that which is Knowable of God, is
said to have been manifest amongst the Pagans; and they to have Known God,
though they did not Glorify him as God, but hold the Truth in Unrighteousness;
by reason of their Polytheism and Idolatry (or Image Worship) The Latter of
which, accounted by the Jews the greatest Enormity of the Pagans, as is proved
from Philo: and this the Reason, why their Polytheism, called also Idolatry.
Plainly declared by S. Paul, that the Pagan Superstition consisted not in
worshipping Many Independent Gods and Creators, but in joining Creature-worship
some way or other, with the worship of the Creator. (...) How to be Understood;
and in what Sense, the Pagans, though acknowledging the Creator, might be said
to have Worshipped the Creature, beyond him. Page 471, 472 Again, from S. Paul's
Oration to the Athenians, where their Unknown God, is said to be that same God,
whom S. Paul Preached, Who made the World and all things in it. And these
Athenian Pagans are affirmed (...), Religiously and Devoutly to Worship this
True God. Page 473, 474 Lastly, that Aratus his Zeus was the True God, whose
Offspring our Souls are; Proved not only from the Context of that Poet
himself, undeniably, and from the Scholiast upon him, but also from S. Paul's
Positive Affirmation. Nor was Aratus Singular in this; That Ancient Prayer of
the Athenians, Commended by M. Antoninus for its Simplicity, ((...), Rain Rain,
O Gracious Jupiter etc.) no otherwise to be understood. And how that other
Passage of S. Paul, That in the Wisdom of God, the World by Wisdom knew not
God, does not at all Clash herewith. Page 475, 476 XXXII. In order to a Fuller
Explication of the Pagan Theology, and making it the better appear, that the
Polytheism thereof, was not Contradictions to the acknowledgment of One Supreme
Omnipotent Numen; Three Things to be Considered. First, That much of their
Polytheism was but Seeming and Fantastical only, and really nothing but the
Polyonymy of One God. Secondly, That their Real and Natural Polytheism,
consisted only in Religiously Worshipping, besides this One Supreme Universal
Numen, Many other Particular and Inferior Created Beings; as Animated Stars,
Demons, and Hero's. Thirdly, That they Worshipping both the Supreme and
Inferior Gods, in Statues, Images, and Symbols; these were also sometimes
Abusively called Gods. To one or other of which Three Heads, all the Pagan
Polytheism, Referrible. Page 477 For the better persuading, That much of the
Pagan Polytheism, was Really nothing, but the Polyonymy of One Supreme God, or
the Worshipping him under several Personal Names; to be Remembered again, what
was before Suggested; That the Pagan Nations Generally, besides their Vulgar,
had another more Arcane Theology, which was the Theology of Wise men and of
Truth. That is; besides both their Fabulous and Poetical, their Political and
Civil Theology, they had another Natural and Philosophic one. This Distinction
of the Vulgar and Civil Theology, from the Nataral and Real, owned by the
Greeks Generally, and amongst the Latins, by Scaevola the Pontifex, Varro,
Cicero, Seneca, and others. ibid. That the Civil Theology of the Pagans,
differed from the Natural and Real, by a certain Mixture of Fabulosity in it.
Of the Romans suffering the Statue of Jupiters Nurse, to be kept in the very
Capitol, as a Religious Monument. Jupiters Nativity, or his having a Father and
a Mother, Atheistically Fabulous; Poets themselves acknowledging so much of the
Natural and True Teology, That Jupiter being the Father of Gods and Men, the
Maker of the whole World, was himself Eternal and Unmade. Page 478 That the
Civil as well as Poetical Theology, had some appearance of Many Independent
Deities also; they making Several Supreme, in their several Territories and
Functions; One Chief for one thing, and another for another. But according to
the Natural and Philosophic Theology, the Theology of Wise men and of Truth,
all these but Poetical, Commentitious, Fictitious, and Fantastic Gods; such
as had no distinct Substantial Essences of their own; and therefore Really to
be accounted nothing else, but several Names or Notions of One Supreme God.
Page 478, 479 Certain, that the Egyptians had several Proper and Personal
Names, for that One Supreme Universal Numen, that Comprehends the whole World,
according to several Notions of it or its several Powers: as Ammon, Phtha,
Osiris, Neith, Cneph; to which may be added, Serapis and Isis too. Besides
Iamblichus, Damascius his Testimony also to this purpose; concerning the
Egyptian Theology. This the Pattern of the other, especially European
Theologies, the Greek and Roman. Page 479, 480 That the Greeks and Romans also,
often Made More Gods of One, or affected a Polyonymy of the Same Gods; Evident
from those many Proper and Personal Names bestowed, First upon the Sun, (of
which Macrobius) who therefore had this Epithet of (...) given to him; and then
upon the Moon, Styled also Polyonymous, as well as her Brother the Sun; and
Lastly upon the Earth, famous likewise, for her Many Names; as Vesta, Cybele,
Ceres, Proserpina, Ops, etc. Wherefore not at all to be Doubted, but that the
Supreme God, or Sovereign Numen of the whole World, was much more Polyonymous.
This Title given to him also, as well as to Apollo in Hesychius. He thus
Invoked by Cleanthes. Zeno, the Writer De Mundo, Seneca, Macrobius, clearly
confirm the same. Maximus Madaurensis in S. Austin, his full acknowledgment
thereof. Page 480, 481 The First Instances of the Polyonymy of the Supreme God,
amongst the Pagans, in such Names as these; (...), etc. And amongst the Latins,
Victor, Invictus, Opitulus, Stator, Tigillus, Centupeda, Almus, Ruminus, etc.
Again, (...), all several Names of the One Supreme God, as likewise were
Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropos, in the Writer De Mundo. And amongst the Latins,
not only Fate, but also Nature, and Fortune too, as Cicero and Seneca affirm.
Page 482 But besides these, there were other Proper Names of the Supreme God,
which had a greater show and appearance of so many Several Gods, they having
their Peculiar Temples, and several Appropriated Rites of Worship. And First,
such as signify the Deity, according to its more Universal Nature. As for
example, Pan; which not the Corporeal World Inanimate or endued with a Senseless
Nature only, but a Rational or Intellectual Principle displaying it self in
Matter, framing the World Harmoniously, and being in a manner All things. This
also the Universal Pastor and Shepherd, of all Mankind. Page 483 Again Janus;
First Invoked by the Romans in their Sacrifices, and never omitted. The most
Ancient God, and First Beginning of all things. Described by Ovid, Martial, and
others, as a Universal Numen. Concluded by S. Austin, to be the Same with
Jupiter, the Soul or Mind of the whole World. The word Janus probably derived
from (...), the Aetolian Jupiter. Page 483, 484 Genius also, one of the Twenty
Select Roman Gods, according to Festus, a Universal Numen: that God who is the
Begetter of All things. And according to Varro in S. Austine, the same with
Jupiter. Page 484, 485 That Chronos or Saturn, no particular Deity; but a
Universal Numen also, which Comprehends the whole nature of the World, affirmed
by Dionysius Halicarnass. The word Saturn Hetrurian (and Originally from the
Hebrew (...)) signifies Hidden; called by the Latins Deus Latius, the Hidden
God; whence Italy Latium, and the Italians Latins; as Worshippers of this
Hidden God, or the Occult Principle of all things. This according to Varro, He
that Produces out of himself, the Hidden Seeds and Forms of all things, and
Swalloweth them up into himself again; which, the Devouring of his Male
Children. This Sinus quidam Naturae, etc. a Certain Inward and deep Recess of
Nature, containing all things within it self; as God was sometimes Defined by
the Pagans. This to S. Austin, the same with Jupiter; as likewise was Coelus or
Uranus, in the old Inscription, and therefore another Name of God too. The
Poetic Theology, of Jupiters being the Son of Saturn, and Saturn the Son of
Coelus; an Intimation (according to Plato) of a Trinity of Divine Hypostases
Universal. Page 485, 486 Though Minerva or Athena, were sometimes confined to a
narrower Sense, yet was it often taken, for a Name of God also, according to
his Universal Notion; it being to Athenagoras the Divine Wisdom displaying it
self through all things. This excellently described by Aristides, as the First
Begotten Offspring of the Original Deity, or the Second Divine Hypostasis, by
which all things were made; agreeably with the Christian Theology. Page 486,
487 Aphrodite Urania, or the Heavenly Venus; another name of God also according
to his Universal Notion; it being the same with that Love which Orpheus, and
other Philosophers in Aristotle, made the First Original of all things. Plato's
Distinction of an Elder, and a Younger Venus: The Former, the Daughter of
Uranus, without a Mother, or the Heavenly Venus; said to be Senior to Japhet
and Saturn. The Latter, afterward begotten from Jupiter and the Nymph Dione,
the Vulgar Venus. Urania, or the Heavenly Venus, called by the Oriental
Nations, Mylitta; that is, the Mother of all things. Temples in Pausanias
Dedicated to this Heavenly Venus. This described by Aeschylus, Euripides, and
Ovid, as the Supreme Deity, and the Creator of all the Gods. God Almighty also,
thus described, as a Heavenly Venus or Love, by Sev. Boethius. To this Urania or
Heavenly Venus, another Venus in Pausanias near a kin; called (...) or
Verticordia; As Conversive of men's Minds upwards, from Unchaste Love, or Unclean
Lust. Page 488, 489 Though Vulcan, according to the Common Notion of him, a
Special God, yet had he sometimes a more Universal Consideration. Zeno in
Laertius, that the Supreme God is called Vulcan as Acting in the Artificial
Fire of Nature. Thus the Soul of the World, styled by the Egyptians Phtha;
which as Iamblichus tells us, was the same with the Greeks Hephaestus, or
Vulcan. Page 489, 490 Besides all which Names of the Supreme God, Seneca
informs us, that he was sometimes called also, Liber Pater, because the Parent
of all things; sometimes Hercules, because his Force is Unconquerable; and
sometimes Mercury, as being Reason, Number, Order and Knowledge. Page 490 But
besides this Polyonymy of God, according to his Universal Notion; there were
other Dii Speciales, or Special Gods also, amongst the Pagans; which likewise
were really but Several Names of One and the same Supreme Deity, vary utentis
sua Potestate, (as Seneca Writes) diversely using his Power, in Particular
Cases, and in the several Parts of the World. Thus Jupiter, Neptune, and Pluto,
(mistaken by some Christians, for a Trinity of Independent Gods) though Three
Civil Gods, yet were they Really, but One and the Same Natural and Philosophic
God; as Acting in those Three Parts of the World; the Heaven, the Sea, the
Earth and Hell. Pluto in Plato's Cratylus a Name for That Part of Divine
Providence, which is exercised in the Government of Separate Souls after Death.
This Styled by Virgil, the Stygian Jupiter. But to others, Pluto together with
Ceres, the Manifestation of the Deity, in this whole Terrestrial Globe. The
Celestial and Terrestrial Jupiter, but One God. Zeus and Hades one and the same
to Orpheus. Euripides doubtful, whether God should be Invoked, by the Name of
Zeus or Hades. Hermesianax the Colophonian Poet, makes Pluto the First of those
Many Names of God, Synonymous with Zeus. Page 490, 491 Neptune also, another
Special God, a name of the Supreme Deity, as Acting in the Seas only. This
affirmed by Xenocrates in Stobaeus, Zeno in Laertius, Balbus and Cotta in
Cicero, and also by Maximus Tyrius. Page 492 The Statue of Jupiter with Three
Eyes, in Pausanias; signifying that according to the Natural Theology, it was
One and the Same God, Ruling in those Three Several Parts of the World, the
Heaven, the Sea, and the Earth; that was called by Three Names, Jupiter,
Neptune, and Pluto. Wherefore since Proserpina and Ceres are the same with
Pluto; and Salacia with Neptune; Concluded, that all these, though Several
Poetical and Political Gods; yet were but One and the Same Natural and
Philosophic God. Page 492, 493 Juno also, another Special God, a name of the
Supreme Deity as Acting in the Air. Thus Xenocrates and Zeno. The Pagans in S.
Austin; that God in the Ether is called Jupiter, in the Air Juno. So Minerva
likewise, when taken for a Special God, a name of the Supreme God, according to
that Particular Consideration of him, as Acting in the Higher Ether. From
whence, S. Austin disputes against the Pagans. Maximus Tyrius, of these and
many other Gods of the Pagans; that they were but (...), Divine Names. Page
493, 494 Yet Many other Special Gods, amongst the Pagans, which also were
really nothing but Divine Names; or Names of God as variously exercising his
Power, or bestowing Several Gifts; as in Corn and Fruit, Ceres, in Wine
Bacchus, in Medicine Aesculapius, in Traffic Mercury, in War Mars, in
Governing the Winds Aeolus, etc. Page 494 That not only Philosophers, did thus
interpret, the Many Poetical and Political Gods, into One and the Same Natural
God; but the Poets themselves also, sometimes openly broached this more Arcane
Free and True Theology; as Hermesianax amongst the Greeks, and Valerius Soranus
amongst the Latins. Page 494, 495 That S. Austin making a large Enumeration of
the other Special Gods, amongst the Pagans, affirms of them Universally, That
according to the Sense of the Pagan Doctors, they were but one Natural God, and
all Really the same with Jupiter. Page 495, 496 Apuleius in his Book De Deo
Socratis, either not rightly understood by that Learned and Industrius
Philologer, G.I. Vossius, or else not sufficiently attended to. His design
there, plainly to reduce the Pagans Civil Theology, into a Conformity with the
Natural and Philosophic; which he does as a Platonist, by making the Dii
Consentes of the Romans, and their other Invisible Gods, to be all of them,
Nothing, but the Divine Ideas; and so the Offspring of one Highest God. An
occasion for this Fancy, given by Plato, where he calls his Ideas Animals. Nor
was Apuleius Singular herein; Julian in his Book against the Christians, going
the very same way; and no otherwise understood by S. Cyril, than as to make the
Invisible Gods, worshipped by the Pagans, to be the Divine Ideas. A Fancy of
the same Julian, who opposed the Incarnation of the Eternal Word, that
Aesculapius was first of all the Idea of the Medicinal Art, Generated by the
Supreme God, in the Intelligible World; which afterward, by the Vivifick
Influence of the Sun, was Incarnated, and appeared in Humane Form about
Epidaurus. And that this Pagan Doctrine, Older than Christianity; proved out of
Philo; writing of a Sun, and Moon, Intelligible; as well as Sensible,
Religiously worshipped by the Pagans: That is, the Ideas of the Archetypal
World. And thus were these Ideas of the Divine Intellect, (...), Intelligible
Gods, to Plotinus also. Page 496, etc. 501 Wherefore Julian, Apuleius, and
those others, who thus made all the Pagan Invisible Gods, to be nothing else
but the Divine Ideas, the Patterns of Things in the Archetypal World; supposed
them not to be so many Independent Deities, nor Really Distinct Substances,
Separate from one another, but only so many Partial Considerations of One
God. Julian before affirming them, (...). As to have been Generated out of him;
so also to Coexist with him, and Inexist in him. Page 501, 502 That the Pagans
appointed some Particular God or Goddess by Name, to preside over Every thing;
(there Being (...) Nothing at all without a God to them) appears from that
Catalogue, of their Ignoble or Petty Gods, Collected by S. Austine out of
Varro. Now it is Incredible; that they should think all these to be so many
Single Substantial Spirits, of each Sex, Really Existing apart in the World;
they must therefore needs take them, to be so many Partial Considerations of
the Deity, either in the way of the more High-flown Platonists, as his Ideas
Exemplarily and Vertually containing all things; or else in that more Common
and eas^y way of the Generality; as so many Several Denominations of him,
according to the Several Manifestations of his Power and Providence; or as the
Pagans in Eusebius declares themselves, those Several Virtues and Powers, of
the Supreme God, themselves Personated and Deifyed. Which yet because, they
were not executed, without the Subservient Ministry of Created Spirits, Angels
or Demons, appointed to preside over such things; therefore might these also
Collectively taken, be included under them. Page 502, 503 But for the fuller
clearing of this Point, that the Pagan Polytheism, was in great part Nothing
but the Polyonymy of one God; Two Things here to be taken notice of. First that
the Pagan Theology Universally, Supposed God to be Diffused thorough all, to
Permeate and Pervade all, and Intimately to Act all. Thus Horus Apollo of the
Egyptians. Thus among the Greeks, Diogenes the Cynick, Aristotle, the Italick,
and Stoicall Philosophers. Thus the Indian Brachmans before Strabo. Thus also
the Latin Poets; and Seneca, Quintilian, Apuleius, and Servius, besides others.
Page 503, 504 That Anaxagoras and Plato also, though neither of them Confounded
God with the World, but affirmed him to be Unmingled with any thing; yet
Concluded him in like manner, to Permeate and Pervade all things. Plato 's
Etymology of (...), as taken for a Name of God, to this purpose in his
Cratylus. Where a Fragment of Heraclitus, and his Description of God agreeably
hereunto; a most Subtle and Swift Substance, that Permeates and Passes through
every thing, by which all things are made. But Plato disclaiming this
Corporeity of the Deity, will neither have it Fire nor Heat; but a Perfect Mind
that Passes through all things Unmixedly. Page 505 Wherefore no wonder, if the
Pagans supposing God to be Diffused thorough all things, called him in the
Several Parts of the World, and Things of Nature, by several Names, as in the
Earth Ceres, in the Sea Neptune, etc. This account of the Pagan Polytheism
given by Paulus Orosius, That whilst they believed, God to be in Many things,
they indiscreetly made Many Gods of Him. Page 505, 506 Further to be observed,
That many of the Pagan Theologers; seemed to go yet a Strain higher, they
supposing God not only to Pervade all things, but also to Be himself all
things. That the Ancient Egyptian Theology ran so high, Evident from the
Saitick Inscription. A strong Tang hereof in Aeschylus; as also in Lucan.
Neither was this proper to those, who held God to be the Soul of the World, but
the Language also of those other more Refined Philosophers, Xenophanes,
Parmenides, etc. they affirming God, to be One and All. With which agrees, the
Author of the Asclepian Dialogue, that God is, Vnus omnia, One all things; and
that before things were made, he did then (...) Hide them, or Occultly contain
them all, within himself. In like manner Orpheus. Page 506, 507 This not only
a further Ground of the Polyonymy of One God, according to the Various
Manifestations of himself in the World, but also of another Strange Phenomenon
in the Pagan Theology, their Personating the Inanimate Parts of the World, and
Natures of things, and bestowing the Names of Gods and Goddesses upon them.
Thus Moschopulus before cited, and Arnobius. This Plutarch thinks to have been
done at first, Metonymically only, the Effects of the Gods, being called Gods;
as the Books of Plato, Plato. And thus far not disliked by him. But himself
complains, that aftewards, it was carried on further by Superstitious
Religionists, and not without great Impiety. Nevertheless that Inanimate
Substances and the Natures of things, were formerly Deifyed, by the Ancient
Pagans, otherwise than Metonymically, proved from Cicero, Philo and Plato. For
they supposing God, to Pervade all things, and to be All things, did therefore
look upon every thing as Sacred or Divine; and Theologize the Parts of the
World and Natures of Things; Titularly making them, Gods and Goddesses. But
especially such things, as wherein Humane Utility was most concerned; and which
had most of Wonder in them. Page 507, 510 This properly, the Physiological
Theology of the Pagans, their Personating and Deifying the Natures of things,
and Inanimate Substances. That the Ancient Poetic Fables of the Gods were many
of them in their first and true meaning, thus Physiologically Allegorical, and
not mere Herology, affirmed against Eusebius. Zeno, Cleanthes and Chrysippus,
Famous for thus Allegorizing the Fables of the Gods. Chrysippus his
Allegorizing an Obscene Picture of Jupiter and Juno in Samos. Plato though no
Friend to these Poetic Fables, yet confesses some of them to have contained
Allegories in them: the same does also Dionysius Halicarnassaeus: and Cicero
likewise, who affirms, this Personating and Deifying the Natures of things,
to have filled the World with Superstition. Page 510, 512 Against Eusebius
again, That the whole Theology of the Pagans, consisted not in thus Deifying
the Natures of things, and Inanimate Bodies; because he that acknowledges no
Animant God, acknowledges no God at all, but is a downright Atheist. Page 512
Neither ought this Physiological Theology of the Pagans, that consisted in
Personating and Deifying the Natures of things and Inanimate Bodies, to be
Confounded, with that Natural and Philosophical Theology of Varro, Scaevola and
others, which admitted of no other, but Animant Gods, and such as Really
Existed in Nature: for which Cause it was called Natural, in opposition to the
Fictitious and Fantastic, Poetic Gods. Page 512 S. Austin's just Censure and
Condemnation of the Pagans, for their thus Theologizing of Physiology, or
Fictitiously Personating and Deifying the Natures of things. Page 512, 513 But
though the Pagans did thus verbally Personate and Deifie the things of Nature,
yet did not the Intelligent amongst them, therefore account these True and
Proper Gods. Cotta in Cicero, Though we call Corn Ceres, and Wine Bacchus, yet
was there never any one so mad, as to take that for a God, which himself feeds
upon and devours. The Pagans really accounted that only for a God, by the
Invoking whereof, they might expect benefit to themselves; and therefore
Nothing Inanimate. This proved from Plato, Aristotle, Lucretius, Cicero, and
Plutarch. Wherefore these Natures of things Deified, but Fictitious and
Fantastic Gods. Nor can any other sense be made of them than this, that they
were really but so many several Names of one Supreme God, as severally
manifested in his works: according to that Egyptian Theology, That God may be
called by the Name of every thing, or every thing by the Name of God. With
which agrees Seneca, That there may be as many Names of God, as there are
Gifts and Effects of his: and the Writer De Mundo, That God may be Denominated
from every Nature, he being the Cause of all things. Page 513, 515 Wherefore
these Deified Natures of things, were not directly worshipped by the
Intelligent Pagans, but only Relatively to the Supreme God, or in way of
Complication with him only: and so not so much Themselves, as God worshipped
in them. The Pagans Pretense, that they did not look upon the world with such
Eyes as Oxen and Horses do, but with Religious Eyes, so as to see God in every
thing. They therefore worshipped the Invisible Deity, in the Visible
manifestations of himself; God and the World together. This sometimes called
Pan and Jupiter. Thus was the whole World said to be the Greatest God, and the
Circle of the Heavens worshipped by the Persians; not as Inanimate Matter, but
as the Visible manifestation of the Deity, displayed from it, and pervaded by
it. When the Roman Sea-Captains Sacrificed to the Waves, their worship intended
to that God, who Stilleth the Waves, and Quieteth the Billows. Page 515, 516
These Pagans also apprehended a Necessity of permitting men to worship the
Invisible God in his Visible Works. This account given by them in Eusebius.
Plato himself approved of worshipping the Invisible God in the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, as his Visible Images. And though Maximus Tyrius would have men
endeavor, to rise above the Starry Heavens, and all Visible things, yet does
he allow the weaker, to worship God in his Progeny. And Socrates persuades
Euthydemus to be contented herewith. Besides which, some Pagans worshipping the
Elements, directed their Intention to the Spirits of those Elements, as Julian
in Ammianus (these being supposed also to be Animated) or else to those
Demons, whom they conceived to inhabit them, or preside over them. Page 516,
518 XXXIII. Further to be observed, That amongst those Natures of things, some
were merely Accidental, as Hope, Love, Desire, Memory, Truth, Virtue, Piety,
Faith, Justice, Concord, Clemency, Victory, Echo, Night. According to which,
the vulgar Athenians supposed S. Paul to have Deified Anastasis, or made a
Goddess of the Resurrection, as well as a God of Jesus. Vices also sometimes
thus Deified by them, as Contumely, and Impudence, (to whom were Temples
dedicated at Athens) though to the end that these things might be Deprecated.
These Accidents sometimes Deified under Counterfeit Proper Names, as Pleasure
under the name of Volupia, and Lubentina Venus; Time under the name of Chronos
or Saturn; Prudence or Wisdom, under the names of Athena or Minerva: against
which Origin in his answer to Celsus. Cicero himself allowed of Dedicating
Temples to Mind, Virtue, Piety, Faith, etc. Page 518, 520 But such Accidents
and Affections of Things Deifyed, could not possibly be Accounted True and
Proper Gods, they having not (...), any Real Subsistence, or Substantial
Essence of their own. And thus does Origin again dispute against Minerva's
Godship, as Tropologized into Prudence. As he does also elsewhere, upon the
same Ground, against that of Memory the Mother of the Muses, and that of the
Graces: he concluding, these and such like therefore, to be nothing but
Figments of the Greeks, they being Things Personated, and Feigned with Humane
Members. Thus the Pagans condemned by Prudentius also, for Feigning Things
Incorporeal, with Counterfeit Members. These Gods plainly Exploded by Cotta, or
Cicero in disguise; as having only Vim Rerum, but not Deorum, the Force of
Things, but not of Gods in them; or being but Naturae Rerum, and not Figurae
Deorum. Page 520, 521 Wherefore the True meaning of these Deified Natures of
Things could be no other then this, that God was to be acknowledged and
worshipped in All things; or, as the Pagans themselves declare it, that the
Force of every thing was, both governed by God, and it self Divine. Pliny of
this Breaking and Crumbling of the Deity into Parts, Every one Worshipping that
in God, and for a God, which himself most stood in need of. This dividing of
the Simple Deity, and Worshipping it Brokenly by parcells and piecemeal, as
manifested in all the Several Things of Nature, and Parts of the world, Justly
Censured, and Elegantly Perstringed, by Prudentius against Symmachus. Where
Prudentius grants, that Symmachus, who declared, that it was One thing which
all worshipped; when he sacrificed to Victory, did sacrifice to God Almighty,
under that Partial Notion, as the Giver of Victory. This in the Egyptian
Allegory, Osiris Mangled, and Cut in pieces by Typhon. Victory and Virtue, as
well as Neptune, Mars, and Bellona, but several names or Notions of Jupiter, in
the Prologue of Plautus his Amphitryo. Page 521, 522 Vossius his opinion, that
these Deified Accidents, and Natures of Things, as well as the other Pagan
Invisible Gods, were commonly looked upon by the Vulgar, as so many Single
Substantial Minds, or Spirits Created by the Supreme God, and appointed to
preside over those several things respectively. Where it is acknowledged: that
neither the Political, nor the Poetical Gods of the Pagans, were taken so much
as by the Vulgar, for so many Independent Deities. Page 523, 524 Probable, that
by these Gods, the Wiser Pagans sometimes understood, Demons in General, or
Collectively; that is, whosoever they were that were appointed to preside over
those several Things, or dispense them. As Aeolus in Arrianus, seems to be
taken for the Demons appointed by God Almighty to preside over the Winds. Page
524, 525 Lactantius his Reason, why the Consentes and Select Gods, vulgarly
worshipped by the Romans, could not be Single Demons or Angels. Page 525 And
from Aristotle's Observation, against Zeno, That according to Law or Civil
Theology, One God was chief for one thing, and another for another; Concluded,
that these Political Gods were not properly the Subservient Ministers of the
Supreme; and therefore could be nothing, but several Names and Notions of One
Natural God, according to his Various Powers and Effects. Page 525, 526 And
thus does Vossius himself afterward confess, That, according to the Natural
Theology, all the Pagan Gods were but Several Denominations of one God. Where
notwithstanding this Learned and Industrious Philologer, seems to take the
Natural and Philosophic Theology, for the Physiological, he making the God
thereof, the Nature of things. Whereas the Natural Theology, was the True and
Real, and Philosophical, opposed both to the Fictions of the Poets, and the
Institutes of Lawmakers and Politicians. As Varro affirms, that in Cities
those things were Worshipped and believed, according to False Opinions, which
had no Nature, nor Real Subsistence, neither in the World, nor without it. The
God of the Pagans not the Nature of things, which could be the Numen of none
but of Atheists; but an Understanding Being, the Great Mind, or Soul of the
whole World, pervading all things. Thus unquestionably true, that the Many
Poetical and Political Gods, were but several Names or Notions, of One Natural,
Real, and True God. Besides which, there were other Inferior Ministers of this
Supreme God, acknowledged to be the Instruments of his Providence, and
Religiously worshipped also. A brief, but full account, of the Pagans Natural
Theology, set down by Prudentius. Page 526, 527 And when the more high-flown
Pagans referred these Poetical and Political Gods to the Divine Idea's, or
Patterns of things in the Archetypal World; which besides the Platonists, the
Egyptians in Celsus are said to have done, making the Brute Animals worshipped
by them, but Symbols of the Eternal Idea's; They hereby made these Gods to be
but so many Partial Considerations of One God neither, as being All things, or
Containing in himself the Causes of all things; as Julian himself declares in
his Sixth Oration. Page 527, 528 An Anacephalaeosis, That much of the Pagan
Polytheism, was but the Polyonymy of One God; he being worshipped under several
Names. First, according to several General Notions of him; as of Janus, Genius,
Saturn, Minerva, Urania, or the Heavenly Venus, or Love, and others before
declared. So also of Summanus, according to S. Austin, and Themis, afterward
to be mentioned. Page 528, 529 And Secondly, according to other more Particular
Notions of him, (in their Special Gods) as Acting in some Parts of the world
only, or exercising some Particular Powers. Page 529, 530 And Lastly, as
Pervading All things, and Being All things, or the Cause of All things, he was
thereupon called by the Name of Every thing, or Every thing by his Name. The
Pagans in S. Austin; That their Ancestors were not so sottish, as not to
understand, that those Things of Nature were but Divine Gifts, and not
Themselves Gods. And the Pagans in Eusebius; That the Invisible God, the Cause
of All things, ought to be worshipped in his Visible Effects, wherein he has
displayed himself. Page 530 Though the Two former Kinds of these Gods only,
called by Athanasius Poetical and Fictitious, he opposing them to those of the
Third sort, that were Natural and Real things; yet may these also be well
called Poetical, Fictitious, and Fantastical Gods too; because though
themselves were Real things, Existing in Nature, yet was their Personation, and
Deification, mere Fiction, Fancy and Poetry. And accordingly, were they before
called by Origin (...), mere Figments of the Greeks. Page 530, 531 XXXIV. Of
those Pagans who supposed the Supreme God to be the Whole Animated World.
Hitherto showed, that even the most Refined of the Pagans agreed in these Two
things. First, in Breaking and Crumbling the One Simple Deity, and multiplying
it into Many Gods; or Parcelling it out into several Particular Notions,
according to its several Powers and Virtues. ((...) being, to these Pagans, the
same thing with (...).) And then, in Theologizing the whole World, Personating
and Deifying the Natures of Things, Accidents, and Inanimate Bodies. They
supposing God to Pervade all things, and Himself to be in a manner All things:
Therefore every thing to the Religious, Sacred and Divine; and God to be
Worshipped in All. Page 531, 532 We shall now add, that both those
forementioned Principles, of God's Pervading all things, and his Being all
things, were carried on farther, by those Pagan Theologers, who had no higher
Notion of the Supreme Deity then as the Soul of the World. For First, Whereas
the more Refined Pagans supposed God to Pervade all things Unmixedly; These
Mingled and Confounded him with the whole World. Some of them supposing him
also to be a Subtle Body. Page 532, 533 Again, Whereas the other more
Sublimated Pagans affirmed God so to be All, as nevertheless to be something
also Above all; These concluded him, to be nothing Higher then the Animated
World. Page 533 And though they supposed, that as well in this Mundane Animal,
as in other Animals, there was something Principal and Hegemonical, (whether
the Sun, or Ether, or Fire,) which therefore was Emphatically called God; yet
did they conceive the whole Matter thereof to be Animated, and so to be All
God. Not barely as Matter, but by reason of the Soul thereof. Page 534, 535 Now
if the Whole World Animated be the Supreme God, then must all the Parts and
Members of the World be the Parts and Members of One God; but not themselves
therefore properly so Many Gods. This affirmed by Origin, as the True Sense of
these Pagans, against that unwary Assertion of Celsus, That If the Whole were
God, then must the several Parts thereof needs be Gods. Page 535 Wherefore
though these Pagans Deified the Parts of the World and Natures of Things, as
well as the Powers of the Mundane Soul; yet did not the Intelligent amongst
them Worship them severally, as so many True and Proper Gods, but only as the
Parts and Members of one Great Animal or God; or rather Worship the great
Mundane Soul (the Life of the whole World) in them all. This proved from S.
Austin. Page 536, 537 The same plainly declared also by the Pagans in
Athanasius, That not the Divided Parts of the World were by them accounted so
many several Gods, but the Whole, made up of them All, One God; which yet might
be worshipped in its several Parts. Page 537 The Pagans being thus divided, as
to their Opinions, concerning the Natural and True Theology; some of them
Worshipped the World as the Body of God, but others only as his Image or
Temple. Thus Plutarch, though disliking the Deifying of Inanimate Things, did
notwithstanding approve of Worshipping God in the Whole World, as his most
Sacred Temple. And the Persian Magi, allowing of no Artificial Temples, made
with men's hands, Worshipped God sub Dio, and upon the Tops of Mountains, as
conceiving the Whole World to be his Natural Temple. For the same Reason did
they condemn also Artificial Statues and Images, concluding Fire, Earth, and
Water, and the like Parts of the World, to be the Natural Images of the Deity.
Thus Dino in Clemens Alexandrinus. This Difference amongst the Pagan Theologers
noted by Macrobius. Thus were all the Pagans World-Worshippers, in different
Senses: but not as a Dead and Inanimate Thing, but either as the Body of God,
or else as his Temple or Image. Page 537, 539 Furthermore, the Pagans
Universally acknowledging the World to be an Animal, those of them who supposed
it not to be the First and Highest God, conceived it to be either a Second, or
else a Third God; and so Worshipped it, not only as a Temple or Image, but
also as the Son of the First God. Celsus pretended the Christians to have
called their Jesus, the Son of God, in Imitation of these Pagans, who styled
the World so. Page 539, 540 Thus have we made it fully to appear, That,
according to the Saying of Antisthenes, the Many Popular Gods of the Pagans
were but One and the Same Natural God; or, according to that of Euclides, their
Many Gods were but Many Names. So that neither their Poetical, nor yet their
Political Theology, was looked upon by them as True and Natural. Page 540
Nevertheless, the Wiser Pagans generally concluded, that there ought to be
another Theology, besides the Natural, fitly Calculated for the Vulgar, and
having a Mixture of Falsehood and Fabulosity in it. Varro and Scaevola agreed,
that the Vulgar being Incapable of the True and Natural Theology, it was
expedient for them to be Deceived in their Religion. Strabo also, that the
Vulgar cannot by Philosophic Reason, and Truth, be carried on to Piety; but
this must be done by Superstition, and by the help of Fables, and Prodigious
Relations. The same partly acknowledged by Synesius for true. Plato also; That
it is Hard to find out God, but Impossible to declare him to the Vulgar; and
therefore a necessity of a Civil Theology, distinct from the Natural and
Philosophical. Page 540, 542 XXXV. We come now to the next thing Proposed,
That, besides this Seeming and Fantastic Polytheism of the Pagans, which was
nothing but the Polyonymy of One God, they had another Real Polytheism, even
in their Natural and Philosophic Theology it self. But this not of
Self-existent Gods, but Generated or Created ones only. Thus, according to
Plutarch, One Highest Unmade God, is the Maker and Father of all the other
Gods, Generated or Derived from him. And Proclus concludes, All the Gods to
derive their Godship from the First God; who therefore is the Fountain of the
Godhead. Page 542, 543 These Inferior Pagan Gods, styled by Ammianus
Marcellinus, Substantial Powers, in way of opposition to those other Poetical
and Political Gods, that were not Substantial or Real, but only several
Names or Notions of One Supreme God. Those Substantial Powers (as Divination
and Prophecy was by them imparted to men) said to be all Subject to that One
Sovereign Deity, called Themis, placed by Pagan Theologers in the Throne of
Jupiter. This Themis also another Name or Notion of the Supreme God, besides
those before mentioned. Poetry and Phantastry intermingled by the Pagans with
their Natural or Philosophic Theology. Page 543, 544 Thus the Pagans held both
One God, and Many Gods, in different Senses. Onatus and Plotinus, That the
Majesty of the Supreme God consists, in having Multitudes of Gods Dependent
on him, and Ruled by him; and that the Honor done to them, redounds to him.
The Gods of the Oriental Pagans, not mere Dead Statues and Images, but Living
Understanding Beings, Represented by them. That Christians asserted no Solitary
Deity, as Pagans pretended, but agreed with this of Seneca, That God has
Generated, or Created, innumerable Understanding Beings Superior to Men,
Ministers of his Kingdom; The only difference being this, that they gave them
no Religious Worship: Out of Lactantius. Page 544, 546 XXXVI. That besides the
Inferior Gods, generally received by all the Pagans; (namely, Animated Stars,
Demons, and Heroes) the more refined of them, who accounted not the Animated
World the Supreme Deity, acknowledged a Trinity of Divine Hypostases, Superior
to them all. Which Doctrine affirmed by Plotinus to have been very Ancient, and
no Invention of Plato's. Page 546 Parmenides an Asserter of a Trinity, long
before Plato. This imputed to the Pythagoreans, by Moderatus in Simplicius, and
Iamblichus in Proclus. Before Pythagoras, Orpheus had his Trinity, Phanes,
Uranus, and Chronus; the same with Plato's Three Kings or Principles. Probable,
that Pythagoras and Orpheus derived the same from the Theology of the Egyptian
Hermes. Some Footsteps of such a Trinity, in the Mithraick Mysteries, amongst
the Persians, and the Zoroastrian Cabala. The same expressly declared in the
Magic or Chaldaick Oracles. A Trinity of Gods worshipped Anciently by the
Samothracians, and called by an Hebrew name Cabiri, the Mighty Gods. From
thence the Roman Capitoline Trinity derived; The Second whereof, Minerva, or
the Divine Wisdom. The Ternary, a Number used by the Pagans, in their
Religious Rites, as Mysterious. Page 546, 547 It being no way Probable, that
such a Trinity of Divine Hypostases should have sprung from Humane Wit, we may
reasonably assent to what Proclus affirms, that it was at first (...), a
Theology of Divine Tradition or Revelation: As having been first Imparted to
the Hebrews, and from them communicated to other Nations. Nevertheless, as this
Divine Cabbala was but little understood by these Pagans; so was it by many of
them Depraved and Adulterated. Page 547, 548 This called Universally by them, a
Trinity of Gods; or a First, Second, and Third God: by some a Trinity of
Causes, and of Principles, and of Opificers. The Tradition of the Three Gods,
in Proclus, Ancient and Famous. Numenius his Three Gods, called by him, the
Father, the Son, and the Nephew, (or Grandson.) Nous or Intellect, to Plotinus,
a Second God: as also the World an Image of all the Three Gods. Plotinus and
Porphyrius, their supposed Ecstatick Union with the First of these Three Gods.
Page 548, 549 That Philo, a Religious Jew, and Zealous Opposer of the Pagan
Polytheism, called, notwithstanding, the Divine Word also, a Second God. This
not agreeable to the Principles of Christianity. Nevertheless S. Austin partly
excuses this Language in the Pagans. Page 549, 550 And They perhaps the more
excusable, because they sometimes called also those Three Hypostases, taken all
together, the First God. Page 551 Nor was this Trinity of Divine Hypostases
Ill-Languaged only by the Pagans, but also the Cabbala thereof much Depraved
and Adulterated, by some Platonists and Pythagoreans. As First, such as made
the World to be the Third God. Such a Trinity, a Confounding of God and
Creature together. Page 551, 552 And that this an Adulterated Notion of the
Trinity, evident from hence; because no Reason why these Philosophers should
stop here, since the Sun, Moon and Stars, and their other Generated Gods,
differ not in Kind, but only in Degree, from the World. Page 552 Neither will
this excuse them, that they understood this chiefly of the Soul of the World;
Since if there were such a Mundane Soul, as together with the World made up
One Animal, this it self must needs be a Creature also. ibid. This probably the
Reason, why Philo, though acknowledging the Divine Word, as a Second God, and
Second Cause, yet nowhere speaks of a Third God; lest he should thereby seem
to Deify the whole Created World. Though he call God also, in some Sense, the
Soul of the World too, (whether meaning thereby his First, or his Second God.)
So that Philo seems to have acknowledged only a Duality, and not a Trinity, of
Divine Hypostases. Page 552, 553 Another Depravation of this (...), Theology of
Divine Tradition, or Cabbala of the Trinity, That some of these Platonists and
Pythagoreans, concluding all those several Idea's of the Divine Intellect, or
Archetypall World, to be so many distinct Substances, Animals, and Gods; have
thereby made their Second Hypostasis, not One, but a Heap of Innumerable Gods
and Hypostases; and consequently destroyed their Trinity. Page 553 Though Philo
again here Platonized so far, as to suppose an Incorporeal Heaven and Earth,
and an Intelligible Sun, Moon, and Stars, to have been made before the
Corporeal and Sensible; yet does he nowhere declare them to be so many
distinct Substances and Animals; much less Gods; but on the contrary censures
that for Pagan Idolatry. This Pretense of worshipping the Divine Idea's, in all
Sensible things, that which gave Sanctuary and Protection to the Foulest and
Sottishest of all the Pagan Idolatries; The Egyptians worshipping Brute Animals
thus, and the Greeks, the Parts of the World Inanimate, and Natures of Things.
Page 554 A Third Depravation or Adulteration of the Divine Cabbala of the
Trinity, by Proclus and other latter Platonists, asserting an innumerable
Company of Henades, Particular Unities, Superior to the First Nous, or
Intellect, their Second Hypostasis; as also innumerable Noes, Substantial
Minds or Intellects, Superior to the First Psyche, their Third Hypostasis.
Page 555 These Noes seem to be asserted by Plotinus also; as likewise the
Henades and Agathotetes were by Simplicius. Page 555, 556 A Swarm of
Innumerable Pagan Gods from hence; besides their Intelligible Gods, or Idea's,
Particular Henades and Noes, Unities and Intellects. ibid. Now since these
Particular Henades and Noes of theirs must needs be Creatures; the Trinity of
Proclus and such others, nothing but a Scale or Ladder of Nature, wherein God
and the Creature are Confounded together; the Juncture or Commissure betwixt
them being nowhere discernible; as if they differed only in Degrees: A gross
Mistake and Adulteration of the Ancient Cabbala of the Trinity. Page 556, 557
This that Platonic, or rather Pseudo-Platonick Trinity, by us opposed to the
Christian; viz. such a Trinity, as confounds the Differences betwixt God and
the Creature; bringing the Deity, by degrees, down lower and lower, and at
length scattering it into all the Animated Parts of the World; A Foundation for
Infinite Polytheism, Cosmolatry or World-Idolatry, and Creature-Worship. Hence
the Platonists and Pythagoreans, the Fittest men to be Champions for Paganism
against Christianity. Page 557, 558 Concerning the Christian Trinity, Three
things to be Observed. First, that it is not a Trinity of mere Names and Words,
nor Logical Notions, or Inadequate Conceptions of God; this Doctrine having
been condemned by the Christian Church, in Sabellius and others; but a Trinity
of Hypostases, Subsistences, or Persons. Page 558, 559 The Second thing
Observable in the Christian Trinity, That though the Second Hypostasis thereof
were Begotten from the First, and the Third Proceeds both from the First and
Second; yet neither of them Creatures. First, because not made (...), or from
an Antecedent Nonexistence brought forth into Being, but both of them
Coeternall with the Father. Secondly, because all Necessarily existent, and
Un-Annihilable. Thirdly, because all of them Universal, or Infinite, and
Creatours of all other Particular Beings. Page 559 The Third Observable as to
the Christian Trinity, That the Three Hypostases thereof are all Truly and
Really One God; not only by Reason of Agreement of Will, but also of a Mutual
(...) and (...), Permeation of each other, and Inexistence. Though no Instance
of the like Unity to be found elsewhere in Nature; yet since two distinct
Substances, Corporeal, and Incorporeal, make one Man and Person in our Selves;
much more may Three Divine Hypostases be One God. ibid. Though much of Mystery
in the Christian Trinity, yet nothing of plain Contradiction to Reason therein;
that is, no Nonsense, and Impossibility. The Ill Design of those, who represent
the Christian Trinity as absolutely Contradictious to Reason, that they may
thereby debauch men's Understandings, and make them swallow down other things
which unquestionably are such. Page 560 The Christian Trinity much more
agreeable to Reason, then the Pseudo-Platonick, in the Three Particulars before
mentioned. First, its making their Third Hypostasis the Animated World, or
Mundane Soul. Which, not only too great a Leap betwixt the Second and Third,
but also a gross Debasement of the Deity, and Confounding it with the Creature;
a Foundation for World-Idolatry, and worshipping Inanimate Things, as Parts and
Members of God. ibid. God to Origin, but Quasi Anima Mundi, As it were the Soul
of the World, and not Truly and Properly such. All the Perfection of this
Notion to be attributed to God, but not the Imperfection thereof. Page 560, 561
Certain, that according to the more refined Platonists, their Third Divine
Hypostasis, not a Mundane, but Supra-mundane Soul, and the (...) or Opificer of
the whole World. So to Amelius, Porphyrius, and Plotinus. A Double Soul of the
World to Plato likewise. The Third Hypostasis, to these, no Creature, but a
Creator. Page 562 So in their Second Particular, (whereby the forementioned
Pseudo-Platonick Trinity, no Trinity) its making all the Idea's and Archetypal
Paradigms of things, so many Hypostases, Animals, and Gods. This a Monstrous
Extravagancy. Not to be doubted, but that Plato well understood these Idea's to
be Nothing but Noemata, or Conceptions of the Divine Mind, existing nowhere
apart by themselves; however called (...), Essences or Substances, because not
such Accidental and Evanid things as our Humane Thoughts are, they being the
Standing and Eternal Objects of all Science: As also (...), or Animals; to
signify that they were not mere Dead Forms, as Pictures upon Paper, or Carved
Statues. And thus did not only Amelius understand S. John, concerning the
Logos, Whatsoever was made was Life in him, but also diverse of the Ancient
Fathers, Greek and Latin. This Deifying of Idea's, but a Piece of Pagan Poetry.
Page 562, 563 Lastly, whereas Proclus and others intermingle many Particular
Gods, with those Three Universal Hypostases, as Henades and Agathotetes,
Unities and Goodnesses, Substantial above the First Intellect; and Noes,
Particular Minds or Intellects, above the First Soul; This Hypothesis of
theirs, altogether Irrational and Absurd; there being Nothing Essentially
Goodness, Wisdom, and Sanctity, but the Three Divine Hypostases, all other
Beings having only a Participation thereof. Thus Origin expressly; who
therefore acknowledges no higher Rank of Created Beings, then such as the
Platonists call Souls, that are Self-moveable, Vitally Unitable to Bodies, and
Peccable. With whom agrees S. Jerome, and others of the Fathers, That God is
the only Impeccable Being; but all Understanding Creatures, Free-willed, and
Lapsable. Page 564, 565 An Opinion of Simplicius, that even in that Rank of
Beings called Souls (though not Essentially Immutable, but Self-moveable) some
are of so high a Pitch, as that they can never Degenerate, nor Sink or Fall
into Vicious Habits. Insomuch that he makes a Question whether Proaeresis
belong to them or no. Page 565, 566 But whatever is to be thought of this,
Origin too far in the other Extreme, in denying any other Ranks of Souls above
Humane; and supposing all the Difference, that is now betwixt the highest
Angels, and Men, to have proceeded only from their Merits, and different uses
of their Free Will; his Reason being this, because God would be otherwise a
Prosopoleptes or Accepter of Persons. This also Extended by him to the Soul of
our Savior Christ; as not Partially chosen to that Dignity, but for its
Faithful adherence to the Divine Word in a Prae-existent State; which he would
prove from Scripture. But if a Rank of Souls below Humane, and Specifically
differing from them, as Origin himself confesses those of Brutes to be; no
reason why there might not also be other Ranks or Species Superior to them.
Page 566, 567 But least of all can we assent to Origin, when from this
Principle, That all Souls are Essentially endued with Free Will, and therefore
in their Nature Peccable, he infers those Endless Circuits of Souls, Upwards
and Downwards, and consequently denies them any Fixed State of Holiness and
Happiness by Divine Grace: an Assertion contrary to the Tenor and Promises of
the Gospel. Thus perhaps that to be understood, That Christ brought Life and
Immortality to Light thorough the Gospel: not as if he were the First who
taught the Soul's Immortality, a thing believed before by the Pharisaick Jews,
and Generality of Pagans; but because these held their Endless Transmigrations
and Circuits, therefore was he the first who brought everlasting Life and
Happiness to Light. Page 567, 568 That Origin, a man well skilled in the
Platonic Learning, and so much addicted to the Dogmata thereof, would never
have gone so far into that other Extreme had there been any Solidity of Reason,
for either those Henades, or Noes, of the Latter Platonists. This Opinion all
one, as if a Christian should suppose, besides the First Person, or Father, a
Multitude of Particular Paternities, Superior to the Second Person; and also
besides the One Son, or Word, a Multitude of Particular Sons or Words,
Superior to the Third, the Holy Ghost. This plainly to make a Breach upon the
Deity, and to introduce a company of such Creaturely Gods, as imply a
Contradiction in their very Notion. Page 568 Lastly, this not the Catholic
Doctrine of the Platonic School neither, but a Private Opinion only of some
late Doctors. No Footsteps of those Henades and Agathotetes to be found
any-where in Plato; nor yet in Plotinus. This Language little Older then
Proclus. Nor does Plato speak of any Abstract or Separate Mind, save only One:
His Second things about the Second, being Idea's; as his Thirds about the Third
Created Beings. Plotinus also doubtful and staggering about these Noes, he
seeming sometimes to make them but the Heads or Summities of Souls. Wherefore
this Pseudo-Platonick Trinity to be Exploded, as Confounding the Differences
betwixt God and the Creature. Whereas the Christian Trinity Homogeneall, all
Deity or Creator; all other things being supposed to be the Creatures of those
Three Hypostases, and produced by their Joynt-Concurrence and Influence; they
being all Really but One God. Page 568, 570 Nevertheless, these forementioned
Depravations and Adulterations of that Divine Cabbala of the Trinity, not to be
charged upon Plato himself, nor all the other Ancient Platonists and
Pythagoreans; some of which approached so near to the Christian Trinity, as to
make their Three Hypostases all truly Divine, and Creatours, other things being
the Creatures of them. ibid. First therefore, Plato himself, in his Timaeus,
carefully distinguishes betwixt God and the Creature, and determines the
bounds of each, after this manner. That the First, is that which Always Is, and
was never Made; the Second, that which is Made and had a Beginning, but truly
Is not. His meaning here perverted by Junior Platonists, whom Boethius also
followed. Where Plato takes it for granted, That whatsoever has a Temporary
and Successive Duration, had a Beginning; and whatsoever had no Beginning, has
no Successive, but Permanent Duration; and so concludes, That whatsoever is
Eternal, is God; but whatsoever exists in Time, and has a Beginning,
Creature. Page 570, 572 Now to Plato, more Eternal Gods then One. Which not
Idea's or Noemata, but true Substantial Things; his First, Second, and Third,
in his Epistle to Dionysius, or Trinity of Divine Hypostases, the Makers or
Creatours of the whole World. Cicero's Gods, by whose Providence the World and
all its Parts were framed. Page 572, 573 The Second Hypostasis in Plato's
Trinity, to wit, Mind or Intellect, unquestionably Eternal, and without
Beginning. The same affirmed by Plotinus also, of the Third Hypostasis, or
Psyche, called the Word of the Second, as the Second, the Word of the First.
Porphyrius his Testimony to this purpose in S. Cyril; where also Mind, or the
Second Divine Hypostasis, (though said to have been Begotten from the First,
yet) called (...), and (...), Its Own-Parent, and its Own-Offspring, and said
to have sprung out (...), Self-begottenly. Page 573, 574. This Mysterious
Riddle expounded out of Plotinus. The plain meaning thereof no more then this,
That though this Second Hypostasis proceeded from the First, yet was it not
produced by it after a Creaturely manner, nor Arbitrariously by Will and
Choice, but in way of Natural and Necessary Emanation. Thus have some
Christians ventured to call the Logos, (...), and Ex seipso Deum, God from
himself. Page 574, 575 Dionysius Petavius, having declared the Doctrine of
Arius, that the Father was the only Eternal God, and the Son, or Word, a
Creature, made in Time, and out of Nothing; Concludes it undeniably manifest
from hence, that Arius was a German, True, and Genuine Platonist. Whereas it is
most certain from hence, that Arius was no Platonist at all; and that Petavius
himself did not well understand the Platonic Doctrine. Had Plato denied the
Eternity of his Second Hypostasis, called Nous, he must have denied the
Eternity of Wisdom and Understanding it self; this being to him that Wisdom
by which God himself is Wise, and whereby he made the World. With which agrees
also Athanasius; Our Lord is Wisdom, and not Second to any other Wisdom: and,
The Father of the Word is not himself Word: and, That was not Word and Wisdom,
which produced Word and Wisdom. This in opposition to Arius, who maintained
Another Word and Wisdom, Senior to that Word and Wisdom in Christ. These
Platonists, so far from denying the Eternity of the Word, that they rather
attributed too much to it, in making it Selfbegotten. Wherefore Plato,
asserting the Eternity of his Second Hypostasis, Nous or Logos, and not of the
World, did thereby, according to Athanasius his own Doctrine, make it to be no
Creature. Page 575 Nor is there any force at all in that Testimony of
Macrobius, cited by Petavius, to the contrary, wherein the First Hypostasis is
said to have Created Mind from it self, and the Second to have Created Soul;
because these Ancient Pagans did not confine the word Creare, to such a narrow
sense as Christians commonly do; but used it generally for all manner of
Production. Petavius his mistake, chiefly from that Spurious Trinity of the
latter Platonists, whose Third God is by themselves called (...), a Creature.
But this not the Doctrine of the Ancients. Page 576 Nevertheless, some more
Reason to doubt, whether Plato's Third Hypostasis were Eternal, because in his
Timaeus, he Generates the Mundane Soul. This Controversy decided, by supposing
a Double Psyche, (...), and (...), a Mundane, and Supra-Mundane Soul; the first
of these called by Plotinus, a Heavenly Venus, and a Separate Soul. Wherefore
though the Lower Venus, or Mundane Soul, according to Plato, made in Time
together with the World; yet the Higher Divine Soul, or Heavenly Venus, the Son
of Chronus without a Mother, his Third Hypostasis, Eternal, and without
Beginning. Page 576, 577 This further Evident from hence, Because Plato in his
Epistle to Dionysius, affirms as well of the Second, and Third, as of the
First, that in all those things that are Cognate to our Humane Soul, (or
Creaturely) there is (...), Nothing like thereunto. Page 577 Secondly, The
Three Hypostases of Plato's Trinity, not only all Eternal, but also
Necessarily Existent, and Absolutely Unannihilable. Nor could the First any
more Exist without the Second and Third, then the Sun without its Primary
Light, and Secundary Splendour. These according to Plotinus, the Three
Principles of the Universe, so that there could be neither More, nor Fewer.
They also who called the Second, Autopator, signified thereby, the Necessity of
its Existence. Page 577, 578 Thirdly, These Three Platonic Hypostases, as
Eternal, and Necessary, so likewise Universal, or Comprehensive of the Whole
World, that is, Infinite and Omnipotent. Therefore called Principles, and
Causes, and Opificers. Though Nous or Mind vulgarly looked upon as the Highest
Principle of all things, yet Plato set before it, One Most Simple Good. When
Nous said by Plato, to be (...), of the Same Kind, with the First Cause of all
things; this all one as if he had affirmed it to be (...), Co-Essential or
Consubstantial with it. Page 578, 579 Plato's Third Hypostasis, Psyche, or the
Superior Mundane Soul, called by him Zeus, from (...), as also the Cause and
Fountain of Life, and the Prince and King of all things. And when said to be
(...), the Offspring of the Highest Mind, thereby made Consubstantiall with it
also. So that Plato's whole Trinity Homoousian. Page 579 Though by the
Demiurgus or Opificer, Plato commonly meant the Second Hypostasis, Mind or
Intellect; yet Atticus, Amelius, Plotinus and others, called the Third or the
Higher Psyche also, by that Name. Wherefore according to the Genuine Platonic,
and Parmenidian Trinity, all the Three Hypostases Joynt-Creatours of the whole
World. Thus Ficinus often, and Proclus. Porphyrius his Affirmation, that the
Deity according to Plato, Extends to Three Hypostases. Ibid. Certain therefore,
that Arius did not Platonize, but rather Athanasius and the Nicene Fathers; who
notwithstanding made not Plato, but the Scriptures, their Foundation. The
Genuine Trinity of Plato and Parmenides, a Middle betwixt that of Sabellius,
and that of Arius: it being neither a Trinity of Words and Names, as the
Former; nor an Heteroousious Trinity, a Confused Jumble of God and Creature
together; but Homoousious and Homogeneall: all Eternal, Necessarily Existent,
Infinite or Omnipotent, and Creator. Page 579, 580 But that it may yet more
fully appear, how far the most refined Platonic and Parmenidian Trinity, does
either Agree or Disagree, with the Scripture and Christian Doctrine, Two things
further to be Observed concerning it. First, that the Platonists Universally
asserted an Essential Dependence of their Second and Third Hypostases upon the
First, as also a Graduall Subordination in them. Thus Plotinus; Chronos, or the
Second Hypostasis, is in a Middle State betwixt his Father who is Greater, and
his Son who is Inferior. And that in this Eternal Generation or Emanation, no
Progress Upward, but all Downward, and a Graduall Descent. Page 580, 581 More
of the Dependence and Graduall Subordination of the Second and Third Hypostases
of the Platonic Trinity, to the First. Each following Hypostasis called (...),
and (...), and (...), and (...), and (...) of that before it. Philo's Offensive
Expression, That the Logos, or Word, is the Shadow of God. This Gradation
commonly Illustrated by the (...) or (...), the Effulgency or Out-shining
Splendour of the Sun. Page 581, 582 The same further manifested, from the
several Distinctive Characters, given to each Hypostasis, in the True
Platonic or Parmenidian Trinity. The First, (...), One before all things; The
Second, (...), One All things, as to their Distinct Idea's; The Third, (...),
One Really producing All things. The First, Unity and Goodness Essential; the
Second, Understanding and Wisdom; the Third, Self-Active Love and Power. The
First or Father (...), Above Action: The Second or Son the Demiurgus, The Maker
or contriving Architect of the World, but an Immovable Nature: The Third a
Movable Deity; and the Immediate Governor of the whole World. Amelius his
Distinction of them into (...). Page 582, 583 The greatest Difficulty in the
distinctive Characters of these Three Platonic Hypostases; That Understanding,
Reason, and Wisdom, should be made Peculiar to the Second, as if the First
were therefore devoid of Mind, Reason and Wisdom. This an Arcanum of the
Platonic and Pythagorick Theology: That whereas Anaxagoras, Aristotle, and the
Vulgar, make Mind and Understanding, the Oldest of all things, and the Highest
Principle in the Universe; this supposes Mind, Knowledge, and Wisdom, to be,
not the First, but Second. Partly because there is Multiplicity in Knowledge,
but there must be Unity before Multiplicity. And partly because there must be
(...) before (...), An Object or Intelligible before Intellect. As also,
because Intellection, or Knowledge, is not the Highest Good, or Happiness; and
therefore to be some Substantial thing, in order of Nature Superior to Mind.
Hence concluded, that the Supreme Deity is Better then Logos, Reason, Word, or
Intellect. That not Logos, from whence Logos is derived. Thus Philo; The God
before Reason or Word, better then all the Rational Nature. But this
Difficulty common to Platonism, with Christianity; which likewise makes Word or
Reason and Wisdom, not the First, but Second Hypostasis. Thus does Athanasius
deny that there is any Word, Reason, or Wisdom, before the Son of God. What
then? Is the First Hypostasis therefore (...) and (...), Devoid of Reason and
Mind? Plotinus his Attempts to answer this; That the First has (...), A Simple
Light, different from that Multiform Light of Knowledge. Again, That the First
is (...), Intelligence it self, and therefore Superior to Intellect, or that
which has Intellection. (For (...), Intelligence it self does not Understand.)
Besides which, another Attempt also to salve this Difficulty. Page 583, 586 The
Ground of this Platonic Dependence and Subordination in the Divine Hypostases;
Because there is but One Fountain of the Godhead; so that the Second must needs
differ from the First, as the (...) from the (...), The Splendour from the Sun.
Page 586, 587 Though the Second Hypostasis said to have been Begotten, from the
First; yet this not to be taken for such a Generation, as that of Men, where
Three Men, (Father, Son, and Grandson) all Adult, have no Essential Dependence
upon one another, nor Gradual Subordination. This but an Imperfect Generation.
Page 587 Furthermore, the Platonists would recommend this their Gradation in
the Deity, or Subordination of Hypostases, from hence, Because by this means,
not so great a Leap or Jump in the Creation, as otherwise there must be; nor
the Whole Deity screwed up to such a Disproportionate Height, as would render
it Incapable of having any Intercourse with the Lower World. Were the whole
Deity, either One Simple Monade, or else an Immovable Mind, it could have no
such Liberty of Will as is commonly attributed to it, nor be Affectible with
any thing here below; nor indeed any fitter Object for men's Devotion, then an
Adamantine Rock. Whereas all the Phenomenon of the Deity salvable by this
Platonic Gradation. Page 587, 588 As also according to this Hypothesis, some
reasonable satisfaction to be given, why just so many Divine Hypostases, and
neither Fewer, nor More. Page 588 The Second thing to be Observed, concerning
the Genuine Platonic, or Parmenidian Trinity; That though the Hypostases
thereof be called Three Natures, and Three Principles, and Three Opificers, and
Three Gods; yet they all Really make up but One Divinity. For the World, being
Created by all Three, and yet having but One Creation, they must needs be all
One Creator. Porphyrius in S. Cyril explicitly, That, according to Plato, the
Essence of the Deity extends to Three Hypostases. Page 588, 589 Platonists
further add, That were it not for this Essential Dependence, and
Subordination, the Three Divine Hypostases must needs be Three Coordinate
Gods; and no more One God, then Three Men are One Man, or Three Suns One Sun.
Whereas the Sun, its Splendour, and Derivative Light, may all well be accounted
One and the same Thing. Page 589, 590 These Platonists therefore suppose, so
close a Union, and so near a Conjunction, betwixt their Three Hypostases; as no
where else to be found in Nature. Plotinus, That there is Nothing between them,
and That they are Only Not the very same. They acknowledge also, their
Perichoresis or Mutual Inexistence. The Three Hypostases One Divinity to the
Platonists, in the same manner, as the Center, Radious Distance Immovable, and
Movable Circumference of a Sphere, all One Sphere. The First Infinite Goodness,
the Second Infinite Wisdom, the Third Infinite Active Love, and Power
Substantial. Page 590, 591 From this full Account of the True and Genuine
Platonic Trinity, its both Agreement and Disagreement with the Christian,
Plainly appears. First, its Agreement in the Three Fundamental things before
mentioned; and consequently its Discrepance from A^ianism. Page 591, 592
Secondly, its Disagreement notwithstanding, from the Now-received Doctrine, in
that it supposes the Three Hypostases not to have One and the same Singular
Essence, nor yet an Absolute Co-Equality, but a Graduall Subordination, and
Essential Dependence. Upon which account s^id by some, to Symbolize with
Arianism, h^wever different from it in the Main Point. Page 592 Besides which,
the best of the Platonists, sometimes Guilty of Extravagant Expressions.
Pl^tinus his (...), That our Humane Soul is of the same Species with the
Mundane Soul, or Third Hypostasis; That being but the Elder Sister. Which
indeed is to make it Co-Essentiall or Consubstantiall with us Men, as S.
Austine understood it. This a Foundation for Creature Worship or Idolatry. Why
the Arians by Constantine called Porphyrianists. But this Doctrine, as
Repugnant to Plato, so elsewhere Contradicted by Plotinus himself. Page 593,
594 That notwithstanding, a Platonic Christian would Apologize for Plato and
the Genuine Pythagoreans, after this manner. First, That having no Scriptures,
Councills, nor Creeds, to direct them in the Darkness of this Mystery, and to
guide their Language, they the more excusable, if not always Uniform, and
sometimes Extravagant. More to be wondered at, that they should approach so near
the Christian Truth. Page 594, 595 And for their Gradual Subordination of
Hypostas^s, and Dependence of the Second and Third upon the First; That these
Platonists h^rein the more excus^ble, because the Majority of Christian
Doctors, for the first Three Centuries, seem to have asserted the same. Page
595* 596 The Platonic Christians further Apology; That the Platonists
Intention in Subordinating their Three Hypostases, only to exclude a Plurality
of Coordinate Independent Gods. That none of Plato's Three Hypostases,
Creatures, but that the Essence of the Godhead belongs to them All; they
being all Eternal, Necessarily Existent, Infinite, or Omnipotent, and
Creatours. Therefore in the sense of the Nicene Council, Consubstantiall and
Co-equall. The Essence of the Godhead, wherein all the Three Hypostases agree,
as well to the Fathers, as Platonists, General and Universal. Page 596, 597
Besides which, the Genuine Platonists would acknowledge also, all their Three
Hypostases to be Homoousian, Co-essentiall or Consubstantiall* yet in a further
Sense; as making up One Entire Divinity: As the Root, Stock and Branches,
Co-essentiall to a Vine. The Trinity not so Undivided, as if Three were not
Three in it. The Inequality and Subordination in the Platonic Trinity, within
the Deity it self only, and in the Relation of the Hypostases to one another;
they being ad extra all One and the same God, Jointly Concurring in the same
Actions, and in that respect, devoid of Inequality. Page 597, 598 Furthermore,
the Platonic Christian would urge, That according to the Principles of
Christianity it self, there must needs be some Dependence and Subordination in
these Hypostases, in their Relation to one another; a Priority and Posteriority
of Order and Dignity: That which is Originally of it Self, having some kind of
Priority and Superiority, over that which is wholly Derived from it. The Second
and Third Hypostases, not so Omnipotent as the First, because not able to Beget
or Produce that. Hence the First styled by Macrobius, the Most Omnipotent of
all. Sundry passages in Scripture, favoring this Hypothesis, as also Orthodox
Fathers. Athanasius his Resemblances to the Original Light and the Secondary
Splendour; to the Fountain and the Stream, the Root and the Branch, the Water
and the Vapor. The Equality asserted by the Orthodox, in way of opposition to
the Arian Inequality, of God and Creature; That they Equally God, or Uncreated.
Notwithstanding which, some Inequality amongst them allowed by Petavius and
others, as This God, and That Person. Page 599, 600 However, no necessity of
any more Inequality and Subordination in the Platonic, then in the Christian
Trinity; they being but Infinite Goodness, and Infinite Wisdom, and Infinite
Active Love, and Power Substantial. Another Hypothesis of some Platonists,
hinted by S. Austine out of Porphyry, which makes the Third Hypostasis a Myddle
betwixt the First and Second; and implies, not so much a Gradation, as a
Circulation in the Trinity. Page 600, 601 As for the Platonists supposing their
Three Hypostases (though One Entire Divinity) to have their Distinct Singular
Essences, without which they conceive they could be nothing but Three Names;
the Platonic Christian would make this Apology; That the Orthodox Fathers
themselves were generally of this persuasion, That the Essence of the Godhead
wherein all the Three Persons agree, not One Singular, but only One Common or
Universal Essence. Their Distinction to this purpose, betwixt (...) and (...)^
that the former was Common or Generical, the latter Singular or Individual.
Theodoret, Basil, and many others. Petavius his acknowledgement, that the
Greeks Universally agreed herein. Page 601, 602 The Opinion of Gregory Nyssen,
Cyril, Damascen, and others; That the Persons of the Trinity no otherways One,
then as Three Individuals under the same Species, or as Three Men agree in the
same common Humanity. These the Chief Asserters of an Absolute, Independent,
and Un-subordinate Co-equality. This the only fault that S. Cyril finds in the
Platonists, that they did not assert such a Consubstantiality. Whereas this
Trinity, Tritheism: the Three Persons thereof being no more One God, then Three
Men are One Man, However this certain, that these Fathers did not suppose, the
Three Hypostases of the Trinity to have all the same Singular Essence. Another
Extreme, that sprung up afterward in the room of the former Tritheism, and
owned by no other Authority, then of a Lateran Council. Page 603, 604 And that
this Sameness of Singular Essence was not asserted by the Nicene Fathers, and
first Opposers of Arius; First, clearly acknowledged by Petavius. Page 604, 605
But this further Evident from hence; Because the same Orthodox Fathers, who
opposed Arianism, did also condemn Sabellianism; which asserted, Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, to be but One Hypostasis, that is, to have but One and the same
Singular Essence; and consequently acknowledged no other Trinity then of Names
or Words. Page 605 It appears also from hence, Because the Word Homoousios
had never any other Sense, then to signify the Agreement of things Numerically
differing, in some Common and General Nature or Essence. S. Basil, That the
same thing is not Homoousious, Co-essential, or Consubstantial with it self;
but always One thing with another. (...) the same with (...) in Plotinus. So
also in Athanasius, he affirming the Branches to be Homoousious and Congenerous
with the Root. Besides which, (...), and (...), used by Athanasius, and others,
as Synonymous with (...). None of which words signify an Identity of Singular
Essence, but General or Universal only. The Council of Chalcedon, That our
Savior Christ as to his Humanity, was Homoousious or Consubstantial with us
Men. Thus does Athanasius deny, the Son or Word, as such, to be Homoousious or
Consubstantial with Creatures; as also he affirms men to be Consubstantial
with one another; every Son Consubstantial and Co-essential with his Father.
Page 605, 606 Moreover the Sense of the Nicene Fathers, in their
Consubstantiality, may more fully appear from the Doctrine of Arius opposed by
them; which made the Son a Creature, and therefore (as Athanasius writes)
(...) or (...), of a different Essence or Substance from the Father. Proved
clearly from Athanasius, that by the Consubstantiality of the Word, was meant
no more then its being not a Creature, or Uncreated. Page 606, 608 Further
Proof, out of Athanasius, that by Consubstantiality, is not meant a Sameness of
Singular, but only of General Essence. As also out of S. Austine. Page 608,
611 Lastly, That the Homoousian Fathers did not assert against Arius, a
Sameness of Singular Essence, evident from their Disclaiming those two other
words, (...), and (...), (as having a Sabellian Sense in them,) the former by
Epiphanius, the latter by Athanasius. So that they who asserted the Son to be
Homoousious, Consubstantial with the Father, denied him to be Monoousious or
Tautoousious, that is, to have the same Singular Essence. Page 612 613 From all
these Considerations, concluded by the Platonic Christian, That as the Genuine
Trinity of Plato agreed with that of the Orthodox Christians, in being not
Heteroousian, but Homoousian, Co-essential or Consubstantial; not made up of
God and Creature, but all Homogeneal of Uncreated, or Creator: so did the
Trinity of the First Orthodox Anti-Arians herein agree with the Platonic
Trinity; that it was not Monoousian, or Tautoousian, One and the same Singular
Essence, under Three Names or Notions only; but really Three Hypostases or
Persons. Page 612 Nevertheless, here remains a Question to be Answered;
Whether Athanasius, the Nicene Fathers, and all the First Anti-Arians did
therefore assert the same thing with Greg. Nyssen. Cyril, and others, That the
Three Persons in the Trinity, were but Three Coordinate Individuals, under the
same Species, having only a Specific Unity or Identity; (besides Consent of
Will) or that they all agree in the Uncreated Nature only. This Grossly
asserted in the Dialogues of the Trinity, Vulgarly Imputed to Athanasius; and
to that purpose also, That Three Men are not Three Men, but only then when
they Dissent from one another in Will and Opinion. But these Dialogues
Pseudepigraphous. Nevertheless to be Granted, that Athanasius himself, in that
Book of the Common Essence of the Persons, seems to lay something too much
Stresse upon this Common Nature, Essence, or Substance, of the Three Persons,
as to the making of them all but One God. However, it is certain he does not
there rely upon that alone; and elsewhere acknowledges it to be insufficient.
The true Reason, why Athanasius laid so great a Stresse upon the Homoousiotes,
not because this alone would make them One God, but because they could not
possibly be One God without it. For if the Father be Uncreated, and the Son a
Creature, then can they not both be One God. Several Passages of Athanasius
Cited to this purpose. Those Expressions in him of One Godhead, and the
Sameness of the Godhead, and One Essence or Substance in the Trinity, not so to
be understood, as if the Three Persons were but several Names, Notions, or
Modes of One Thing. Page 612, 616 Wherefore though Athanasius lay his
Foundation in this (...), Common Specific Unity of the Persons, (which is
their Consubstantiality,) in order to their being One God; yet does he
superadde other Considerations also thereunto. A^ first of all this, That they
are not Three Principles, but only One; the Essence of the Father being the
Root and Fountain of the Son and Spirit: and the Three Hypostases, gathered
together under One Head. Where Athanasius implies, That were they perfectly
Coordinate and Independent, they would not be One, but Three Gods. Page 616 In
the next place, he further adds; That these Three Hypostases are not Three
Separated Disjoined Things, but Indivisibly United; as the Splendour is
Indivisible from the Sun, and Wisdom from him that is Wise. That neither of
these Persons could be without the other; nor any thing come between them: they
so immediately Conjoined together, as that there is a kind of (...) or
Continuity betwixt them. Page 616, 617 Thirdly, Athanasius goes yet higher;
affirming these Three Hypostases, not only to be Indivisibly Conjoined, but
also to have a Mutual Inexistence in each other. This afterward called an
Emperichoresis. That of our Savior, I am in the Father, and the Father in me,
therefore Quarrelled at by the Arians, because they conceived of Things
Incorporeal, after a Corporeal manner. That the Godhead of the Son, is the
Godhead of the Father; and the Father exercises a Providence over all, in the
Son. Page 617, 619 Lastly, Athanasius also in Sundry Places, supposes the Three
Divine Hypostases to make up one Entire Divinity; as the Fountain and the
Stream make up one entire River; the Root, Stock, and Branches, one entire
Tree. Accordingly the word Homoousios used by Athanasius, in a further Sense,
not only to signify things Agreeing in one Common and General Essence, but
also such as Essentially Concur to the making up of One Entire thing. That the
Three Hypostases do Outwardly, or Ad extra, produce all, (...), One and the
self-same Action; the Father, By the Word, In the Holy Spirit, doing all
things. That all this Doctrine of Athanasius would have been readily assented
to by Plato and his Genuine Followers. The Platonic Christian therefore
Concludes, That there is no such Real Difference, betwixt the Genuine
Platonic Trinity, and that of the First Orthodox Anti-Arian Fathers, as some
conceive. From which notwithstanding that Tritheistick Trinity, of S. Greg.
Nyssen, Cyril, and others, of Three Coordinate Individuals under the same
Species, (as Three Men) seems to have been a Deviation. Page 619, 620 Hitherto
the Platonic Christians Apology, for the Genuine Platonic Trinity; or
Endeavor to reconcile it with the Doctrine of the Ancient Church: Where
nothing is asserted by our selves, but all Submitted to the Judgment of the
Learned in these Matters. And whatsoever in Plato's Trinity shall be found
Discrepan^ from the sense of the First Orthodox Anti-Arian Fathers, utterly
disclaimed by us. Athanasius a great Instrument of Divine Providence, for
preserving the Christian Church from Lapsing into a kind of Paganick and
Idolatrous Christianity. ibid. The Reason of this Apology, for the Genuine
Platonic Trinity; Because it is against the Interest of Christianity, that
this should be made more Discrepant from the Christian, then indeed it is.
Moreover certain, that this Genuine Platonic Trinity was Anti-Arian; or rather
the Arian, Anti-Platonick. Wherefore Socrates wondered, that Georgius and
Timotheus Presbyters, should adhere to the Arian Faction; when one of them was
accounted much a Platonist, the other an Origenist. Page 620, 621 Furthermore,
Platonic Pagans after Christianity, highly approved of the Beginning of S.
John's Gospel, concerning the Logos, as exactly agreeing with their Platonic
Doctrine. Thus Amelius in Eusebius, and others. A Platonist in S. Austine, That
it deserved to be writ in Golden Letters, and set up in some Eminent places, in
every Christian Church. But that which is most of all Considerable, to Justify
this Apology, The generality of Christian Fathers, before and after the Nicene
Council, looked upon this Platonic Trinity, if not as really the Same thing
with the Christian, yet as approaching so near thereunto, that it differed
chiefly in Circumstances, or Manner of Expression. Thus Justin Martyr, Clemens
Alexandrinus, Origin, S. Cyprian, or the Author of the Book De Spiritu Sancto,
Eusebius Caesariensis; and, which is most of all to the purpose, Athanasius
himself; he giving a Signal Testimony thereunto. To which may be added, S.
Austine, and Theodoret. S. Cyril, though blaming the Platonic Subordination,
(Himself supposing the Trinity to be Three Coordinate Individuals, under the
same Specific Nature of the Godhead) yet acknowledges that Plato was not
altogether ignorant of the Truth, etc. But that Plato's Subordination, of his
Second Hypostasis to the First, was not (as the Arian) of a Creature to the
Creator; already made unquestionably Evident. Page 621, 625 Wherefore a
Wonderful Providence of Almighty God here to be taken notice of; That this
Doctrine, of a Trinity of Divine Hypostases, should be entertained in the Pagan
World before Christianity, as it were to prepare a way for the Reception of it
amongst the Learned. Which the Junior Platonists were so sensible of, that
besides their other Adulterations of the Platonic Trinity before mentioned*
(for the Countenancing of their Polytheism and Idolatry) they at length
Innovated and Altered the whole Cabbala; now no longer acknowledging a Trinity,
but at least a Quaternity of Divine Hypostases; namely, before and besides the
Trinity, another Hypostasis superior thereunto, and standing alone by it self.
This first started by Iamblichus, carried on by Proclus, taken notice of by S.
Cyril: besides which, Proclus also added other Fantastic Trinities of his
own. Page 625, 627 Another Advantage of this Platonic Trinity, extending to
the present time; perhaps not Vnintended also by Divine Providence, to abate
the Confidence of those Conceited Wits, who so boldly decry the Trinity for
Nonsense, Absolute Contradiction to Reason, and Impossibility; when they shall
find, that the Best and Freest Wits amongst the Pagans, though having no
Scripture-Revelation to impose upon them, were yet fond of this Hypothesis.
Page 627 And now it sufficiently appears, That the Ancient Platonists and
Pythagoreans, were not to be taxed for Polytheists and Idolaters, in giving
Religious Worship to their Three Divine Hypostases. One grand Design of
Christianity, to free the World from Idolatry and Creature-Worship: And this
the reason, why the Ancient Fathers so zealously opposed Arianism, because it
thwarted that Design; it Paganizing and Idolatrizing that, which was intended
for the Unpaganizing of the World. One Remarkable Passage of Athanasius to this
purpose. Page 627, 629 Where First Observable, That Athanasius expressly
affirms the Pagans to have Worshipped only One Uncreated, and Many Created
Gods. Thus Greg. Naz. That there was but One Divinity amongst the Pagans also.
And Irenaeus, That they attributed the first place of the Deity to One Supreme
God, the Maker of this Universe. And Secondly, That to Athanasius, and all
those other Fathers, who charged the Arians with Idolatry, this was supp^sed
not to consist in Worshipping Many Independent* and Self-Existent Gods, but in
giving Religious Worship to Creatures: As the Arians g^ve a Religious Worship
to the Son or Word, supposed by themselves to be but a Creature. Page 629* 630
But if Arians guilty of Polytheism or Idolatry, for bestowing Religious Worship
upon the Son, or Word, as a Creature, (though the Chief of Creatures, and that
by which all others were Made) much more they guilty hereof, who Religiously
worshipped other Inferior Beings. Athanasius; That no Creature the Object of
Religious Worship, and That the Orthodox worshipped the Divinity, in the
Humanity of our Savior Christ. Nestorius branded with the name of a
Man-worshipper. Some suppose That necessary to Idolatry, which is Impossible;
to Worship more then One, as Omnipotent, or with Mental Latria. Page 630* 632
And now have we sufficiently Answered the Objection against the Naturality of
the Idea of God, as including Oneliness in it; from the Pagan Polytheism. What
farther here intended concerning the same, (as a Foundation for our Defense of
Christianity) differred, to make room for a Confutation of all the Atheistick
Arguments.
CHAP. V. A Particular Confutation of all the Atheistick Grounds.
THE First Atheistick Argument; That there is no Idea of God. That in Answer to
this, The Idea of God has been already declared: viz. A Perfect Understanding
Being, Unmade, or Self-Existent from Eternity, and the Cause of all other
Things. In which, Nothing Unconceivable, nor Contradictious. That these
Confounded Atheists themselves, who deny that there is any Idea of God at all,
must notwithstanding of necessity suppose the contrary; because otherwise,
denying his Existence, they should deny the Existence of Nothing. And that they
agree also with Theists in the same Idea; The one denying the Existence of
that, which the other Asserteth, Than an Understanding Nature is the Original
of all things. This Idea of God, as containing Oneliness and Singularity in it,
not only largely Defended and made good against that Objection from the Pagan
Polytheism; but also Proved, that the Generality of Mankind have a Natural
Prolepsis or Anticipation in their Minds, concerning the Real and Actual
Existence of such a Being. Atheists but Monsters, and Anomalies of mankind.
This a sufficient Confutation of the First Atheistick Argument. Page 633, 634
Nevertheless, That Atheists may not Pretend, any of their Strength to be
Concealed; all their Particular Exceptions against the Idea of God here
Declared, being Five. Their First Exception, That we can have no Ide^ nor
Thought of any thing not Subject to Sense; much less any Evidence of the
Existence thereof. The Answer. First, That whereas the Atheists suppose Sense
to be the Only Knowledge, or at least Original Knowledge; Sense as such is not
Knowledge, or Understanding; because if it were, then every one that sees Light
and Colors, or feels Heat and Cold, would understand Light and Colors, Heat
and Cold. Plainly proved also, from that Atomick Philosophy, (which the
Epicurean Atheists so much pretend to,) That there is a Higher Faculty of the
Soul, which Judges of Sense, detects the Phantastry thereof, resolves Sensible
Things into Intelligible Principles, etc. No Passion able to make a Judgment,
either of it self, or of other things. The Confounded Democritus himself,
sometimes acknowledged Sense to be but Seeming and Phantasy, and not to reach
to the Absolute Truth and Reality of Things. He therefore Exploded Qualities
out of the Rank of Entities, because Unintelligible; concluding them to be but
our Own Phantasms. Undeniably Evident, that we have Idea's, Notions, and
Thoughts, of many things that never were in Sense, and whereof we have no
Genuine Phantasms. Atheists attend not to their own Cogitations. That Opinion,
That there is Nothing in the Understanding which was not before in Sense, False
and Atheistical. Men having a Notion of a Perfect Understanding Being, the
Cause of all things, as the Object of their Devotion; the Atheists
notwithstanding, would here Persuade them that they have none, and that the
thing is a Nonentity, merely because they have no Sensible Idea, or Phantasm
thereof. And so may they as well prove, not only Reason and Understanding,
Appetite and Volition, to be Non-Entities; but also Fancy and Sense it self;
neither of these falling under Sense, but only the Objects of them. Were God
indeed Corporeal, as some mistaken Theists suppose, yet his Essence chiefly
consisting in Mind and Understanding, this of him could not possibly be subject
to Sense. But that there is also Substance Incorporeal, which therefore in its
own Nature is Insensible, and that the Deity is such, will be elsewhere
Demonstrated. Page 634, 637 Though the Evidence of Singular Bodies Existing,
depend upon the Information of Sense; yet the Certainty of this very Evidence,
not from Sense alone, but a Complication of Reason and Understanding with it.
Sense Fantastical, not reaching to the Absolute Truth of things; and obnoxious
to Delusion. Our own Imaginations, taken for Sensations and Realities, in
Sleep, and by Melancholized persons when awake. Atomick Atheists themselves,
assert the Existence of such things as they have no Sense of; Atoms, Membranes,
or Exuvious Images of Bodies, nay Incorporeal Space. If the Existence of
Nothing, to be acknowledged, which falls not under Sense, then not the
Existence of Soul and Mind. God the Great Mind, that Rules the whole Universe;
whence our Imperfect Minds derived. The Existence of that God, whom no Eye can
see, Demonstrated by Reason from his Effects. Page 637, 638 The Second
Atheistick Pretense against the Idea of God, and his Existence; from Theists
own acknowledging Him to be Incomprehensible; from whence they infer him to be
a Nonentity. Here perhaps it may be Granted, in a right Sense, that whatsoever
is altogether Unconceivable, is either in It self, or at least to Us, Nothing.
How that of Protagoras, That Every man is the measure of all things to himself,
in his Sense false. Whatsoever any man's shallow understanding cannot clearly
comprehend, not therefore to be presently expunged out of the Catalogue of
Beings. Nevertheless according to Aristotle, the Soul and Mind in a manner All
things. This a Crystalline Globe, or Notional World, that has some Image in it
of whatsoever is contained in the Real Globe of Being. Page 638 But this
Absolutely False; That whatsoever cannot be fully Comprehended by us, is
therefore utterly Unconceivable, and consequently Nothing. For we cannot fully
Comprehend Our selves, nor have such an Adequate Conception of any Substance,
as perfectly to Master and Conquer the same. That of the Scepticks so far True,
That there is Something Incomprehensible in the Essence of Every thing; even of
Body it self. Truth Bigger then our Minds. Proper to God Almighty, (who alone
is wise) perfectly to Comprehend the Essences of all things. But it follows not
from hence, that therefore we have no Idea nor Conception at all of any thing.
We may have a Notion or Idea of a Perfect Being, though we cannot fully
Comprehend the same by Our Imperfect Minds; as we may See and Touch a Mountain,
though we cannot Enclasp it all round within our Arms. This therefore a False
Theorem of the Atheists, That whatsoever cannot be fully Comprehended by Men's
Imperfect Understandings, is an Absolute Nonentity. Page 638, 639 Though God
more Incomprehensible then other Things, because of his Transcendent
Perfection; yet has he also more of Conceptibility: as the Sun, though dazzling
our Sight, yet has more of Visibility, also, then any other Object. The Dark
Incomprehensibility of the Deity, like the Azure Obscurity of the Transparent
Ether, not any thing Absolutely in it self, but only Relative to us. Page
639, 640 This Incomprehensibility of the Deity so far from being an Argument
against its Existence, that certain, on the Contrary, were there Nothing
Incomprehensible to our Imperfect Minds, there could be no God. Every thing
Apprehended by some Internal Congruity. The Scantness and Imperfection of our
Narrow Understandings, must needs make them Asymmetral or Incommensurate, to
what Absolutely Perfect. Page 640 Nature it self Intimates, That there is
Something Vastly Bigger then our Mind and Thoughts, by those Passions Implanted
in us, of Devout Veneration, Adoration, and Admiration, with Ecstasie and
Pleasing Horror. That of the Deity which cannot enter into the Narrow Vessels
of our Minds, must be otherwise apprehended, by their being Plunged into it, or
Swallowed up and Lost in it. We have a Notion or Conception of a Perfect Being,
though we cannot fully Comprehend the same; because our selves being Imperfect,
must needs be Incommensurate thereunto. Thus no Reason at all, in the Second
Atheistick Pretense, against the Idea of God, and his Existence; from his
Confessed Incomprehensibility. ibid. The Third follows, That Infinity, supposed
to be Essential to the Deity, is a thing Perfectly Unconceivable, and
therefore an Impossibility, and Nonentity. Some Passages of a Modern Writer to
this purpose. The meaning of them. That there is Nothing of Philosophic Truth
in the Idea or Attributes of God, nor any other Sense in the words, then only
to signify the Veneration and Astonishment of men's own Minds. That the word
Infinite, signifies Nothing in the Thing it self so called, but only the
Inability of our Understandings, and Admiration. And since God by Theists, is
denied to be Finite, but cannot be Infinite, therefore an Unconceivable
Nothing. Thus another Learned Well-willer to Atheism, That we have no Idea of
Infinite, and therefore not of God. Which in the Language of Atheists, all one
as to say, that He is a Nonentity. Page 640, 641 Answer. This Argument, That
there can be nothing Infinite, and therefore no God; proper to the Modern and
Neoterick Atheists only; but Repugnant to the Sense of the Ancients.
Anaximander's (...) Infinite Matter, though Melissus his (...) the True Deity.
Formerly both Theists and Atheists agreed in this; That there must be Something
or other Infinite, either an Infinite Mind, or Infinite Matter. The ancient
Atheists also asserted, a Numericall Infinity of Worlds. Thus do Atheists
Confute or Contradict Atheists. Page 641, 642 That the Modern Atheists do no
less Contradict Plain Reason also, and their very Selves, then they do their
Predecessors, when they would disprove a God from hence, Because there can be
Nothing Infinite. For First, Certain, that there was something or other
Infinite in Duration, or Eternal without Beginning: Because, If there had been
once Nothing, there could never have been Any thing. But hardly any Atheists
can be so Sottish, as in good earnest to think there was once Nothing at all,
but afterward Senseless Matter Happened to Be. Notorious Impudence in them, who
assert the Eternity of Matter, to make this an Argument against the Existence
of a God; Because Infinite Duration without Beginning, an Impossibility. Page
642, 643 A Concession to the Atheists of these Two Things; That we neither have
a Phantasm of any Infinite, because there was never any in Sense; and that
Infinity is not fully Comprehensible by Finite Understandings neither. But
since, Mathematically Certain, That there was something Infinite in Duration,
Demonstrated from hence, against Atheists, That there is Something Really
Existing, which we have neither any Phantasm of, nor yet can fully Comprehend
in our Minds. ibid. Further Granted, That as for Infinity of Number, Magnitude,
and Time without beginning; as we have no Phantasm nor full Comprehension of
them, so have we neither any Intelligible Idea, Notion or Conception: From
whence it may be Concluded, That they are Non-Entities. Number Infinite in
Aristotle, only in a Negative Sense, because we can never come to an End
thereof by Addition. For which very Reason also, there cannot possibly be any
Number Positively Infinite, since One or More may always be Added. No Magnitude
so Great neither, but that a Greater may be Supposed. By Infinite Space, to be
Understood, Nothing but a Possibility of more and more Body, further and
further Infinitely, by Divine Power; or that the World could never be made so
Great, as that God was not able to make it still Greater. This Potential
Infinity, or Indefinity of Body, seems to be mistaken, for an Actual Infinity
of Space. Lastly, no Infinity of Time Past, because then there must needs be
Time Past, which never was Present. An Argument of a Modern Writer. Reason
therefore Concludes, neither the World nor Time, to have been Infinite in Past
Duration. Page 643, 644 Here will the Atheist think he has got a Great
Advantage, for disproving the Existence of a God; They who thus take away the
Eternity of the World, taking away also the Eternity of a God. As if God could
not be Eternal otherwise, then by a Successive Flux of Infinite Time. But we
say, that this affords a Demonstration of a God; Because since both the World
and Time had a Beginning; there must of necessity be Something, whose Duration
is not Successive, but Permanent, which was the Creator of them both.
Wherefore the Atheists can here only make Grimaces, and Quibble upon
Nunc-Stans; as if this Standing Eternity of the Deity, were nothing but a
Pitiful Moment of Time Standing still; and as if all Duration must needs be
the same with ours, etc. Page 644, 645 Concluded, That Infinite and Eternal,
are not Words which signify Nothing in the thing it self, but only the Idle
Progress of our Minds, or our own Ignorance, Stupid Astonishment, and
Veneration: not mere Attributes of Honor and Complement, but Attributes
belonging to the Deity, (and that alone) of the most Philosophic Truth. And
though we have no Ad^quate Comprehension thereof, yet must we have some Notion
of that, which we can Demonstrate to belong to Something. Page 645, 646 But the
Thing which the Atheists Principally Quarrel with, is Infinite Power, or
Omnipotence; which they pretend also to be utterly Unconceivable, and
Impossible, and a Name of Nothing. Where indeed our Modern Atheists have the
joint Suffrage of the Ancients also, who concerned themselves in Nothing more,
then Disproving Omnipotence, or Infinite Power. ib. This Omnipotence, either
Wilfully or Ignorantly Misrepresented by Atheists, as if it were a Power of
doing things Contradictious. An Irony of a Modern Atheist; That God could turn
a Tree into a Syllogism. The Absurd Doctrine of Cartesius; That God could have
made Twice two, not to have been Four; or the Three Angles of a Triangle, not
to be Equal to two Right. This to make one Attribute of the Deity Devour and
Destroy another; Infinite Will and Power, Infinite Understanding and Wisdom.
To suppose God to Understand and be Wise, only by Will, Really to give him no
Understanding at all. God not so Omnipotent, as that he can destroy the
Intelligible Natures of things; which were to Baffle and Befool his own
Wisdom. Infinite Power, That which can do all that is Possible; that is,
Conceivable, or Implies no Contradiction. The very Essence of Possibility,
Conceptibility. And thus all the Ancient Theists. Absurd for Atheists to say,
that a Power of doing Nothing but what is Conceivable, is Unconceivable. ibid.
646 But because Atheists look upon Infinity as such a Mormo, we shall take off
the Vizard from it; by declaring, That it is Really nothing else but
Perfection. Infinite Understanding and Knowledge, Perfect Understanding,
without any Defect, and the Knowledge of all things Knowable. Infinite Power,
Perfect Power, or a Power of doing all things Possible. Infinite Duration,
Perfection of Essence. Because Infinity, Perfection; therefore Nothing which
includes any thing of Imperfection in the Essence of it, can be truly and
properly Infinite; as Number, Magnitude, and Time: all which can but
Counterfeit Infinity. Nothing One way Infinite, which is not so Every way, or a
Perfect Being. Page 647, 648 Now, That we have an Idea of Perfection, plain
from that of Imperfection. Perfection First in Order of Nature, as the Rule and
Measure. This not the want of Imperfection, but Imperfection the want of
Perfection. A Scale or Ladder of Perfections in Nature, Perceived by means of
that Idea, which we have of a Being Absolutely Perfect, the Measure of them.
Without which, we could not take notice of Imperfection, in the most Perfect of
all those things which we ever had Sense of. Boethius; That whatsoever is
Imperfect in any kind, Implies something in that kind Perfect, from whence it
was derived. And that the Nature of things took not Beginning, from any thing
Incomplete and Imperfect; but descended downward, from what was Absolutely
Perfect, by steps and degrees, Lower and Lower. Page 648 Wherefore since
Infinite, the same with Perfect; we having a Notion of the Latter, must needs
have of the Former. And though the Word Infinite be Negative, yet is the Sense
Positive. Finite the Negation of Infinite, as which in order of Nature is
before it; and not Infinite of Finite. However, in things Incapable of True
Infinity; Infinity being here a mere Imaginary thing and Nonentity, can be
only conceived by the Negation of Finite, as Nothing is, by the Negation of
Something. An Infinite Being, Nothing but a Perfect Being, such as never Was
Not, and could produce all things Possible, or Conceivable. Page 648, 649 The
Fourth Atheistick Pretense against the Idea of God; That it is an Arbitrarious
Compilement of Contradictious Notions. Where First we deny not, but that as
some Religionists Extend the Divine Power to things Contradictious, so may
others compound Contradictions together in the Nature of the Deity. But it does
not follow from thence, that Theology it self is therefore Contradictious, no
more then that Philosophy is so, because some Philosophers also hold
Contradictious things: Or that Nothing is Absolutely True, neither in Divinity,
nor Philosophy, but all Seeming, and Fantastical; according to the Protagorean
Doctrine. Page 649, 650 But though it be True, That whatsoever really Implies a
Contradiction, is a Nonentity; yet is this Rule Obnoxious to much Abuse, when
whatsoever men's shallow Understandings cannot reach to, is therefore presently
cried down by them, as an Impossibility or Nothing. As when the Atheists, and
Materialists, explode Incorporeal Substance upon this Pretense; or make it
only an Attribute of Honor, expressing the Veneration of Men's Minds, but
signifying Nothing in Nature, nor having any Philosophic Truth. But the
Atheists true meaning in this Objection, and what kind of Contradictions they
are, which they impute to all Theology, may appear from a Passage of a Modern
Writer: Namely, such as these; when God is said to Perceive Sensible Things,
and yet to have no Organs of Sense; as also to Understand, and yet to have no
Brains. The Vn-disguised meaning of the Writer, That Religion is not
Philosophy, but Law, and all mere Arbitrary Constitution; nor God a Subject of
Philosophy, as all Real Things are; he being no True Inhabitant of the World or
Heaven, but only of men's Brains and Phancies; and his Attributes signifying
neither True nor False, nor any thing in Nature, but only men's Reverence and
Devotion, toward what they Fear. And so may any thing be said of God, no
matter what, so it be agreeable to Civil Law. But when men mistake Attributes
of Honor, for Attributes of Philosophic Truth; that is, when they will
suppose such a thing as a God Really to Exist; then is all Absurd Nonsense and
Contradiction. God's Understanding without Brains, no Contradiction. Page 650,
651 Certain, That no Simple Idea, as of a Triangle, or a Square, can be
Contradictious to it self; much less can the Idea of a Perfect Being, the most
Simple of all. This indeed Pregnant of many Attributes, which if
Contradictious, would render the whole a Nonentity; but all the Genuine
Attributes of the Deity, as Demonstrable of a Perfect Being, as the Properties
of a Triangle, or a Square; and therefore can neither be Contradictious to it,
nor one another. Page 652 Nay, the Genuine Attributes of the Deity, not only
not Contradictious, but also all Necessarily Connected together. ibid. In
Truth, All the Attributes of the Deity, but so many Partial and Inadequate
Conceptions of One and the Same Perfect Being, taken into our Minds, as it
were, by Piecemeal. ibid. The Idea of God, neither Fictitious, nor Factitious.
Nothing Arbitrarious in it; but a most Natural and Simple Idea, to which not
the Least can be Added, nor any thing Detracted from it. Nevertheless, may
there be different Apprehensions concerning God; every one that has a Notion
of a Perfect Being, not Understanding all that Belongs to it; no more then of
a Triangle, or of a Sphere. ibid. 653 Concluded therefore, That the Attributes
of God, No Confounded Nonsense of Religiously Astonished Minds, huddling up
together all Imaginable Attributes of Honor, Courtship, and Complement; but
the Attributes of Necessary Philosophic Truth: and such as do not only speak
the Devotion of men's Hearts, but also declare the Real Nature of the thing.
Here the Wit of a Modern Atheistick Writer, ill placed. (Though no doubts, but
some, either out of Superstition, or Ignorance, may Attribute such things to
the Deity, as are Incongruous to its Nature.) Thus the Fourth Atheistick
Pretense, against the Idea of God, Confuted. Page 653, 654 In the next place,
The Atheists think themselves concerned, to give an Account of this
Unquestionable Phenomenon; the General Persuasion of the Existence of a God,
in the Minds of men, and their Propensity to Religion; whence this should come,
if there were no Real Object for it in Nature. And this they would do by
Imputing it, partly to the Confounded Nonsense of Astonished Minds, and partly
to the Imposture of Politicians. Or else to these Three Things; To Men's Fear;
and to their Ignorance of Causes; and to the Fiction of Lawmakers and Civil
Sovereigns. Page 654 The First of these Atheistick Origins of Religion; That
Mankind by reason of their Natural Imbecility, are in continual Solicitude and
Fear concerning Future Events, and their Good and Evil Fortune. And this
Passion of Fear raises up in them for an Object to it self, a most Affrightfull
Phantasm; of An Invisible Understanding Being, Omnipotent, etc. They afterward
Standing in awe of this their own Imagination, and Tremblingly Worshipping the
Creature of their own Fear and Fancy. Page 654 The Second Atheistick Origin of
Theism and Religion; That Men having a Natural Curiosity, to Enquire into the
Causes of things, wheresoever they can discover no Visible and Natural Causes,
are prone to Feign Causes Invisible and Supernatural. As Anaxagoras said, never
to have betaken himself to a God, but only when he was at a loss for Necessary
Material Causes. Wherefore no wonder if the Generality of Mankind, being
Ignorant of the Causes of all or most Things, have betaken themselves to a God,
as to a Refuge and Sanctuary for their Ignorance. Page 654, 655 These two
Accounts of the Phenomenon of Religion; from men's Fear and Solicitude and from
their Ignorance of Causes and Curiosity; Joined together by a Modern Writer. As
if the Deity were but a Mormo or Bugbear, raised up by men's Fear, in the
Darkness of their Ignorance of Causes. The Opinion of other Ghosts and Spirits
also, deduced from the same Original. Men's taking things Casual for
Prognostics, and being so addicted to Omens, Portents, Prophecies, etc. From a
Fantastic and Timorous Supposition, That the things of the World are not
disposed of by Nature, but by some Understanding Person. Page 655 But lest
these Two Accounts of the Phenomenon of Religion, should prove Insufficient;
the Atheists superadde a Third, Imputing it also to the Fiction and Imposture
of Civil Sovereigns; who perceiving an advantage to be made from hence, for
the better keeping men in Subjection, have thereupon Dexterously laid hold of
men's Fear and Ignorance; and Cherished those Seeds of Religion in them, from
the Infirmities of their Nature: Confirming their Belief of Ghosts and Spirits,
Miracles, Prodigies, and Oracles, by Tales, publicly Allowed and Recommended.
And that Religion might be every way Obsequious to their Designs; have
persuaded the People, that Themselves were but the Interpreters of the Gods,
from whom they Received their Laws. Religion an Engine of State; to keep men
busily Employed; Entertain their Minds; render them Tame and Gentle, apt for
Subjection and Society. Page 655, 656 All this not the Invention of Modern
Atheists. But an Old Atheistick Cabbal; That the Gods made by Fear. Lucretius;
That the Causes of Religion, Terror of Mind and Darkness: and that the Empire
of the Gods owes all its Being to men's Ignorance of Causes, as also, that the
Opinion of Ghosts proceeded from men's not knowing how to distinguish their
Dreams, and other Frightfull Phancies, from Sensations. Page 656, 657 An Old
Atheistick Surmize also; That Religion a Political Invention. Thus Cicero. The
Atheists in Plato, That the Gods are not by Nature, but by Art and Laws only.
Critias, one of the Thirty Tyrants of Athens, his Poem to this purpose. Page
657, 658 That the Folly and Falsness of these Three Atheistick Pretenses, for
the Origin of Religion, will be fully Manifested. First, As to that of Fear and
Fancy. Such an Excess of Fear, as makes any one constantly Believe the
Existence of that, for which no manner of Ground, neither in Sense nor Reason,
highly tending also to his own Disquiet; Nothing less then Distraction.
Wherefore, the generality of mankind here affirmed by Atheists, to be Frighted
out of their Wits, and Disstempered in their brains; only a few of themselves,
who have escaped this Panick Terror, remaining Sober or in their Right Senses.
The Sobriety of Atheists, nothing but Dull Stupidity, and Dead Incredulity;
they Believing only what they can See or Feel. Page 658 True, That there is a
Religious Fear, Consequent upon the Belief of a God; as also that the Sense of
a Deity, is often awakened in men's Minds, by their Fears and Dangers. But
Religion no Creature of Fear. None less Solicitous about their Good and Evil
Fortune, then the Pious and Virtuous, who place not their Chief Happiness in
things Aliene, but only in the Right Use of their own Will. Whereas the Good
of Atheists, wholly in things Obnoxious to Fortune. The Timorous Complexion of
Atheists; from building all their Politics and Justice upon the Foundation of
Fear. Page 658, 659 The Atheists Grand Error here; That the Deity, according
to the general Sense of Mankind, Nothing but a Terriculum, a Formidable,
Hurtful and Undesirable thing. Whereas men every where agree, in that Divine
Attribute of Goodness and Benignity. ibid. (...), in the worst Sense, taken by
none but a few Ill-natured Men; painting out the Deity according to their own
Likeness. This condemned by Aristotle in the Poets, (he calling them therefore
Liars) by Plutarch in Herodotus, as spoken Universally; Plutarch himself
restraining the Sense thereof to his Evil Principle. Plato's ascribing the
World to the Divine Goodness: who therefore made all things most like Himself.
The true meaning of this Proverb; That the Deity affects to Humble and Abase
the Pride of men. Lucretius his Hidden Force, that has as it were a Spite to
all Overswelling Greatnesses; could be no other then the Deity. Those amongst
Christians, who make the worst Representation of God, yet Phansy him Kind and
Gracious to Themselves. Page 659, 660 True, that Religion often expressed by
the Fear of God. Fear, Prima Mensura Deitatis, the First Impression that
Religion makes upon men in this Lapsed State. But this not a Fear of God, as
Mischievous and Hurtful, nor yet as a mere Arbitrary Being, but as Just, and
an Impartial Punisher of Wickedness. Lucretius his acknowledging, men's Fear of
God to be conjoined with a Conscience of Duty. A Natural Discrimination of
Good and Evil, with a Sense of an Impartial Justice, presiding over the
World, and both Rewarding and Punishing. The Fear of God, as either a Hurtful,
or Arbitrary and Tyrannical Being, (which must needs be joined with something
of Hatred) not Religion, but Superstition. Fear, Faith, and Love; Three Steps
and Degrees of Religion, to the Son of Sirach. Faith better Defined in
Scripture, then by any Scholasticks. God such a Being, as if he were not,
Nothing more to be Wished for. Page 660, 661 The Reason why Atheists thus
mistake the Notion of God, as a Thing only to be Feared, and consequently
Hated; from their own Ill Nature and Vice. The latter disposing them so much to
think, that there is no Difference of Good and Evil by Nature, but only by
Law; which Law Contrary to Nature, as Restraint to Liberty. Hence their denying
all Natural Charity, and Acknowledging no Benevolence, or Good Will, but what
arises from Imbecility, Indigency, and Fear. Their Friendship at best no
other, then Mercatura Utilitatum. Wherefore if there were an Omnipotent Deity,
this (according to the Atheistick Hypothesis) could not have so much, as that
Spurious Love or Benevolence to any thing, because standing in Need of Nothing,
and Devoid of Fear. Thus Cotta in Cicero. All this asserted also, by a late
Pretender to Politics; He adding thereunto, that God has no other Right of
Commanding, then his Irresistible Power: nor men any Obligation to obey him,
but only from their Imbecility and Fear, or because they cannot Resist him.
Thus do Atheists Transform the Deity into a Monstrous Shape; an Omnipotent
Being that has neither Benevolence nor Justice in him. This indeed a Mormo or
Bugbear. Page 661, 662 But as this a false Representation of Theism; so the
Atheistick Scene of things, most Uncomfortable, Hopeless, and Dismal; upon
several Accounts. True, that no Spightfull Designs in Senseless Atoms; in which
Regard, Plutarch Preferred, even this Atheistick Hypothesis, before that of an
Omnipotent Mischievous Being. However, no Faith, nor Hope neither, in Senseless
Atoms. Epicurus his Confession, that it was better to believe the Fable of the
Gods, then that Material Necessity of all things, asserted by the other
Atheistick Physiologers, before himself. But he not at all mending the Matter,
by his supposed Free Will. The Panick Fear of the Epicureans, of the Frame of
Heaven's Cracking, and this Compilement of Atoms being dissolved into a Chaos.
Atheists running from Fear, plunge themselves into Fear. Atheism, rather then
Theism, from the Imposture of Fear, Distrust, and Disbelief of Good. But Vice
afterward prevailing in them, makes them Desire, there should be No God. Page
663, 664 Thus the Atheists, who derive the Origin of Religion from Fear, First
put an Affrightfull Vizard upon the Deity, and then conclude it to be but a
Mormo or Bugbear, the Creature of Fear and Fancy. More likely of the Two, that
the Opinion of a God, sprung from Hope of Good, then Fear of Evil, but neither
of these True, it owing its Being to the Imposture of no Passion, but supported
by the Strongest and clearest Reason. Nevertheless a Natural Prolepsis, or
Anticipation of a God also, in men's Minds, Preventing Reason. This called by
Plato and Aristotle, a Vaticination. Page 664, 665 The Second Atheistick
Pretense, to salve the Phenomenon of Religion, from the Ignorance of Causes,
and men's innate ^uriosity, (Upon which Account the Deity said by them, to be
nothing but an Asylum of Ignorance, or the Sanctuary of Fools,) next to be
Confuted. Page 665 That the Atheists, both Modern and Ancient, here commonly
Complicate these Two together, Fear, and Ignorance of Causes; making Theism the
Spawn of both: as the Fear of Children in the Dark, raises Bugbears and
Specter. Epicurus his Reason, why he took such great pains in the Study of
Physiology; that by finding out the Natural Causes of things, he might free
men from the Terror of a God, that would otherwise Assault their Minds. ibid.
The Atheists thus Dabbling in Physiology, and finding out Material Causes for
some of those Phenomenon, which the unskilful Vulgar salve only from a Deity;
therefore Confident, that Religion had no other Original, then this Ignorance
of Causes: as also, that Nature, or Matter, does all things alone without a
God. But we shall make it manifest, That Philosophy and the True Knowledge of
Causes Lead to a Deity; and that Atheism; from Ignorance of Causes, and want of
Philosophy. Page 665, 666 For First, No Atheist, who derives all from Senseless
Matter, can possibly assign any Cause of Himself, his own Soul or Mind: it
being Impossible, that Life and Sense should be Naturally produced, from what
Dead and Senseless; or from Magnitudes, Figures, Sites, and Motions. An
Atheistick Objection, nothing to the purpose; That Laughing and Crying things
are made out of Not-Laughing and Crying Principles: because these result from
the Mechanism of the Body. The Hylozoists never able neither, to produce Animal
Sense, and Consciousness, out of what Senseless and Inconscious. The Atheists,
supposing their own Life and Understanding, and all the Wisdom that is in the
World, to have sprung, merely from Senseless Matter, and Fortuitous Motion;
Grossly Ignorant of Causes. The Philosophy of Our Selves, and True Knowledge
of the Cause of our own Soul and Mind, brings to God. Page 666, 667 Again,
Atheists Ignorant of the Cause of Motion, by which they suppose all things
done: this Phenomenon being no way Salvable, according to their Principles.
First, undeniably certain, That Motion not Essential to all Body or Matter as
such, because then there could have been no Mundane System, no Sun, Moon,
Earth, etc. All things being continually Torn in Pieces, and Nothing Cohering.
Certain also, That Dead and Senseless Matter* such as that of Anaximander,
Democ^itus, and Epicurus, cannot Move it self Spontaneously, by Will or
Appetite. The Hylozoists further considered elsewhere. Democritus could assign
no other Cause of Motion, then this, That one Body moved another from Eternity
Infinitely; without any First Cause or Mover. Thus also a Modern Writer. To
Assert an Infinite Progress in the Causes of Motion, according to Aristotle, to
assign no Cause thereof at all. Epicurus, though an Exploder of Qualities,
forced here to fly to an Occult Quality, of Gravity. Which, as Absurd in
Infinite Space, and without any Center of Rest; so indeed nothing but to make
his own Ignorance, and He Knows not Why, to be a Cause. The Motion of Body,
from the Activity of something Incorporeal. Though Motion taken for
Translation, be a Mode of Matter; yet as it is taken for the Vis Movens, a
Mode, or Energy, of Something that is Incorporeal, and Self-Active. The Motion
of the whole Corporeal Universe, Originally from the Deity. Thus the Ignorance
of the Cause of Motion, another Ground of Atheism. Page 667 669 Thirdly, The
Atheists also Ignorant of the Cause of that Grand Phenomenon, the (...), the
Regular and Artificial Frame of the Mundane System, and of the Bodies of
Animals; together with the Harmony of all. They who boast they can give Causes
of all things, without a God, able to give no Cause of this, but only, that it
Happened by Chance so to be. This, either to make the Absence of a Cause, a
Cause; ( Chance being but the Absence of an Intending Cause) or their Own very
Ignorance of the Cause, and They Know not Why, to be a Cause; or to make One
Contrary, the Cause of Another; (Confusion of Order and Harmony, Chance of Art
and Skill,) or Lastly, to deny it to have any Cause at all, since they deny an
Intending Cause. Page 669 But here the Atheists make several Preten^es, for
this their Ignorance. First, That the World is not so Well Made, but that it
might have been much Better; and many Flaws to be found therein: whereas a God,
or Perfect Being would have Bungled in Nothing, but have made all things after
the Best manner. But this a Twelfth Ath^istick Argumentation, and the
Confutation thereof to be expected afterward. Reasons why some Modern Theists
give Atheists so much advantage here* as to acknowledge Things be Ill Made;
whilst the Ancient Pagan Theists stood their Ground, and generously maintained,
that Mind being the Maker of all things, and not Blind Fortune or Chance, nor
Arbitrary Will, and Irrational Humane Omnipotent; the (...), That which is
Absolutely the B^st, in order to the Good of the Whole, (so far as the
Necessity of things would admit) the Measure and Rule of Nature, and
Providence. Page 669, 670 Again, the Atomick and Epicurean Atheists Pretend,
That though many things serve for Uses, yet it does not therefore fol^ow, that
they were made Intentionally for those Uses; because things that Happen by
Chance, may have Uses Consequent. Thus Lucretius, and the old Atheistick
Philosophers before Aristotle, of the Parts of the Bodies of Animals, and all
other things. The Answer, That when things consist of many Parts, all
Artificially Proportioned together, with much Curiosity, as for example the
Eye; no man who considers the Anatomy thereof, and its whole Structure, can
reasonably conclude, that it Happened so to be made; and the Use of Seeing
Followed: but that it was made Intentionally for the Use of Seeing. But to
maintain, that not only Eyes Happened to be so made, and the Use of Seeing
Followed, but also Ears, and a Mouth, and Feet, and Hands, and all the other
parts Organical and Similar, (without any of which, the Whole would be Inept or
Useless) all their several Uses, Vn-Intended, following; Gross Insensibility,
and Stupidity. Galen of the Use of Parts. Page 671, 672 Democritus his Dotages;
Countenanced also by Cartesius His Book of Meteors, (first written with design
to Salve all those Phenomenon without a God,) but Vnsuccessfully. Nevertheless
we acknowledge, That God and Nature do all things in the most Frugal and
Compendious way; and that the Mechanic Powers are taken in, so far as they
will serviceably comply with the Intellectual Platform. But Nature not
Mechanical and Fortuitous only, but also Vital and Artificial; the Archeus of
the whole World. ibid. Again, Atheists further Pretend, That though it may well
seem strange, that Matter Fortuitously Moved, should, at the very First, fall
into such a Regularity and Harmony, as is now in the World; yet not at all
strange, that Atoms, moving from all Eternity, and making all manner of
Combinations and Contextur^s, and trying all Experiments, should after
innumerable other Inept, and Discongruous Forms, at length fall into such a
System as This. They say therefore, That the Earth, at first, brought forth
diverse Monstrous and Irregular Shapes of Animals; some wanting Feet, some
Hands, some without a Mouth, etc. to which the Ancients added Centaurs,
Scylla's, and Chimaera's; mixtly Boviform, and Hominiform Animals. Though
Epicurus, ashamed to own these, would seem to exclude them, but without Reason.
But because we have now no such Irregular Shapes Produced out of the Earth,
they say that the Reason is, because none could Continue and Propagate their
kind by Generation, but only such as Happened to be fitly made. Thus Epicurus,
and the Atheists before Aristotle. They also add hereunto, their Infinite
Worlds; amongst which they Pretend, not one of a Thousand, or of Ten thousand,
has so much Regularity in it as this of ours. Lastly, they Presage likewise,
that this World of ours shall not always continue such, but after a while fall
into Confusion and Disorder again; and then may we have Centaurs, Scylla's, and
Chimaera's as before. Page 672, 674 Nevertheless, because this Universal and
Constant Regularity of things, for so many Ages together, is so Puzzling; they
would persuade us, that the Senseless Atoms, Playing and Toying up and down,
from Eternity, without any Care or Thought; were at length Taught, by the
Necessity of things, and driven to a kind of Trade or Habit of Artificialness
and Methodicalness. Page 674, 675 To all which Atheistick Pretenses Replied.
First, That this an Idle Dream, or Impudent Forgery, That there was once an
Inept Mundane System; and in this World of ours all manner of Irregular Shapes
of Animals: not only because no Tradition of any such thing; but also because
no Reason possibly to be given, why such should not be Produced out of the
Earth still, though they could not Continue long. That also Another Atheistick
Dream, That in this World of ours, all will quickly fall into Confusion and
Nonsense again. And as their Infinite Worlds, an Impossibility, so their
Assertion of the Irregularity of the supposed other Worlds, well enough
Answered, by a Contrary Assertion; That were every Planet a Habitable Earth,
and every Fixed Star, a Sun, having all more or fewer such Habitable Planets
moving round about them, and none of them Desert or Un-inhabited; there would
not be found so much as one Ridiculous or Inept System amongst them all; the
Divine Act being Infinite. Page 675 Again, That the Fortuitous Motions of
Senseless Atoms, should in length of Time grow Artificial, and contract a Habit
or Trade of Acting as Regularly, as if directed by perfect Art and Wisdom;
This Atheistick Fanaticism. Page 675, 676 No more Possible, That Dead and
Senseless Matter, Fortuitously Moved, should at length be Taught, and
Necessitated by it self, to produce this Artificial System of the World; then
that a dozen or more Persons, unskilled in Music, and striking the Strings as
it Happened, should at length be Taught, and Necessitated to fall into
Exquisite Harmony; Or that the Letters in the Writings of Plato and Aristotle,
though having so much Philosophic Sense, should have been all Scribbled at
random. More Philosophy in the Great Volume of the World, then in all
Aristotle's and Plato's Works; and more of Harmony, then in any Artificial
Composition of Vocal Music. That the Divine Art and Wisdom, has printed
such a Signature of it self upon the Matter of the Whole World, as Fortune and
Chance could never Counterfeit. Page 676, 677 But in the next place, the
Atheists will for all this undertake to Demonstrate, That things could not
Possibly be made by any Intending Cause, for Ends and Uses; as Eyes for Seeing,
Ears for Hearing; from hence, Because things were all in Order of Time, as well
as Nature, before their Uses. This Argument seriously propounded by Lucretius
in this manner; If Eyes were made for the Use of Seeing, then, of necessity,
must Seeing have been before Eyes; But there was no Seeing before Eyes;
Therefore could not Eyes be made for the sake of Seeing. Page 677, 678 Evident,
that the Logic of these Atheists, differs from that of all other Mortals;
according to which, the End for which any thing is designedly made, is only in
Intention First, but in Execution Last. True, that Men are Commonly excited,
from Experience of things, and Sense of their Wants, to Excogitate Means and
Remedies: but it does not therefore follow, that the Maker of the World could
not have a Preventive Knowledge of whatsoever would be Useful for Animals, and
so make them Bodies Intentionally for those Uses. That Argument ought to be
thus framed: Whatsoever is made Intentionally for any End, as the Eye for that
of Seeing; that End must needs be in the Knowledge and Intention of the Maker,
before the Actual Existence of that which is made for it; But there could be no
Knowledge of Seeing before there were Eyes; Therefore Eyes could not be made
Intentionally for the sake of Seeing. Page 678 This the True Scope of the
Premised Atheistick Argument, however disguised by them in the first
Propounding. The Ground thereof, Because they take it for granted, That all
Knowledge is derived from Sense, or from the Things Known, Pre-Existing without
the Knower. And here does Lucretius Triumph. The Controversy therefore at last
resolved into this; Whether all Knowledge be in its own Nature, Junior to
Things; for if so, it must be Granted, that the World could not be Made by any
Antecedent Knowledge. But this afterward fully Confuted; and Proved, That
Knowledge is not, in its own Nature, Ectypall, but Archetypall; and that
Knowledge was Older then the World, and the Maker thereof. Page 679 But
Atheists will Except against the Proving of a God, from the Regular and
Artificial frame of things; That it is unreasonable to think, there should be
no Cause in Nature, for the Common Phenomenon thereof; but a God thus
Introduced to salve them. Which also, to suppose the world Bungled and Botcht
up. That Nature is the Cause of Natural things, Which Nature does not Intend,
nor Act for Ends. Wherefore the Opinion of Final Causality for things in
Nature, but an Idolum Specus. Therefore rightly banished, by Democritus, out of
Physiology. Page 679, 680 The Answer: Two Extremes here to be avoided, One of
the Atomick Atheists, who derive all things from the Fortuitous Motion of
Senseless Matter; Another of Bigoticall Religionists, who will have God to do
all things Himself Immediately, without any Nature. The Middle betwixt both,
That there is not only a Mechanical and Fortuitous, but also an Artificial
Nature, Subservient to the Deity, as the Manuary Opificer, and Drudging
Executioner thereof. True, that some Philosophers have absurdly attributed
their own Properties or Animal Idiopathies to Inanimate Bodies. Nevertheless,
this no Idol of the Cave or Den, to suppose the System of the World to have
been framed by an Understanding Being, according to whose Direction, Nature,
though not it self Intending, Acts. Balbus his Description of this
Artificial Nature in Cicero. That there could be no Mind in us, were there
none in the Universe. That of Aristotle True, That there is more of Art in some
things of Nature, then in any thing Made by Men. Now the Causes of Artificial
things, as a House or Clock, cannot be declared, without Intention for Ends.
This Excellently pursued by Aristotle. No more can the Things of Nature be
rightly Understood, or the Causes of them fully Assigned, merely from Matter
and Motion, without Intention or Mind. They who banish Final or Mental
Causality from Philosophy, look upon the Things of Nature, with no other Eyes
then Oxen and Horses. Some pitiful Attempts of the Ancient Atheists, to salve
the Phenomenon of Animals, without Mental Causality. Democritus and Epicurus
so cautious, as never to pretend, to give an Account of the Formation of the
Foetus. Aristotle's Judgment here to be Preferred before that of Democritus.
Page 680, 683 But nothing more Strange, then that these Atheists should be
justified in this their Ignorance, by Professed Theists and Christians; who
Atomizing likewise, in their Physiology, contend that this whole Mundane
System, resulted only from the Necessary and Unguided Motion of Matter, either
Turned Round in a Vortex, or Jumbled in a Chaos, without the Direction of any
Mind. These Mechanic Theists more Immodest then the Atomick Atheists
themselves; they supposing these their Atoms, though Fortuitously moved, yet
never to have produced any Inept System, or Incongruous Forms; but from the
very first, all along, to have Ranged themselves so Orderly, as that they could
not have done it better, had they been directed by a Perfect Mind. They quite
take away that Argument for a God, from the Phenomenon, and that Artificial
Frame of things, leaving only some Metaphysicall Arguments; which though never
so good, yet by reason of their Subtlety, cannot do so much Execution. The
Atheists Gratified to see the Cause of Theism thus betrayed, by its professed
Friends; and the Grand Argument for the same, totally Slurred by them. Page
683, 684 As this, Great Insensibility of Mind, to look upon the Things of
Nature with no other Eyes then Brute Animals do; so are there Sundry
Phenomenon, partly Above the Mechanic Powers, and partly Contrary to the same,
which therefore can never be Salved, without Mental and Final Causality. As
in Animals, the Motion of the Diaphragma in Respiration; the Systole and
Diastole of the Heart (Being a Muscular Constriction and Relaxation) To which
might be added others in the Macrocosm: as the Intersection of the Planes of
the Equator and Ecliptic; or the Earth's Diurnall Motion upon an Axis not
Parallel with that of its Annual. Cartesius his Confession, that according to
Mechanic Principles, these should continually come nearer and nearer together;
which since they have not done, Final or Mental Causality here to be
acknowledged; and because it was Best it should be so. But the Greatest
Phenomenon of this kind, the Formation and Organization of Animals; which
these Mechanists never able to give any Account of. Of that Posthumous Piece of
Cartesius, De la Formation Du Foetus. Page 684, 685 Pretended, That to assign
Final Causes, is to presume our selves to be as Wise as God Almighty, or to be
Privy to his Counsels. But the Question, not Whether we can always reach to
the Ends of God Almighty, or know what is Absolutely Best in every Case, and
accordingly Conclude things therefore to be so; but Whether any thing in the
World be made for Ends, otherwise then would have resulted from the Fortuitous
Motion of Matter. No Presumption, nor Intrusion into the Secrets of God
Almighty, to say, that Eyes were made by him Intentionally for the sake of
Seeing. Anaxagoras his Absurd Aphorism, That Man was therefore the most Solert
of all Animals, because he Chanced to have Hands. Far more Reasonable to think,
(as Aristotle concludes) That because Man was the wisest of all Animals,
therefore he had Hands given him. More proper to give Pipes, to one that has
Musical skill, then upon him that has Pipes, to bestow Musical skill. Page
685 In the Last place, The Mechanic Theists Pretend, and that with some more
plausibility, That it is below the Dignity of God Almighty, to perform all
those Mean and Trivial Offices of Nature, Himself Immediately. This Answered
again; That though the Divine Wisdom, it Self Contrived the System of the
whole, for Ends; yet is there an Artificial Nature under him, as his Inferior
Minister and Executioner. Proclus his Description hereof. This Nature to
Proclus, a God or Goddess; but only as the Bodies of the Animated Stars were
called Gods, because the Statues of the Gods. Page 685, 686 That we cannot
otherwise Conclude, concerning these Mechanic Theists, who derive all things
in the Mundane System, from the Necessary Motions of Senseless Matter, without
the Direction of any Mind or God; but that they are Imperfect Theists, or have
a certain Tang of the Atheistick Enthusiasm, (the Spirit of Infidelity) hanging
about them. Page 687 But these Mechanic Theists Counterbalanc'd by another
sort of Atheists, not Fortuitous nor Mechanical; namely the Hylozoists; who
acknowledge the works of Nature to be the works of Understanding, and deride
Democritus his Rough and Hooky Atoms, devoid of Life; they attributing Life to
all Matter as such, and concluding the Vulgar Notion of a God, to be but an
Inadequate Conception of Matter, its Energetick Nature being taken alone by it
self as a Complete Substance. These Hylozoists, never able to satisfy that
Phenomenon, of the One Agreeing and Conspiring Harmony throughout the whole
Universe: every Atom of Matter, according to them, being a Distinct Percipient;
and these Unable to confer Notions with One another. Page 687 Nor can the other
Cosmo-Plastick Atheists (to whom the whole World, but one Huge Plant or
Vegetable, Endued with a Spermatick, Artificial Nature, Orderly disposing the
whole, without Sense or Understanding,) do any thing toward the Salving of
This, or any other Phenomenon: it being Impossible, That there should be any
such Regular Nature, otherwise then as Derived from, and Depending on, a
Perfect Mind. ibid. Besides these Three Phenomenon, of Cogitation, Motion, and
the Artificial Frame of things, with the Conspiring Harmony of the Whole, (no
way Salvable by Atheists) Here further Added, That those who asserted the
Novity of the World, could not possibly give an Account neither, of the First
Beginning of Men, and other Animals, not now Generated out of Putrefaction.
Aristotle sometimes doubtful and staggering concerning the World's Eternity.
Men and all other Animals not produced at first by Chance, either as Worms out
of Putrefaction, or out of Eggs, or Wombs, growing out of the Earth; Because no
Reason to be given, why Chance should not as well produce the same out of the
Earth still. Epicurus his vain Pretense, that the Earth, as a Childbearing
Woman, was now grown Effete and Barren. Moreover, Men and Animals, whether
first Generated out of Putrefaction, or excluded out of Wombs or Egge-shells,
supposed by these Atheists themselves, to have been produced in a Tender,
Infant-like State, so that they could neither supply themselves with
nourishment, nor defend themselves from harms. A Dream of Epicurus, That the
Earth sent forth streams of Milk after those her Newborn Infants and
Nurslings; Confuted by Critolaus in Philo. Another Precarious Supposition or
Figment of Epicurus; That then no immoderate Heats nor Colds, nor any
blustering Winds. Anaximander's way of Salving this Difficulty; That Men were
first generated and nourished in the bellies of Fishes, till able to shift for
themselves; and then disgorged upon dry land. Atheists swallow any thing,
rather then a God. Page 688, 689 Wherefore here being Dignus Vindice Nodus, a
(...), Reasonably introduced, in the Mosaic Cabbala, to solve the same. It
appearing, from all Circumstances put together, that this whole Phenomenon
surpasses, not only the Mechanic, but also the Plastic Powers; there being
much of Discretion therein. However, not denied, but that the Ministry of
Spirits (Created before Man, and other Terrestrial Animals) might be here made
use of. As in Plato, after the Creation of Immortal Souls, by the Supreme God,
the Framing of Mortal Bodies is committed to Junior Gods. Page 689, 690
Furthermore, Atheists no more able to Salve that ordinary Phenomenon, of the
Conservation of Species, by the Difference of Sexes, and a due Proportion of
Number, kept up between Males and Females. Here a Providence also, Superior,
as well to the Plastic, as Mechanic Nature. ibid. Lastly, Other Phenomenon,
as Real, though not Physical; which Atheists cannot possibly Salve, and
therefore do commonly Deny; as of Natural Justice or Honesty, and Obligation;
the Foundation of Politics, and the Mathematics of Religion. And of Liberty
of Will, not only That of Fortuitous Self-determination, when an equal
Eligibility of Objects; but also That which makes men deserve Commendation and
Blame. These not commonly distinguished, as they Ought. Epicurus his endeavor
to Salve Liberty of Will, from Atoms Declining Uncertainly from the
Perpendicular, mere Madness and Frenzy. Page 690, 691 And now have we already
Preventively Confuted the Third Atheistick Pretense, to Salve the Phenomenon
of Theism, from the Fiction and Imposture of Politicians; we having proved,
That Philosophy, and the true Knowledge of Causes, infer the Existence of a
God. Nevertheless this to be here further Answered. Page 691 That Statesmen
and Politicians could not have made such use of Religion, as sometimes they
have done, had it been a mere Cheat and Figment of their own. Civil Sovereigns
in all the distant places of the World, could not have so universally
conspired, in this one Piece of State-craft or Cozenage: nor yet have been
able, to possess the Minds of men everywhere with such a constant Awe and
Dread of an Invisible Nothing. The World would long since have discovered this
Cheat, and suspected a Plot upon their Liberty, in the Fiction of a God; at
least Governors themselves would have understood it; many of which
notwithstanding as much awed with the Fear of this Invisibl^ Nothing, as any
Others. Other Cheats and Juggles, when once Detected no longer Practiced. But
Religion now as much in Credit as ever, though so long since Decried by
Atheists, for a Political Cheat. That Christianity, a Religion Founded in no
Humane Policy, prevailed over the Craft and Power of all Civil Sovereigns, and
Conquered the Persecuting World, by suffering Deaths and Martyrdoms. This
Presignified by the Prophetic Spirit. Page 691, 692 Had the Idea of God, been
an Arbitrarious Figment, not conceivable, h^w men should have universally
agreed in the same, and the Attributes belonging thereunto: (This Argument used
by Sextus:) Nor that Civil Sovereigns themselves should so universally have
Jumped in it. Page 692, 693 Furthermore; Not Conceivable, how this Thought or
Idea of a God should have been Formed by any, had it been the Idea of Nothing.
The Superficialness of Atheists, in Pretending, that Politicians, by telling
men of Such a thing, put the Idea into their Minds. No Notions, or Idea's, put
into men's minds by Words, but only the Phantasms of the Sounds. Though all
Learning be not Remembrance; yet is all Humane Teaching, but Maieutical or
Obstetricious; not the Filling of the Soul as a Vessel, by Pouring into it from
without; but the Kindling of it from within. Words signify nothing, to him
that cannot raise up within himself the Notions, or Idea's, correspondent to
them. However, the Difficulty still remains; How Statesmen themselves, or the
first Inventer of this Cheat, could have framed any Notion at all of a
Nonentity. Page 693, 694 Here the Atheists Pretend, That there is a Feigning
Power in the Soul, whereby it can make Idea's and Conceptions of Non-Entities;
as of a Golden Mountain, or a Centaur: and that by this, an Idea of God might
be framed, though there be no such Thing. Answer; That all the Feigning Power
of the Soul, consists only in Compounding Idea's of things, that Really
Exist Apart, but not in that Conjunction. The Mind cannot make any New
Conceptive Cogitation, which was not Before; as the Painter or Limner cannot
Feign Colors. Moreover the whole of these Fictitious Idea's, though it have no
Actual, yet has it a Possible Entity. The Deity it Self, though it could
Create a World out of Nothing, yet can it not Create more Cogitation or
Conception, then Is, or was always contained in its own Mind from Eternity; nor
frame a Positive Idea of that, which has no Possible Entity. Page 694, 695 The
Idea of God, no Compilement or Aggregation of things, that Exist Severally,
apart in the World; because then it would be a mere Arbitrarious thing, and
what Every one Pleased; the contrary whereunto has been before manifested.
Page 695 Again; Some Attributes of the Deity, nowhere else to be found in the
whole World; and therefore must be Absolute Non-Entities, were there no God.
Here the Painter must Feign Colors, and Create New Cogitation, out of Nothing.
ibid. Lastly; Upon Supposition, That there is no God, it is Impossible not
only, that there should be any for the Future, but also, that there should
ever have been any; whereas all Fictitious Idea's must have a Possible Entity,
since otherwise they would be Unconceivable, and No Idea's. ibid. Wherefore
some Atheists will further Pretend; That besides this Power of Compounding
things together, the Soul has another Ampliating, or Amplifying Power; by both
which together, though there be no God Existing, nor yet Possible; the Idea of
him might be Fictitiously Made: those Attributes which are nowhere else to be
found, arising by way of Amplification or Augmentation of Something found in
Men. Page 695, 696 Answer; First, That according to the Principles of these
Atheists, that all our Conceptions are nothing but Passions from Objects
without; there cannot Possibly be any such Amplifying Power in the Soul,
whereby it could make More then Is. Thus Protagoras in Plato; No man can
Conceive any thing, but what he suffers. Here also, (as Sextus Intimates,) the
Atheists guilty of that Fallacy, called a Circle or Diallelus. For having First
undiscernedly made the Idea of Imperfection, from Perfection; they then go
about again, to make the Idea of Perfection, out of Imperfection. That men have
a Notion of Perfection, by which, as a Rule, they Judge things to be Imperfect;
Evident from that Direction given by all Theologers, To Conceive of God, in way
of Remotion or Abstraction of all Imperfection. Lastly, Finite Things added
together, can never make up Infinite; as more and more Time backward, can never
reach to Eternity without Beginning. God differs from Imperfect things, not in
Degree, but Kind. As for Infinite Space, said to consist of Parts Finite; we
certain of no more then this, that the Finite World might have been made Bigger
and Bigger Infinitely; for which very Cause, it could never be Actually
Infinite. Gassendus his Objection, That the Idea of an Infinite God, might as
well be Feigned, as that of Infinite Worlds. But Infinite Worlds, are but Words
or Notions ill Put together, or Combined; Infinity being a Real Thing in
Nature, but Misapplied, it being Proper only to the Deity. Page 696, 697 The
Conclusion; That since the Soul can neither Make the Idea of Infinite, by
Amplification of Finite; nor Feign or Create any New Cogitation, which was not
before; nor make a Positive Idea, of a Nonentity; certain, that the Idea of
God, no Fictitious Thing. Page 697 Further made Evident, That Religion not the
Figment of Civil Sovereigns. Obligation in Conscience, the Foundation of all
Civil Right and Authority. Covenants without this, Nothing but Words and
Breath. Obligation, not from Laws neither; but before them; or otherwise they
could not Oblige. Lastly, This derived, not from Utility neither. Were
Obligation to Civil Obedience Made by men's Private Utility, then could it be
Dissolved by the Same. Wherefore if Religion, a Fiction or Imposture; Civil
Sovereignty must needs be so too. Page 697, 698 Had Religion been a Fiction of
Politicians, they would then have made it every way Pliable, and Flexible;
since otherwise it would not Serve their Turn, nor consist with their Infinite
Right. Page 698 But Religion in its own Nature, a Stiff, Inflexible thing, as
also Justice, it being not Factitious, or Made by Will. There may therefore be
a Contradiction, betwixt the Laws of God, and of Men; and in this case does
Religion conclude, That God ought to be Obeyed, rather then Men. For this
Cause, Atheistick Politicians of Latter times, declare against Religion as
Inconsistent with Civil Sovereignty; It destroying Infinite Right, Introducing
Private Judgment, or Conscience, and a Fear Greater then that of the Leviathan;
to wit, of him who can Inflict Eternal Punishments. Senseless Matter the
Atheists Natural God; the Leviathan or Civil Sovereign, his Artificial One.
Religion thus disowned and disclaimed by Politicians, as Inconsistent with
Civil Power, could not be the Creature of Political Art. Thus all the Three
Atheistick Pretenses, to Salve the Phenomenon of Religion; from Fear,
Ignorance of Causes, and Fiction of Politicians; fully Confuted. Page 698, 700
But because, besides those Ordinary Phenomenon, before mentioned, there are
certain other Extraordinary ones, that cannot be Salved by Atheists, which
therefore they will impute, Partly to Men's Fear and Ignorance, and Partly to
the Fiction and Imposture of Civil Governors, (viz. Apparitions, Miracles, and
Prophecies;) the Reality of these, here also to be briefly Vindicated. Page 700
First, as for Apparitions; Though much of Fabulosity in these Relations, yet
unquestionably something of Truth. Atheists imputing these things to men's
mistaking their Dreams and Phancies for Sensations, Contradict their own
Fundamental Principle, That Sense is the only Criterion of Truth; as also
Derogate more from Humane Testimony, then they ought. ibid. That some Atheists
Sensible hereof, have acknowledged the Reality of Apparitions, concluding them
nevertheless to be the Mere Creatures of Imagination; as if a Strong Fancy
could produce Real Substances, or Objects of Sense. The Fanaticism of Atheists,
who will rather Believe the greatest Impossibilities, then endanger the Being
of a God. Invisible Ghosts Permanent, easily introduce One Supreme Ghost of the
whole World. Page 700, 701 Democritus yet further Convinced; That there were
Invisible Beings Superior to Men, Independent upon Imagination, and Permanent;
(called by him Idols) but having nothing Immortal in them; and therefore that a
God could be no more proved from the Existence of them, then of Men. Granted by
him, that there were, not only Terrestrial, but also Aerial and Aetherial
Animals; and that all those Vast Regions of the Universe above, were not Desert
and Uninhabited. Here something of the Fathers, asserting Angels to have
Bodies: but more afterward. Page 701, 702 To this Phenomenon of Apparitions,
may be added those Two others, of Witches and Demoniacks; both of these
proving, That Spirits are not Phancies, nor Inhabitants of men's Brains only,
but of the World: as also, That there are some Impure Spirits, a Confirmation
of the Truth of Christianity. The Confident Exploders of Witchcraft, suspicable
for Atheism. As for Demoniacks or Energumeni, certain from Josephus, That the
Jews did not take these Demons or Devils, for Bodily Diseases; but Real
Substances, possessing the Bodies of Men. Nor probable, that they supposed, as
the Gnostics afterward, all Diseases to be the Infestation of Evil Spirits;
nor yet, (as some think) all Demoniacks to be Madmen. But when there were any
Unusual and Extraordinary Symptoms, in any Bodily Distemper, but especially
that of Madness, they supposing this to be Supernatural, imputed it to the
Infestation of some Devil. Thus also the Greeks. Page 702, 704 That Demoniacks
and Energumeni, are a Real Phenomenon; and that there are such also in these
Times of ours, Asserted by Fernelius and Sennertus. Such Maniacal Persons, as
not only discover Secrets, but also speak Languages, which they had never
learnt, Unquestionably Demoniacks or Energumeni. That there have been such in
the Times since our Savior, proved out of Psellus; as also from Fernelius.
This for the Vindication of Christianity, against those who suspect the
Scripture- Demoniacks for Figments. Page 704, 706 The Second Extraordinary
Phenomenon Proposed; That of Miracles, and Effects Supernatural. That there
have been such things amongst the Pagans, and since the Times of Christianity
too; Evident from their Records. But more Instances of these in Scripture. Page
706 Two Sorts of Miracles. First, Such as, though they cannot be done by
Ordinary Causes, yet may be effected by the Natural Power of Invisible Spirits,
Angels, or Demons. As Illiterate Demoniacks, speaking Greek. Such amongst the
Pagans that Miracle of the Whetstone, cut in two with a Razour. Secondly, Such
as transcend the Natural Power of all Second Causes, and Created Beings. Page
706, 707 That late Politico-Theological Treatise, denying both these Sorts of
Miracles; Inconsiderable, and not deserving here a Confutation. Page 707
Supposed in Deuteronomy. That Miracles of the Former sort, might be done by False
Prophets, in Confirmation of Idolatry. Wherefore Miracles alone, not sufficient
to confirm every Doctrine. ibid. Accordingly in the New Testament do we read,
of (...) Lying Miracles; that is, Miracles done in Confirmation of a Lie, and
by the Power of Satan, etc. God permitting it, in way of Probation of some, and
Punishment of others. Miracles done for the promoting of Creature-Worship or
Idolatry, in stead of Justifying the same, themselves Condemned by it. Page 708
Had the Miracles of our Savior been all of the Former Kind only, yet ought
the Jews, according to Moses Law, to have acknowledged him for a True Prophet,
he coming in the Name of the Lord, and not Exhorting to Idolatry. Supposed in
Deuteronomy. That God would not Permit False Prophets to do Miracles, save only in
the Case of Idolatry; or when the Doctrine is discoverable to be False by the
Light of Nature; because that would be an Invincible Temptation. Our Savior,
That Eximious Prophet foretold, by whom God would again reveal his Will to the
World; and no more out of Flaming Fire. Nevertheless some Miracles of our
Savior Christ's such also, as could be done only by the Power of God
Almighty. Page 708, 709 All Miracles evince Spirits; to disbelieve which is, to
disbelieve Sense, or Unreasonably to Derogate from Humane Testimony. Had the
Gentiles entertained the Faith of Christ, without Miracles, This it self would
have been a Great Miracle. Page 709 The Last Extraordinary Phenomenon,
Divination or Prophecy. This also evinces Spirits, (called Gods by the Pagans:)
and thus that of theirs True; If Divination, then Gods. 710 Two Sorts of
Predictions likewise, as of Miracles. First, such as might proceed from the
Natural Presageing Power of Created Spirits. Such Predictions acknowledged by
Democritus, upon account of his Idols. Not so much Contingency in Humane
Actions, by reason of Men's Liberty of Will, as some suppose. Page 710, 711
Another Sort of Predictions of Future Events, Imputable only to the
Supernatural Prescience of God Almighty. Epicurus his Pretense, That Divination
took away Liberty of Will; either as Supposing, or Making a Necessity. Some
Theists also denying the Prescience of God Almighty, upon the same Account.
Certain, That no Created Being can foreknow Future Events, otherwise then in
their Causes. Wherefore Predictions of such Events, as had no Necessary
Antecedent Causes, Evince a God. Page 711, 712 That there is Foreknowledge of
Future Events, Unforeknowable to Men; formerly the general Persuasion of
Mankind. Oracles and Predictions amongst the Pagans, which Evince Spirits; as
that of Actius Navius. Most of the Pagan Oracles, from the Natural Presageing
Power of Demons. Nevertheless some Instanc^s of Predictions of a higher kind
amongst them; as that of Vectius Valens, and the Sibyls. Thus Balaam, Divinely
assisted to Predict our Savior. Page 712, 713 Scriptures Triumphing over Pagan
Oracles. Predictions concerning our Savior Christ, and the Conversion of the
Gentiles. Amongst which that remarkable one, of the Seventy Weeks. Page 713,
714 Other Predictions concerning the Fates of Kingdoms, and of the Church.
Daniel's Fourth Ten-Horned Beast, the Roman Empire. This Prophecy of Daniel's,
carried on further in the Apocalypse. Both of them Prophetic Calendars of
Times, to the End of the World. ibid. That this Phenomenon of
Scripture-Prophecies, cannot Possibly be Imputed by Atheists, as some others,
to Fear, or Ignorance of Causes, or to the Fiction of Politicians. They not
only Evince a Deity, but also the Truth of Christianity. To this Purpose, of
more Use to us, who now live, then the Miracles themselves Recorded in
Scripture. Page 714, 715 These Five Extraordinary Phenomenon, all of them
evince, Spirits to be no Fancies, but Substantial Inhabitants of the World;
from whence a God may be Inferred. Some of them, Immediately prove a Deity.
ibid. Here have we not only fully Confuted all the Atheistick Pretenses from
the Idea of God, but also by the way, already Proposed several Substantial
Arguments for a Deity. The Existence whereof will now be further proved from
its very Idea. ibid. True, That some of the Ancient Theists themselves, Declare
God Not to be Demonstrable. Thus Alexander Aphrodis. Clemens Alexand. But their
meaning therein no more then this. That God cannot be Demonstrated a Priori,
from any Antecedent Necessary Cause. Not follow from hence, That therefore no
Certainty, or Knowledge of the Existence of a God; but only Conjectural
Probability, Faith, and Opinion. We may have a Certain Knowledge of things, the
(...) whereof cannot be Demonstrated a Priori; as, That there was Something or
other Eternal, without Beginning. Whenever a thing is Necessarily Inferred,
from what is altogether Undeniable, this may be called a Demonstration. Many
Geometrical Demonstrations such; or of the (...) only. Page 715, 716 A
Skeptical Position of Cartesius; That there can be no Certainty of any thing,
no not of Geometrical Theorems, nor Common Notions; before we be Certain of the
Existence of a God, Essentially Good, who therefore cannot Deceive. From whence
it would follow, That neither Atheists, nor such Theists, as assert an
Arbitrary Deity, can ever be certain of anything; as That, Two and Two are
Four. Page 716, 717 However some appearance of Piety in this Assertion; yet is
it a Foundation of Eternal Skepticism, both as to all other things, and the
Existence of a God. That Cartesius here went Round in a Circle, proving the
Existence of a God, from our Faculties; and then the Truth of our Faculties,
from the Existence of a God; and consequently Proved nothing. If it be
possible, that our Faculties might be False, then must we confess it possible,
that there may be no God; and Consequently remain for ever Skeptical about it.
ibid. Wherefore a Necessity of Exploding and Confuting this New Skeptical
Hypothesis, of the Possibility of our Faculties being so made, as to Deceive
us, in all our Clearest Perceptions. Omnipotence it self cannot make any thing
to be Indifferently True or False. Truth not Factitious. As to the Universal
Theorems of Abstract Science, the Measure of Truth, no Foreign or Extraneous
thing, but only our own Clear and Distinct Perception. Here whatsoever is
Clearly Perceived, Is. The very Essence of Truth, Perceptibility. Granted by
all, That there can be no False Knowledge or Understanding. The Perception of
the Understanding, never False, but only Obscure. Not Nature that Erreth in
us, but We Our selves, in Assenting to things not Clearly Perceived.
Conclusion; That Omnipotence cannot Create any Understanding Faculties, so as
to have as Clear and Distinct Conceptions of all Falsehoods and Non-Entities, as
of Truths: because whatsoever is Clearly and Distinctly Perceived, has
therefore an Entity; and Omnipotence it self (to speak with Reverence) cannot
make Nothing, to be Something, or Something Nothing. This no more, then That it
cannot do Things Contradictious. Conception the Measure of Power. Page 717,
719 True, That Sense as such, is but Fantastical and Relative: and were there
no other Perception, all Truth would be Private, Relative, and Seeming; none
Absolute. This probably the Reason, why some have suspected the same of
Knowledge also. But Mind and Understanding reaches beyond Fancy and
Appearance, to the Absoluteness of Things. It has the Criterion of Truth
within it self. Page 719, 720 Objected; That this an Arrogance, for Creatures
to Pretend to an Absolute Certainty of any thing. Answer; That God alone is
Ignorant of Nothing, and Infallible in All things: but no Derogation from the
Deity, to suppose, that he should make Created Minds such, as to have a
Certainty of Something; as the Whole to be Greater then the Part, and the like:
since otherwise they would be but a mere Mockery. Congruous to think, that God
has made Men so, as that they may Possibly attain to some Certainty of his own
Existence. Origin, That Knowledge is the only thing that has Certainty in it.
Page 720, 721 Having now some Firm Ground or Footing to stand upon; a Certainty
of Common Notions, without which nothing could be proved by Reason; we shall
endeavor by means hereof, to Demonstrate the Existence of a God from his Idea.
ibid. Cartesius his Undertaking to do this with Mathematical Evidence; as this
Idea includes in it Necessary Existence. This Argument hitherto not so
Successful, it being by many concluded to be a Sophism. That we shall
impartially set down all that we can, both For it, and Against it; leaving
others to make a Judgment. Page 721 First, Against the Cartesian Demonstration
of a God. That because we can frame an Idea of a Necessarily Existent Being, it
does not at all follow, that It Is; since we can frame Idea's of things, that
Never Were, nor Will be. Nothing to be gathered from hence, but only that it
is Not Impossible. Again, from this Idea, Including Necessary Existence,
nothing else Inferrible, but That, what has no Necessary ^xistence, is not
Perfect; and, That if there be a Perfect Being, its Existence always was, and
will be Necessary: but not Absolutely, That it does Exist. A Fallacy, when from
the Necessity of Existence affirmed only Hypothetically, the Conclusion is
made Absolutely. Though a Perfect Being, Must Exist Necessarily; yet not
therefore follow, that it Must and Does Exist. The Latter a thing
Indemonstrable. Page 721, 723 For the Cartesian Demonstration of a God. As from
the Notion of a thing Impossible, we conclude, That it never Was nor Will be;
and of that which has a Contingent Schesis to Existence, That it Might be, or
Might not be; so from that which has Necessary Existence in its Nature, That
it Actually Is. The force of the Argumentation, not merely Hypotheticall, If
there be a Perfect Being, then is its Existence Necessary; because this
supposes, that a Necessary Existent Being, is Contingent to be, or not to be:
which a Contradiction. The Absurdity of this will better appear, if instead of
Necessary Existence, we put in Actual. No Theists can otherwise prove, that a
God, though supposed to Exist, might not Happen by Chance to Be. Nevertheless
God, or a Perfect Being, not here Demonstrated a Priori, when from its own
Idea. The Reader left to make a Judgment. Page 723, 724 A Progymnasma, or
Praelusory Attempt, toward the proving of a God from his Idea, as including
Necessary Existence. First, From our having an Idea of a Perfect Being,
Implying no manner of Contradiction in it, it follows, that such a thing is
Possible. And from that Necessary Existence Included in this Idea, added to the
Possibility thereof, it further follows, that it Actually Is. A Necessary
Existent Being, if Possible, Is; because upon the supposition of its
Nonexistence, it would be Impossible for it, ever to have been. Not so in
Contingent things. A Perfect Being, is either Impossible to have Been, or else
it Is. Were God Possible, and yet Not, He would not be a Necessary, but
Contingent Being. However no Stress laid upon this. Page 724, 725 Another
Plainer Argument, for the Existence of a God, from his Idea. Whatsoever we can
frame an Idea of in our Minds, implying no Contradiction, this either Actually
Is, or else if it Be Not, is Possible to Be. But if God Be Not, he is not
Possible to Be. Therefore He Is. The Major before Proved, That we cannot have
an Idea of any thing, which has neither Actual nor Possible Existence. Page
725 A Further Ratiocination from the Idea of God, as including Necessary
Existence, by certain Steps. First, Certain, that something or other did Exist
of It self from Eternity, without Beginning. Again, Whatsoever did Exist of It
self from Eternity, did so Exist Naturally and Necessarily, and therefore there
is a Necessary Existent Being. Thirdly, Nothing could Exist of It self from
Eternity Naturally and Necessarily, but what contained Necessary Self-Existence
in its Nature. Lastly, A Perfect Being, and nothing else, contains Necessary
Existence in its Nature. Therefore It Is. An Appendix to this Argument; That no
Temporary Successive Being, could be from Eternity without Beginning. This
Proved before. Page 725, 726 Again, The Controversy betwixt Atheists and
Theists, First Clearly Stated from the Idea of God, and then Satisfactorily
Decided. Premised; That as every thing was not Made, so neither was every thing
Unmade. Atheists agree in both. The State of the Controversy betwixt Theists
and Atheists; Whether that which being it self Unmade, was the Cause of all
other things Made, were the Most Perfect, or the Most Imperfect Being. A
certain kind of Atheistick Theism, or Theogonism, which acknowledging a God, or
Soul of the World, presiding over the Whole, supposed him notwithstanding, to
have Emerged out of Night and Chaos; that is, to have been Generated out of
Senseless Matter. Page 726, 728 The Controversy thus Stated, easily Decided.
Certain, That Lesser Perfection may be derived from Greater, or from that which
is Absolutely Perfect; but Impossible, That Greater Perfection, and Higher
Degrees of Entity, should rise out of Lesser and Lower. Things did not Ascend,
but Descend. That Life and Sense may Naturally rise from the mere Modification
of Dead and Senseless Matter; as also Reason and Understanding from Sense; the
Philosophy of the Kingdom of Darkness. The Hylozoists so Sensible of this, that
there must be some Substantial Unmade Life and Understanding; that Atheizing,
they thought it Necessary to Attribute Life and Understanding to all Matter, as
such. This Argument, a Demonstration of the Impossibility of Atheism. Page 728,
729 The Controversy again more Particularly Stated, from the Idea of God, as
including Mind and Understanding in it. Viz. Whether all Mind were Made or
Generated out of Senseless Matter; or Whether there were an Eternal Unmade
Mind, the Maker of all. This the Doctrine of Theists, That Mind the Oldest of
all things; of Atheists, That it is a Postnate thing, Younger then the World,
and an Umbratile Image of Real Beings. Page 729 The Controversy thus Stated,
again Decided. Though it does not follow, That if once there had been no
Corporeal World or Matter, there could never have been any; yet is it certain,
That if once there had been no Life nor Mind, there could never have been any
Life or Mind. Our Imperfect Minds, not Of Themselves from Eternity, and
therefore Derived from a Perfect Unmade Mind. Page 729, 730 That Atheists
think, their chief strength to lie here, in their Disproving a God, from the
Nature of Understanding and Knowledge. According to them, Things made
Knowledge, and not Knowledge Things. All Mind and Understanding, the Creature
of Sensibles, and a Fantastic Image of them: and therefore no Mind their
Creator. Thus does a Modern Writer conclude, That Knowledge and Understanding
is not to be Attributed to God, because it implies Dependence upon Things
without; which is all one as if he should have said, That Senseless Matter is
the most Perfect of all things, and the Highest Numen. Page 730 A Compendious
Confutation of the Premised Atheistick Principles. Knowledge not the Activity
of Sensibles upon the Knower, and his Passions. Sensible things themselves, not
Known by the Passion, or Fancy of Sense. Knowledge not from the Force of the
Thing Known, but of the Knower. Besides Phantasms of Singular Bodies,
Intelligible Idea's Universal. A late Atheistick Paradox, That Universals,
nothing but Names. Axiomatical Truths in Abstract Sciences no Passion from
Bodies by Sense, nor yet gathered by Induction from Many Singulars; we at once
Perceiving it Impossible, that they should be otherwise. An Ingenious
Observation of Aristotle's; That could it be Perceived by Sense, the Three
Angles of a Triangle to be Equal to Two Right; yet would not this be Science,
or Knowledge, Properly so called: which is of Universals First, and from thence
descends to Singulars. Page 730, 732 Again; We have Conceptions of things
Incorporeal, as also of such Corporeals as never did Exist, and whose Accuracy
Sense could not reach to: as a Perfect straight Line, and Plain Superficies, an
Exact Triangle, Circle, or Sphere. That we have a Power of framing Idea's of
things that never were nor will be, but only Possible. Page 732 Inferred from
hence, That Humane Science it self, not the mere Image and Creature of Singular
Sensibles, but Proleptical to them, and in order of Nature Before them. But
since there must be (...), before (...), Intelligibles, before Intellection;
the only true Account of Knowledge and its Original, is from a Perfect
Omnipotent Being, Comprehending it self, and the Extent of its own Power, or
the Possibilities of all things, their Relations and Immutable Truths. And of
this one Perfect Mind, all Imperfect Minds Partake. Page 732, 733 Knowledge
therefore in the Nature of it, supposes the Existence of a Perfect Omnipotent
Being, as its (...), or Intelligible. This Comprehending, it self, the First
Original Knowledge, a Mind before the World, and all Sensibles, not Ectypall,
but Archetypall, and the Framer of all. Wherefore not Atheism, but Theism,
Demonstrable from Knowledge and Understanding. Page 733, 734 This further
Confirmed from hence; Because there are Eternal Verities, such as were never
Made, nor had any Beginning. That the Diagonal of a Square, Incommensurable to
the Sides, an Eternal Truth to Aristotle. Justin Martyr's (...), or Eternal
Moralls, Geometrical Truths, not Made by any man's Thinking, but before all
Men; as also before the World and Matter it self. Page 734 Now if there be
Eternal Verities, the Simple Reasons and Intelligible Essences of Things, must
needs be Eternal likewise. These called by Plato, Things that Always Are, but
were never Made, Ingenerable and Incorruptible. However Aristotle quarrels with
Plato's Idea's, yet does he also agree with him in this, That the Forms or
Species of things, were Eternal, and Never Made; and that there is No
Generation of them; and that there are other things besides Sensibles, the
Immutable Objects of Science. Certain, That there could be no Immutable
Science, were there no other Objects of the Mind, but Sensibles. The Objects of
Geometrical Science, no Material Triangles, Squares, etc. These, by Aristotle,
said to be No where. The Intelligible Natures of things to Philo, the most
Necessary Essences. Page 735, 736 Now if there be Eternal Truths, and
Intelligibles, whose Existence also is Necessary; since these can be no where
but in a Mind; there must be an Eternal, Necessarily Existing Mind,
Comprehending all these Idea's and Truths at once, or Being them. Which no
other, then the Mind of a Perfect Omnipotent Being, Comprehending it self, and
all Possibilities of things, the Extent of its own Power. Page 736, 737
Wherefore there can be but One only Original Mind; which all other Minds
Partake of. Hence Idea's, or Notions, exactly alike in several men; and Truths
Indivisibly the Same: Because their Minds all Stamped with the same Original
Seal. Themistius; That One man could not Teach Another, were there not the same
Notion both in the Learner and Teacher. Nor could men confer together as they
do, were there not One Mind, that All Partaked of. That Anti-Monarchical
Opinion, of Many Understanding Beings Eternal, and Independent; Confuted. And
now have we not only asserted the Idea of God, and Confuted all the Atheistick
Pretenses against it; but also from this Idea, Demonstrated his Existence. Page
737, 738
SECT. II.
A Confutation of the Second Atheistick Argument, Against Omnipotence and
Divine Creation; That Nothing can by any Power whatsoever, be Made out of
Nothing. In Answer to which, Three things to be Insisted on. First, That De
Nihilo Nihil, Nothing out of Nothing, is in some Sense an Axiom of
Unquestionable Truth, but then makes Nothing against Theism, or Divine
Creation. Secondly, That Nothing out of Nothing, in the Sense of the Atheistick
Objectors, viz. That Nothing which once was Not, could by any Power whatsoever,
be brought into Being, is Absolutely False; and that if it were True, it would
make no more against Theism, then it does against Atheism. Lastly, That from
this very Axiom, Nothing from Nothing, in the True Sense thereof, the Absolute
Impossibility of Atheism is Demonstrable. Page 738 De Nihilo Nihil, Nothing
from Nothing, in some Sense, is a Common Notion of Unquestionable Truth. For
First, Certain, That Nothing which once was Not, could ever Of it Self come
into Being; or, That Nothing can take beginning of Existence from It self; or,
That Nothing can be Made or Produced, without an Efficient Cause. From whence
Demonstrated, That there was never Nothing; or, That every thing was not Made,
but Something did Exist of It Self from Eternity, Unmade, or Underived from any
thing else. Page 738, 739 Again, Certain also, That Nothing could be
Efficiently Produced by what has not at least Equal Perfection, and a
Sufficient Active or Productive Power. That of an Effect, which Transcends the
Perfection of its supposed Cause, must Come from Nothing, or be Made without a
Cause. Nor can any thing be Produced by another, though having Equal
Perfection, unless it have also a Sufficient Active or Productive Power. Hence
Certain, That were there once no Motion at all in the world, and no other
Substance besides Body, which had no Self-Moving Power, there could never
Possibly be any Motion or Mutation to all Eternity, for want of a Sufficient
Cause, or Productive Power. No Imperfect Being, has a Productive Power of any
New Substance, which was not before, but only of New Accidents and
Modifications; that is, No Cre^ture can Create. Which Two forementioned Senses
respect the Efficient Cause. Page 739 Thirdly, Nothing can be Materially
Produced out of Nothing Prae-Existing or Inexisting. And therefore in all
Natural Generations (where the Supernatural Power of the Deity interposes not)
No New Real Entity or Substance Produced, which was not Before, but only New
Modifications of what Substantially Prae-Existed. Page 739, 740 Nothing out of
Nothing, so much Insisted on by the old Physiologers before Aristotle, in this
Sense; commonly misunderstood by Modern Writers, as if they designed thereby,
to take away all Divine Creation out of Nothing Prae-Existing. Granted, This to
have been the Sense of the Stoics and of Plutarch; He affirming, the World to
have been no otherwise Made by God, then a House is by a Carpenter, or a
Garment by a Tailour. Plutarch and the Stoics therefore, Imperfect Theists,
but nevertheless Zealous Religionists. But the Ancient Italick Philosophers
here Acted only as Physiologers, and not as Theologers, or Metaphysicians;
they not directing themselves, against a Divine Creation out of Nothing
Prae-Existing; but only contending, That neither in Natural Generations, any
new Real Entity was Created, nor in Corruptions, Annihilated; but only the
Modifications of what before Existed, Changed: or, That No New Real Entity
could be Made out of Matter. Page 740, 741 That this was the True meaning of
those Ancient Physiologers, Evident from the Use which they made of this
Principle, Nothing out of Nothing; Which Twofold. First, Upon this Foundation,
they Endeavored to establish a Peculiar Kind of Physiology, and some Atomology
or other, either Similar or Dissimilar; Homoeomery or Anomoeomery. Anaxagoras
from hence concluded, because Nothing could be Made out of Nothing
Prae-Existing and Inexisting, that therefore there were in every Body, Similar
Atoms, of all Kinds, out of which, by Concretions, and Secretions, all Natural
Generations Made; so that Bone was Made out of Bony Atoms Prae-Existing and
Inexisting; Flesh out of Fleshy, and the like. This the Anaxagorean Homoeomery,
or Similar Atomology, built upon this Princile, Nothing out of Nothing. Page
741, 742 But the Ancient Italicks, both before and after Anaxagoras, (whom
Leucippus, Democritus, and Epicurus here followed) with greater Sagacity
concluded, from the same Principle, Nothing out of Nothing; That those
Qualities and Forms of Bodies, Naturally Generated and Corrupted, were
therefore no Real Entities, distinct from the Substance of Matter, but only
Different Modifications thereof, Causing Different Phancies in us; and this an
Anomoeomery, or Dissimilar Atomology, the Atoms thereof being Devoid of
Qualities. Those Simple Elements or Letters (in Nature's Alphabet) out of
which, variously Combined, these Philosophers Spelled out, or Compounded all
the Syllables and Words (or Complexions) of Corporeal Things, Nothing but
Figure, Site, Motion, Rest, and Magnitude of Parts. Were Qualities and Forms,
Real Entities distinct from these, and not Prae-Existing, (as Anaxagoras
dreamed) they must then have come from Nothing, in Natural Generations; which
Impossible. Page 742, 743 Another Improvement of this Principle, Nothing out of
Nothing, made by the Italick Philosophers; That the Souls of Animals,
especially Humane, since they could not Possibly result from the mere
Modifications of Matter, Figure, Site, Motion, etc. were not Produced in
Generations, nor Annihilated in Deaths and Corruptions; but being Substantial
things, did Prae and Post Exist. This set down as the Controversy betwixt
Atheists and Theists, in Lucretius; Whether Souls were Generated, or Insinuated
into Bodies. Generations and Corruptions of Animals, to these Pythagoreans, but
Anagrammatical Transpositions. That those Philosophers who asserted the
Prae-Existence and Ingenerability of Souls, did not therefore Suppose them to
have been Self-Existent and Uncreated, but derived them all from the Deity.
Thus Proclus, though maintaining the Eternity of Souls, with the World. The
Ingenerability of Souls in Plato's Timaeus, no more then this, that they were
not Generated out of Matter: and for this Cause also, were they called
Principles, in the same Sense, as Matter was so accounted. Souls therefore to
Plato, Created by God, though not In the Generation of Animals, but Before.
Page 743, 745 Saint Austine himself, Sometime Staggering and Skeptical, in the
Point of Prae-Existence. That we have a Philosophic Certainty of no more then
this, That Souls were Created by God, out of Nothing Prae-Existing, some time
or other; either In Generations, or Before them. That unless Brutes be mere
Machines, the Reason the same also, concerning Brutish Souls; That these not
Generated out of Matter, but Created, sometime or other, by the Deity; as well
as the Matter of their Bodies was. Page 745 That all these Three Forementioned
Particulars, wherein it is True, that Nothing can Possibly come from Nothing,
are reducible to this One General Proposition, That Nothing can be Caused by
Nothing; which will no way clash with the Divine Omnipotence or Creative Power,
as shall be showed afterward; but Confirm the same. But those same words,
Nothing out of Nothing, may carry another Sense; when that (...), Out of
Nothing, is not taken Causally, but only to signify the Terminus A Quo, the
Term From which, or an Antecedent Nonexistence: and then the meaning thereof
will be, That Nothing which before was Not, could afterward, by any Power
whatsoever, be brought into Being. And this the Sense of the Democritick and
Epicurean Objectors; viz. That no Real Entity can be Made, or Brought out of
Nonexistence into Being; and therefore the Creative Power of Theists, an
Impossibility. ibid. Our Second Undertaking, in way of Answer hereunto; To show
That Nothing out of Nothing, in this Sense, is False; as also That, were it
True, yet it would make no more against Theism, then it does against Atheism;
and therefore ought not to be used by Atheists, as an Argument against a God.
If this Universally True, That Nothing at all which once was Not, could ever be
b^ought into Being, then could there be no Making, nor Causing at all, no
Motion nor Action, Mutation or Generation. But our selves have a Power of
Producing New Cogitation in our Minds, and New Motion in our Bodies. Wherefore
Atheists forced to restrain this Proposition, to Substantialls only. And here
some Deceived with the Equivocation, in this (...), Out of Nothing; which may
be taken either Causally, or else to signify the Term From Which, that is, From
an Antecedent Nonexistence; they confounding both these together; whereof the
First only True, the Latter False. Again, Others Staggered with the
Plausibility of this Proposition; Partly, because no Artificial thing (as a
House or Garment) can be made by Men, but out of Prae-Existing Matter; and
Partly, because Ancient Physiologers maintained the same also, concerning
Natural Generations, That no New Real Entity or Substance, could be therein
Produced; and Lastly, because it is certain, that no Imperfect Created Being,
can Create any New Substance: They being therefore apt to measure all Power
whatsoever, by these Scantlings. But as easy, for a Perfect Being to Create a
World, Matter and all, Out of Nothing, (in this Sense, that is, out of an
Antecedent Nonexistence,) as for us to Create a Thought, or to Move a Finger,
or for the Sun to send out Rays. For an Imperfect Substance which once was Not,
to be brought into Being by God, this not Impossible, in any of the
Forementioned Senses. He having not only Infinitely Greater Perfection, but
also Sufficient Productive or Emanative Power. True, That Infinite Power cannot
do things in their own Nature Impossible; but Nothing thus Impossible, but
what Contradictious: and though a Contradiction for any thing, at the same
time, to Be and Not Be; yet none at all, for an Imperfect Being, (which is in
its Nature Contingent to Existence) after it had Not been, to Be. Wherefore
since the making of a Substance to Be, which was not Before, is no way
Contradictious, nor consequently, in its own Nature Impossible; it must needs
be an Object of Perfect Power. Page 746, 748 Furthermore, If no Real Entity or
Substance, could possibly be brought out of Nonexistence into Being; then must
the Reason hereof be, Because no Substance can Derive its Whole Being from
another Substance. But from hence, it would follow, That whatsoever is
Substantial, did not only Exist from Eternity, but also Of It Self,
Independently upon any thing else. Whereas, First, The Prae-Eternity of
Temporary Beings, not agreeable to Reason: and then, To suppose Imperfect
Substances, to have Existed Of Themselves and Necessarily, is to suppose
Something to come from Nothing, in the Impossible Sense; they having no
Necessary Self-Existence in their Nature. As they who affirm, all Substance to
be Body, and no Body to be able to Move it Self, though supposing Motion to
have been from Eternity; yet make this Motion to Come from Nothing, or be
Caused by Nothing. What in its Nature Contingently Possible, to Be, or Not Be,
could not Exist Of It Self; but must Derive its Being from Something else,
which Necessarily Existeth. Plato's Distinction therefore, betwixt Two kinds of
Substances, must needs be admitted, That which always Is, and was never Made;
and, That which is Made, or had a Beginning. Page 748, 749 Lastly, If this
True, that No Substance Makeable or Producible; it would not only follow from
thence, (as the Epicurean Atheist supposes) that Matter, but also that all
Souls, (at least Humane) did Exist Of Themselves, from Eternity, Independently
upon any thing else; it being Impossible, that Mind or Soul, should be a
Modification of Senseless Matter, or Result from Figures, Sites, Motions, and
Magnitudes. Humane Souls Substantial, and therefore, according to this
Doctrine, must have been Never Made; whereas Atheists stiffly deny both their
Prae, and Post-Existence. Those Pagan Theists, who held the Eternity of Humane
Minds, supposed them notwithstanding, to have Depended upon the Deity, as their
Cause. Before Proved; That there can be but One Understanding Being
Self-Existent. If Humane Souls Depend upon the Deity as their Cause, then
Doubtless Matter also. Page 749, 750 A Common, but Great Mistake; That no Pagan
Theist ever acknowledged any Creative Power out of Nothing; or else, That God
was the Cause of any Substance. Plato's Definition of Effective Power, in
General, and his Affirmation, That the Divine Efficiency is that, whereby
things are Made, after they had Not been. Certain, That he did not understand
this, of the Production of Souls out of Matter, he supposing them to be Before
Matter, and therefore Made by God out of Nothing Prae-Existing. All
Philosophers, who held the Immortality and Incorporeity of the Soul, asserted
it to have been Caused by God, either in Time, or from Eternity. Plutarch's
Singularity here. Unquestionable, That the Platonists supposed, One Substance
to receive its whole Being from Another; in that they derive their Second
Hypostasis or Substance, though Eternal, from the First; and their Third from
Both; and all Inferior Ranks of Beings from all Three. Plotinus, Porphyrius,
Iamblichus, Hierocles, Proclus, and Others, derived Matter from the Deity. Thus
the Chaldee Oracles; and the old Egyptian, or Hermaick Theology also, according
to Iamblichus. Those Platonists who supposed the World and Souls Eternal,
conceived them to have received their Being, as much from the Deity, as if Made
in Time. Page 750, 752 Having now Disproved this Proposition, Nothing out of
Nothing, in the Atheistick Sense, viz. That no Substance was Caused, or Derived
its Being from Another; but whatsoever is Substantial, did Exist Of It self
from Eternity, Independently; we are in the next place, to make it appear also,
That were it True, it would no more oppose Theism, then it does Atheism.
Falsehoods (though not Truths) may Disagree. Plutarch, the Stoics, and Others,
who made God the Creator of no Substance, though not Genuine, yet Zealous
Theists. But the Ancient Atheists, both in Plato and Aristotle, Generated and
Corrupted All things; that is, Produced All things out of Nothing, or
Nonexistence, and Reduced them into Nothing again; the bare Substance of
Matter only Excepted. The same done by the Democritick and Epicurean Atheists
themselves, the Makers of this Objection: though, according to the Principles
of their own Atomick Physiology, it is Impossible, that Life and Unerstanding,
Soul and Mind, should be mere Modifications of Matter. As Theists give a
Creative Power of All, out of Nothing, to the Deity; so do Atheists, to Passive
and Dead Matt^r. Wherefore this can be no Argument against Theism; it Equally
opposing Atheism. Page 752, 756 An Anacephalaeosis; wherein Observable, That
Cicero makes De Nihilo fieri, and Sine Causa, To be made out of Nothing, and to
be made without a Cause, One and the Self-same thing; as also that he does not
Confine this to the Material Cause only. Our Third and Last Undertaking; To
Prove that Atheists Produce Real Entities out of Nothing, in the First
Impossible Sense; that is, Without a Cause. Page 756, 757 A Brief Synopsis of
Atheism; That Matter being the only Substance, is therefore the only Un-made
Thing; and That whatsoever else is in the World, besides the Bare Substance
thereof, was Made out of Matter, or Produced from that alone. Page 757 The
First Argument; When Atheists affirm, Matter to be the only Substance, and all
things to be Made out of that; they Suppose all to be Made without an Efficient
Cause; which is to bring them from Nothing, in an Impossible Sense. Though
Something may be Made, without a Material Cause Prae-Existing; yet cannot any
thing Possibly be Made, without an Efficient Cause. Wherefore if there be any
thing Made, which was Not before, there must of Necessity be besides Matter,
some other Substance, as the Active, Efficient Cause thereof. The Atheistick
Hypothesis supposes, Things to be Made, without any Active or Effective
Principle. Whereas the Epicurean Atheists, Attribute the Efficiency of all to
Local Motion; and yet deny Matter or Body (their only Substance) a Self-moving
Power. They hereby, make all the Motion that is in the World to have been
Without a Cause, or to Come from Nothing; all Action, without an Agent; all
Efficiency, without an Efficient. Page 758 Again; Should we grant these
Atheists, Motion without a Cause; yet could not Dead and Senseless Matter,
together with Motion, ever beget Life, Sense, and Understanding; because this
would be Something out of Nothing, in way of Causality: Local Motion, only
Ch^nging the Modifications of Matter, as Figure, Place, Site, and Disposition
of Parts. Hence also, those Spurious Theists Confuted, who Conclude God to have
done no more in the Making of the World, then a Carpenter does in the Building
of a House, (upon this Pretense, That Nothing can be made out of Nothing;) and
yet suppose him, to Make Souls out of Dead and Senseless Matter, which is to
bring them from Nothing, in way of Causality. Page 758, 759 Declared before,
That the Ancient Italicks and Pythagoricks, Proved in this manner; That Souls
could not possibly be Generated out of Matter; because Nothing can come from
Nothing, in way of Causality. The Subterfuge of the Atheistick Ionicks, out of
Aristotle; That Matter being the only Substance; and Life, Sense, and
Un^erstanding, Nothing but the Passions, Affections, and Dispositions thereof;
the Production of them out of Matter, no Production of any new Real Entity.
Page 759 Answer; Atheists taking it for granted, That there is no other
Substance besides Body or Matter, therefore falsely conclude, Life, Sense, and
Understanding, to be Accidents or Modes of Matter; they being indeed, the Modes
or Attributes of Substance Incorporeal and Self-Active. A Mode, That which
cannot be Conceived, without the Thing whereof it is a Mode; but Life and
Cogitation may be Conceived, without Corporeal Extension; and indeed cannot be
Conceived with it. Page 759, 760 The chief Occasion of this Error, from
Qualities and Forms; as, Because the Quality of Heat, and Form of Fire, may be
Generated out of Matter; therefore Life, Cogitation, and Understanding also.
But the Atomick Atheists themselves, Explode Qualities, as things Really
distinct from the Figure, Site, and Motion of Parts, for this very reason,
Because Nothing can be made out of Nothing Causally. The Vulgar Opinion of such
Real Qualities in Bodies, only from men's mistaking their own Phancies,
Apparitions, Passions, Affections, and Seemings, for things Really Existing
without them. That in these Qualities, which is distinct from the Figure, Site,
and Motion of Parts, not the Accidents and Modifications of Matter; but of Our
own Souls. The Atomick Atheists infinitely Absurd; when exploding Qualities,
because Nothing can come out of Nothing, themselves bring Life, Sense, and
Understanding, out of Nothing, in way of Causality. That Opinion, That
Cogitation is Nothing but Local Motion, and Men themselves mere Machines,
Prodigious Sottishness, or Intolerable Impudence. Page 760, 762 Very Observable
here, That Epicurus himself, having a Mind to assert Contingent Liberty,
confesses, that he could not do this, unless there were some such thing in
the Principles; because Nothing can be made out of Nothing, or Caused by
Nothing: and theref^re does he Ridiculously feign a Third Motion of Atoms, to
salve that Phenomenon of Free Will. Wherefore he must needs be guilty of an
Impossible Production, of Something out of Nothing, when he brings Soul and
Mind, out of Dead and Senseless Atoms. Were there no Substantial and Eternal
Life and Understanding in the Universe, there could none have been ever
Produced; because it must have come from Nothing, or been Made without a Cause.
That Dark Philosophy which Educes, not only Real Qualities and Substantial
Forms, but also Souls themselves, at least Sensitive, out of the Power of the
Matter, Educes them Out of Nothing, or Makes them without a Cause; and so
prepares a direct way to Atheism. Page 762, 763 They who suppose Matter,
otherwise then by Motion, and by a kind of Miraculous Efficiency, to Produce
Souls, and Minds, attribute that Creative Power to this Senseless and Unactive
Matter, which themselves deny, to a Perfect Being, as an Absolute
Impossibility. Thus have we Demonstrated, the Impossibility and Nonsense of all
Atheism, from this very Principle; That Nothing can be made from Nothing, or
without a Sufficient Cause. Page 763, 764 Wherefore, If no Middle betwixt these
Two; but all things must either Spring from a God, or Matter; Then is this also
a Demonstration of the Truth of Theism, by Deduction to Impossible: Either
there is a God, or else all things are derived from Dead and Senseless Matter;
But this Latter is Impossible; Therefore a God. Nevertheless, that the
Existence of a God, may be further Directly Proved also from the same
Principle, rightly understood, Nothing out of Nothing Causally, or Nothing
Caused by Nothing, neither Efficiently, nor Materially. Page 764 By these
Steps; First, That there was never Nothing, but Something or other did Exist Of
It Self from Eternity, Vn-made, and Independently upon any thing else,
Mathematically Certain; from this Principle, Nothing from Nothing. Had there
been once Nothing, there could never have been Anything. Again, Whatsoever did
Exist Of It Self from Eternity, must have so Existed Necessarily, and not by
any Free Will and Choice. Certain therefore, That there is Something Actually
in Being, whose Existence Is, and always Was Necessary. Now that which Exists
Necessarily, Of It Self, must have Necessity of Existence in its Nature; which
Nothing but a Perfect Being has. Therefore there Is a Perfect Being; and
Nothing Else besides this, did Exist Of It Self from Eternity, but All other
things whatsoever (whether Souls or Matter) were Made by it. To suppose any
thing to Exist Of It Self Necessarily, that has no Necessary Existence in its
Nature, is to suppose that Necessary Existence to have Come from Nothing. Page
764, 765 Three Reasons, why some Theists have been so Staggering and Scepticall
about the Necessary Self-Existence of Matter. First, From an Idiotical Conceit,
That because Artificial Things cannot be made by men, but Out of Prae-Existent
Matter, therefore Nothing by God, or a Perfect Being, can be otherwise Made.
Secondly, Because some of them have supposed (...), an Incorporeal Hyle, or
First Matter Un-made; an Opinion Older then Aristotle. Whereas this Really
Nothing, but a Metaphysical Notion of the Potentiality or Possibility of
Things, respectively to the Deity. Lastly, Because some of them have conceived,
Body and Space to be Really the same thing; and Space to be Positively
Infinite, Eternal, and Necessarily Existent. But if Space be not the Extension
of the Deity it Self, as some suppose; but of Body, only considered
Abstractly, from This or That, and therefore Immoveably; then no sufficient
Ground, for the Positive Infinity, or the Indefinity thereof, as Cartesius
Imagined: we being certain of no more then this, That be the World and its
Space, or Extension, never so Great, yet it might be still Greater and Greater
Infinitely; for which very Cause, it could never be Positively Infinite. This
Possibility of more Body and Space, further and further Indefinitely, or
Without End, as also its Eternity, mistaken, for Actual Space and Distance
Positively Infinite and Eternal. Nor is there perhaps any such great
Absurdity, in the Finiteness of Actual Space and Distance, (according to this
Hypothesis,) as some conceive. Page 765, 766 Moreover the Existence of a God
may be further proved, from this Common Notion, Nothing from Nothing Causally;
not only because were there no God, that Idea which we h^ve of a Perfect
Being, must have Come from Nothing, and be the Conception of Nothing; but also
all the other Intelligible Idea's of our Minds, must have Come from Nothing
likewise, they being not Derived from Sense. All Minds, and their Intelligible
Idea's, by way of Participation, from One Perfect Omnipotent Being,
Comprehending it Self. Page 766, 767 However, Certain from this Principle,
Nothing from Nothing, or Nothing Caused by Nothing; That Souls and Minds could
never have Emerged out of Dead and Senseless Matter; or from Figures, Sites, and
Motions: and therefore must either have all Existed Of Themselves, Necessarily
from Eternity; or else be Created by the Deity, out of Nothing Prae-Existing.
Concluded, That the Existence of a God is altogether as certain, as That our
Humane Souls did not all Exist from Eternity, Of themselves, Necessarily. Thus
is the Second Atheistick Argumentation against Omnipotence or Divine Creation,
from that False Principle, Nothing out of Nothing, in the Atheistick Sense,
(which is, That Nothing could be brought out of Nonexistence into Being, or No
Substance derive its Whole Being from another Substance; but all was
Self-Existent from Eternity) abundantly Confuted. It having been Demonstrated,
That unless there be a God, or a Perfect Omnipotent Being, and Creator,
Something must have Come from Nothing in the Impossible Sense; that is, have
been Caused by Nothing, or Made without a Cause. Page 767
SECT. III.
THE Six following Atheistick Argumentations, driving at these Two things, (The
Disproving, First of an Incorporeal, and then of a Corporeal Deity) next taken
all together. In way of Answer to which, Three Things. First, To Confute the
Atheistick Argumentations against an Inco^poreal Deity, being the Third and
Fourth. Secondly, To Show, That from the very Principles of the Atheistick
Corporealism, in their Fifth and Sixth Arguments, Incorporeal Substance is
Demonstrable. And Lastly, That therefore the Two following Atheistick
Arguments, (built upon the Contrary Supposition) are also Insignificant. Page
767 Before we come to the Atheistick Arguments, against an Incorporeal Deity,
Premised; That though all Corporealists be not Atheists, yet Atheists
universally, mere Corporealists. Thus Plato in his Sophist; writing of those
who maintained, That Nature Generated all things without the Direction of any
Mind; affirms, That They held, Body and Substance to be One and the Self-same
thing. From whence it follows, That Incorporeal Substance, is Incorporeal Body,
or Contradictious Nonsense; and That whatsoever is not Body, is Nothing. He
likewise adds, That they who asserted the Soul to be a Body, but had not the
Confidence, to make Prudence, and other Virtues Bodies, (or Bodily,) quite
overthrew the Cause of Atheism. Aristotle also represents the Atheistick
Hypothesis thus, That there is but One Nature, Matter; and this Corporeal, (or
endued with Magnitude) the only Substance; and all other things, the Passions
and Affections thereof. Page 767, 769 In Disproving Incorporeal Substance, some
Difference amongst the Atheists themselves. First, Those who held a Vacuum, (as
Epicurus and Democritus, etc.) though taking it for grant^d, That what is
Un-extended or Devoid of Magnitude, is Nothing; yet acknowledged a Double
Extended Nature; the First Impenetrable and Tangible, Body; the Second
Penetrable and Intangible, Space or Vacuum; To them the Only Incorporeal.
Their Argument thus; Since Nothing Incorporeal besides Space, (which can
neither Do nor Suffer any thing) therefore no Incorporeal Deity. The Answer.
If Space be a Real Nature, and yet not Bodily; then must it needs be either an
Affection of Incorporeal Substance; or else an Accident without a Substance.
Gassendus his Officiousness here, to help the Atheists; That Space is neither
Accident, nor Substance, but a Middle Nature, or Essence betwixt Both. But,
whatsoever Is, must either Subsist by it Self, or else be an Attribute,
Affection, or Mode of Something that Subsisteth by it Self. Space, either the
Extension of Body, or of Incorporeal Substance, or of Nothing: but Nothing
cannot be Extended; wherefore Space, supposed, not to be the Extension of Body,
must be the Extension of an Incorporeal Substance Infinite, or the Deity; as
some Theists Assert. Page 769, 770 Epicurus his Pretended Gods, Such as could
neither Touch, nor be Touched, and had not Corpus, but Quasi Corpus only; and
therefore Incorporeals distinct from Space. But Granted, that He Colluded or
Juggled in this. Page 770 Other Atheists who denied a Vacuum, and allowed not
Space to be a Nature, but a mere Imaginary thing, the Phantasm of a Body, or
else Extension considered Abstractly, Argued thus. Whatsoever is Extended, is
Body, or Bodily; But whatsoever Is, is Extended; Therefore whatsoever Is, is
Body. Page 770, 771 This Argument against Incorporeal Substance, Answered Two
manner of ways: Some Asserters of Incorporeal Substance denying the Minor,
Whatsoever Is, is Extended; others the Major of it, Whatsoever is Exended, is
Body. First, The Generality of Ancient Incorporealists real^y maintained, That
there was Something Un-Extended, Indistant, Devoid of Quantity, and of
Magnitude, Without Parts, and Indivisible. Plato, That the Soul is before
Longitude, Latitude, and Profundity. He also Denies, That whatsoever is in no
Place, is Nothing. Aristotle's First Immovable Mover also, Devoid of Magnitude.
So likewise is Mind, or That which Understands, to him. He also denies Place,
and Local Motion to the Soul, otherwise then by Accident with the Body. Page
771, 773 Philo's Double Substance, Distant and Indistant. God also to him, both
Everywhere, (because his Powers Extend to all things) and yet Nowhere, as in
a Place; Place being Created by him, together with Bodies. Plotinus much
concerned in this Doctrine. Two Books of his upon this Subject, That One and
the same Numerical thing, (viz. the Deity) may be All, or the Whole
Everywhere. God to him, Before all things that are in a Place; therefore
Wholly Present to whatsoever Present. This would he prove also from Natural
Instincts. He Affirms likewise, That the Humane Soul is Numerically the Same,
both in the Hand, and in the Foot. Simplicius his Argument for Un-Extended
Substance; That Whatsoever is Self-Moving* must be Indivisible and Indistant.
His Affirmation, That Souls, Locally Immovable, Move the Body by Cogitation.
Page 773, 775 None more full and express in this, then Porphyrius. His
Assertion, That were there such an Incorporeal Space, (as Democritus and
Epicurus supposed) Mind, or God, could not be Co-Extended with it; but only
Body. The whole Deity, Indivisibly and Indistantly Present, to every Part of
Divisible and Distant things. Page 775, 776 Thus Origin in his Against Celsus.
Saint Austine, That the Humane Soul has no Dimensions, of Length, Breadth, and
Thickness, and is in it Self Illocabilis. Boethius reckons this amongst the
Common Notions, known only to wise men, That Incorporeals are in No Place.
Page 776 This therefore no Novel or Recent Opinion, That the Deity is not Part
of it Here, and Part of it There, nor Mensurable by Yards and Poles; but the
Whole Undivided, Present to every Part of the World. But because many
Objections against this; we shall further Show, how these Ancient
Incorporealists endeavored to Quit themselves of them. The First Objection;
That to suppose the Deity, and other Incorporeal Substances, Un-Extended, is to
make them Absolute Parvitudes, and so Contemptible things. Plotinus his Answer;
That what is Incorporeal, not so Indivisible as a Little thing; either a
Physical Minimum, or Mathematical Point; for thus God could not Congruere with
the whole World, nor the Soul with the whole Body. Again, God not so
Indivisible, as the Least, he being the Greatest of all, not in Magnitude, but
Power. He so Indivisible, as also Infinite. This an Error proceeding from
Sense and Imagination; That what Un-Extended, therefore Little. Incorporeal
Substance, the Whole of which is Present to every Part of Body, therefore
Greater then Body. Porphyrius to the same purpose, That God is neither to be
looked upon as the Least, nor as the Greatest, in a way of Magnitude. Page 776,
778 The Second Objection; That what neither Great nor Little, and possesses no
Place, a Nonentity. This according to Plato, Plotinus, and Porphyrius, a
Mistake, proceeding from men's adhering to Sense and Imagination. They Grant,
That an Un-Extended Being, Is (...) Un-Imaginable. Porphyrius, That Mind and
Fancy are not the same, as some maintain. That which can either Do, or
Suffer, not Nothing, though it swell not out into Distance. Two Kinds of
Substances to Plotinus; Bulky Tumors, and Un-bulky Active Powers. Which
latter, said by Simplicius, to have nevertheless a certain Depth or Profundity
in them. Something (...) Un-imaginable, even in Body it self. We cannot
Possibly Imagine the Sun of such a Bigness, as Reason Evinces it to be. Urged
also by Plotinus, That an Un-stretcht-Out Duration, or Timeless Eternity, as
difficult to be Conceived, as an Un-Extended Substance; and yet must this needs
be Attributed to the Deity. Page 778, 781 That God and Humane Souls, no
otherwise Incorporeal, then as (...), a Thin or Subtle Body, False. Because
the Difference of Grosseness and Subtilty in Bodies, according to True
Philosophy, only from Motion. That the most Subtle Body, may possibly be made
as Gross as Lead or Iron; and the Grossest, as Subtle as Ether. No Specific
Difference of Matter. Page 781 The Third Argument, against Un-Extended
Substance; That to be All in the Whole, and All in every Part, a Contradiction,
and Impossibility. This Granted by Plotinus to be True of Bodies, or that which
is Extended, That it cannot be (...)^ but Impossible, that what has no Parts,
should be a Part here, and a Part there. Wherefore the word (...) (in that,
Whole in the Whole, and Whole in every Part) to be taken only in a Negative
Sense, for (...), Undivided. The Whole Undivided Deity Everywhere; and not a
Part of it Here only, and a Part There. Page 782, 783 The Last Objection is
against the Illocality and Immobility of Finite Created Spirits, and Humane
Souls only. That this not only Absurd, but also Contrary to that Generally
Received Tradition amongst Theists, of Souls Moving Locally after Death, into
another Place, called Hades. Two Answers of Plotinus to this. First, That by
Hades, may be meant only the Invisible; or the Soul's Acting without the Body.
Secondly, That if by Hades, be Meant a Worser place, the Soul may be said to be
there, where its Idol is. But when this same Philosopher, supposes the Soul
(in Good men) to be separable also from this Idol, he departs from the
Genuine Cabbala of his own School. That Souls always united to some Body or
other. This asserted here by Porphyrius; That the Soul is never quite naked of
all Body; and therefore may be said to be there, wheresoever its Body is. Page
784, 785 Some Excerptions out of Philoponus; wherein the Doctrine of the
Ancients, concerning the Soul's Spirituous or Airy Body, (after Death) is
Largely declared. Page 785, 787 Intimated here by Philoponus, That, according
to some of these Ancients, the Soul has such a Spirituous Body here in this
Life, as its Interior Indument, which then adheres to it, when its Outer
Garment is stripped off by Death. An Opinion of some, That the Soul may in this
Spirituous Body, leave its Grosser Body for some time, without Death. True,
That our Soul does not immediately Act upon Bones and Flesh; but certain Thin
and Subtle Spirits, the Instruments of Sense and Motion. Of which Porphyrius
thus; The Blood is the Food of the Spirit, and the Spirit the Vehicle of the
Soul. Page 787, 788 The same Philoponus further Adds, That according to the
Ancients, besides both the Terrestrial, and this Spirituous or Airy Body, there
is yet a Third kind of Body, peculiar to such as are Souls, as are more
thoroughly purged after Death; called by them a Luciform, and Heavenly, and
Aetherial, and Starre-like Body. Of this Proclus also, upon the Timaeus, (who
affirms it to be Un-organized;) as likewise Hierocles. This called the Thin
Vehicle of the Soul, in the Chaldee Oracles, according to Psellus and Pletho.
By Hierocles, a Spiritual Body, in a Sense agreeable to that of the Scripture:
by Synesius, the Divine Body. This Distinction of Two Interior Vehicles, or
Tunicles of the Soul, besides the Terrestrial Body, (called by Plato the
Ostreaceous) no Invention of Latter Platonists since Christianity; it being
plainly insisted upon by Virgil, though commonly not Understood. Page 788, 790
That many of these Platonists and Pythagoreans, supposed the Soul, in its First
Creation, when Made pure by God, to be Clothed with this Luciform and Heavenly
Body; which also did always Inseparably adhere to it, in its After-Descents,
into the Aerial and Terrestrial; though Fouled and Obscured. Thus Pletho. And
the same Intimated by Galen; when he calls this, the First Vehicle of the Soul.
Hence was it, that besides the Moral and Intellectual Purgation of the Soul,
they recommended also, a Mystical or Telestick way of Purifying the Aetherial
Vehicle, by Diet and Catharms. This much Insisted on by Hierocles. What Pliny's
Dying By Wisdom, or the Philosophic Death. Page 790, 792 But this not the
Opinion of all, That the Same Numerical Aetherial Body, always adhereth to the
Soul; but only, that it every where either Finds, or Makes a Body, suitable to
it self. Thus Porphyrius. Plato also seems to have been of that Persuasion.
Page 792, 793 This Affirmed by Hierocles, to have been the Genuine Cabbala of
the Ancient Pythagoreans, which Plato afterward followed. Hierocles his
Definition of a Man, A Rational Soul together with a Cognate Immortal Body; he
declaring, This enlivened Terrestrial Body, to be but the Idol or Image of the
True man, or an Accession to him. This therefore the Answer of the Ancient
Incorporealists, to that Objection against the Illocality and Immobility of
Created Incorporeals; That these being all Naturally United to Some Body or
other, may be thus said to be in a Place, and Locally Moved. And, That it does
not follow, that because Created Incorporeals are Un-extended, they might
therefore inform the whole Corporeal Universe. Page 793, 794 That it would be
no Impertinent Digression here, To Compare the forementioned Pythagorick
Cabbala, with the Doctrine of Christianity; and to consider their Agreement or
Disagreement. First therefore, A Clear Agreement of these most Religious
Philosophers with Christianity in this, That the Highest Happiness, and
Perfection of Humane Nature, consists not, in a Separate State of Souls,
Un-united to any Body; as some High-flown Persons have Conceited. Thus
Plotinus; who sometimes runs as much into the other Extreme, in supposing
Humane Souls to Animate, not only the Bodies of Brutes, but also of Plants.
Thus also Maimonides amongst the Jews; and therefore suspected for denying the
Resurrection. His Iggereth Teman, written purposely to purge himself of this
Suspicion. The Allegorizers of the Resurrection, and of the Life to come. Page
794, 795 Again, Christianity Correspondeth with the Philosophic Cabbala,
concerning Humane Souls, in this, That their Happiness consists not, in
Conjunction with such Gross Terrestrial Bodies, as these we now have:
Scripture, as well as Philosophy, complaining of them, as a Heavy Load, and
Burden to the Soul; which therefore not to be taken up again, at the
Resurrection. Such a Resurrection as this, called by Plotinus, a Resurrection
to Another Sleep. The Difference betwixt the Resurrection-Body, and this
Present Body, in Scripture. The Resurrection-Body of the Just, (as that of the
Philosophic Cabbala) Immortal and Eternal; Glorious and Lucid; Star-like and
Spiritual; Heavenly and Angelical. Not this Gross Fleshly Body, Gilded and
Varnished over in the outside only, but Changed throughout. This the
Resurrection of Life, in Scripture, Emphatically called The Resurrection. Our
Souls, Strangers and Pilgrims in these Terrestrial Bodies: Their proper Home
and Country, the Heavenly Body. That the Grossest Body that is, according to
Philosophy, may merely by Motion be brought into the Purity and Tenuity of the
Finest Ether. Page 795, 799 But whether Humane Souls after Death, always
United to some Body, or else quite Naked from all Body, till the Resurrection;
not so Explicitly determined in Christianity. Souls after Death, Live unto God.
According to Origin, This a Privilege Proper to the Deity, to Live and Act
alone, without Vital Union with any Body. If Natural to the Soul, to Enliven a
Body; then not probable, that it should be kept so long in an Unnatural State
of Separation. Page 799, 800 Again; Probable from Scripture, That wicked Souls
after Death, have Punishment of Sense or Pain, besides Remorse of Conscience:
which not easily Conceivable How they should have, without Bodies. Thus
Tertullian. He adding, That Men have the same Shape, or Effigies, after this
Life, which they had here. Though indeed he drive the business too far, so as
to make the Soul it self to be a Body, Figurate and Colourate. Page 800, 801
But Irenaeus plainly supposed, the Soul after Death (being Incorporeal) to be
Adapted to a Body, such as has the same Character and Figure, with its Body
here in this Life. Page 801, 802 Origin also of this Persuasion, That Souls
after Death, have certain Subtle Bodies, retaining the same Characterizing
Form, which their Terrestrial Bodies had. His Opinion, That Apparitions of the
Dead are from the Souls themselves, surviving, in that which is called a
Luciform Body. As also that Saint Thomas did not doubt, but that the Body of a
Soul departed, might appear, every way like the Former: only be disbelieved
our Savior's appearing in the Same Solid Body, which he had before Death. Page
802, 804 Our Savior telling his Disciples, That a Spirit had no Flesh and
Bones, that is, no Solid Body, as himself then had; seems to Imply, them to
have Thinner Bodies, which they may Visibly Appear in. Thus in Apollonius, is
Touch made the Sign, to distinguish a Ghost Appearing, from a Living Man. Our
Savior's Body after his Resurrection, according to Origin, in a Middle State,
betwixt This Gross or Solid Body of ours, and That of a Ghost. Page 804 A place
of Scripture, which as interpreted by the Fathers, would Naturally Imply, the
Soul of our Savior after Death, not to have been quite Naked of all Body, but
to have had a Corporeal Spirit. Moses and Elias, Visibly appearing to our
Savior, had therefore True Bodies. Page 804, 805 That the Regenerate here in
this Life, have a certain Earnest of their Future Inheritance, (which is, their
Spiritual or Heavenly Body) Gathered from Scripture by Irenaeus, and Novatian.
Which Praelibations of the Spiritual Body, cannot so well consist with a
Perfect Separation from all Body, after Death, till the Day of Judgment. Page
805, 806 This Opinion of Irenaeus, Origin, and others, supposed by them, not at
all to Clash with the Christian Article of the Resurrection. Nothing in this
Point determined by us. Page 806 The Last thing in the Pythagorick Cabbala,
That Demons or Angels, and indeed all Created Understanding Beings, consist,
as well as Men, of Soul and Body, Incorporeal and Corporeal, United together.
Thus Hierocles, Universally of all the Rational Nature; and that no Incorporeal
Substance, besides the Supreme Deity, is Complete, without the Conjunction of a
Body. God the Only Incorporeal in this Sense; and not a Mundane, but
Supra-Mundane Soul. Page 806, 808 Origen's full Agreement with this Old
Pythagorick Cabbala, That Rational Creatures are neither Body, nor yet without
Body; but Incorporeal Substances, having a Corporeal Indument. Page 808, 809
Origin misrepresented by Huetius, as asserting Angels not to Have Bodies, but
to Be Bodies: whereas he plainly acknowledged the Humane Soul to be
Incorporeal, and Angels also to have Souls. He proves Incorporeal Creatures,
from the Scriptures; which though themselves not Bodies, yet always Use Bodies.
Whereas the Deity is neither Body, nor yet clothed with a Body, as the Proper
Soul thereof. Page 809, 810 Some of the Fathers, so far from supposing Angels
altogether Incorporeal, that they ran into the other Extreme, and concluded
them altogether Corporeal; that is, to be All Body, and Nothing else. The
Middle betwixt both these, the Origenick and Phythagorick Hypothesis, That they
consist of Incorporeal and Corporeal Substance, Soul and Body Joined together.
The Generality of the Ancient Fathers, for neither of those Extremes. That they
did not suppose Angels to be perfectly Unbodied Spirits; Evident from their
affirming Devils, as the Greek Philosophers did Demons, to be Delighted with
the Nidours of Sacrifices; as having their Vapourous Bodies, or Airy Vehicles,
refreshed thereby. Thus Porphyrius, and before him Celsus. Amongst the
Christians, (besides Origin) Justin, Athenagoras, Tatianus, etc. S. Basil,
concerning the Bodies of Demons or Devils, being Nourished with Vapors; not by
Organs, but throughout their whole Substance. Page 810, 812 Several of the
Fathers plainly asserting, both Devils and Angels to consist of Soul and Body;
Incorporeal and Corporeal Substance, Joined together. Saint Austine,
Claudianus, Mamertus, Fulgentius, Joannes Thessalonicensis; and Psellus, who
Philosophizeth much concerning this. Page 812, 814 That some of the Ancients,
when they called Angels Incorporeal, understood Nothing else thereby, but only
that they had not Gross, but Subtle Bodies. Page 814, 815 The Fathers, though
herein Happening to Agree with the Philosophic Cabbala, yet seemed to have
been led thereunto by Scripture. As from that of our Savior, They who shall
obtain the Resurrection of the Dead, shall be (...), Equal to the Angels; that
is, according to Saint Austine, shall have Angelical Bodies. From that of Saint
Jude, That Angels Sinning, lost their Own Proper Dwelling House; that is, their
Heavenly Body. (called (...) by Saint Paul) which made them Fit Inhabitants of
the Heavenly Regions; and thereupon Cast down into the Lower Tartarus;
interpreted by Saint Austine, to be this Caliginous Air or Atmo-Sphear of the
Earth. Again, From that Fire said to have been Prepared for the Devils: which
being not to be taken Metaphorically, therefore (as Psellus concludes) Implies
them to be Bodied; because an Incorporeal Substance alone, and not Vitally
United to any Body, cannot be Tormented with Fire. Page 815, 817 Now if all
Created Incorporeals, Superior to Men, be Souls vitally United to Bodies, and
never quite Separate from all Body; then Probable, that Humane Souls, after
Death, not quite Naked from all Body, as if they could Live and Act completely
without it; a Privilege Superior to that of Angels, and proper to the Deity.
Nor is it at all Conceivable, How Imperfect Beings could have Sense and
Imagination without Bodies. Origin Contra Celsum, Our Soul in its own Nature
Incorporeal, always Stands in need of a Body, suitable to the place wherein
it is. And accordingly, Sometimes Puts Off what it had before; and Sometimes
again Puts On something New. Where the following words being vitiated;
Origen's Genuine Sense restored. Evident that Origin distinguishes, the (...)
in S. Paul, (Translated, Tabernacle,) from the Earthly House; he understanding
by the former, a Thin Spirituous Body, which is a Middle betwixt the Earthly
and the Heavenly, and which the Soul remains still clothed with, after Death.
This Opinion of Origen's, That the Soul after Death, not quite Separate from
all Body, never reckoned up in the Catalogue of his Errors. Origin not Taxed
by Methodius, for asserting Souls to Have Bodies, but for not asserting them to
Be Bodies; there being no truly Incorporeall Substance, according to Methodius,
but the Deity. This One of the Extremes mentioned. And the Origenick
Hypothesis, to be preferred before that of Methodius. Page 817, 820 Already
Observed, That Origin not Singular, in this Opinion concerning Humane Souls;
Irenaeus, Philoponus, Joannes Thessalonicensis, Psellus, and others, asserting
the same. S. Austine in his De Genesis ad Lit. Grants, That Souls after Death
cannot be carried to any Corporal Places, nor Locally Moved, without a Body.
Himself seems to think, the Punishment of Souls, before the Resurrection, to be
Fantastical. But gives Liberty of thinking otherwise. In his Book De Civ. D.
He Conceives, that Origenick Opinion not Improbable, That some Souls after
Death, and before the Resurrection, may Suffer from a certain Fire, for the
consuming and burning up of their Dross: which could not be without Bodies.
Page 820, 822 Hitherto showed, How the Ancient Asserters of Unextended
Incorporealls, Answered all the Objections made against them; but especially
that of the Illocality and Immobility of Created Incorporealls; namely, That by
those Bodies, which they are always Vitally United to, they are Localized, and
made Capable of Motion; according to that of Origin, The Soul stands in need of
a Body for Local Motions. Next to be considered, their Reasons for this
Assertion, of Unextended and Indistant Substance, so repugnant to Imagination.
Page 822 That whatsoever Arguments do Evince other Substance besides Body, the
Same against the Atheists Demonstrate, that there is Something Unextended;
themselves taking it for granted, that whatsoever is Extended, is Body.
Nevertheless, other Arguments propounded by these Ancients, to prove directly,
Unextended Substance. Plotinus his First; To prove the Humane Soul and Mind
such. Either every Part of an Extended Soul is Soul; and of Mind, Mind; or Not.
If the Latter, That no Part of a Soul, or Mind, is by it Self Soul, or Mind;
then cannot the Whole, made up of all those Parts, be such. But if every
supposed Part of a Soul, be Soul, and of a Mind, Mind; then would all but One
be Superfluous; or Every One be the Whole: which cannot be in Extended things.
Page 822, 824 Again, Plotinus endeavors to Prove, from the Energies of the
Soul, that it is Unextended, Because it is One and the Same Indivisible thing,
that Perceives the whole Sensible Object. This further pursued; If the Soul be
Extended, then must it either be One Physical Point, or More. Impossible That
it should be but One Physical Point. If therefore More, then must every one of
those Points, either Perceive a Point of the Object, and no more, or else the
Whole. If the Former, then can nothing Perceive the Whole, nor compare one Part
of it with another: If the Latter, then would every man have innumerable
Perceptions of the whole Object at once. A Fourth Supposition, That the whole
Extended Soul, Perceives both the Whole Object, and all the Parts thereof; (no
Part of this Soul having any Perception by it Self) Not to be Made; Because,
the Whole of an Extended Substance, nothing but All the Parts: and so if no
Part have any Perception, the Whole can have none. Moreover, To say, the Whole
Soul Perceives all, and no Part of it any thing, is indeed to acknowledge it
Unextended, and to have no Distant Parts. Page 824, 826 Again, This Philosopher
would prove the same thing, from the Sympathy or Homopathy, which is in
Animals; it being One and the Same thing, that perceives Pain in the Head, and
in the Foot; and Comprehends the whole Bulk of the Body. Page 826 Lastly, He
disputes further, from the Rational Energies. A Magnitude could not
Understand, what has no Magnitude, and what is Indivisible: whereas we have a
Notion, not only of Latitude Indivisible as to Thickness, and of Longitude as
to Breadth, but also of a Mathematical Point, every way Indivisible. We have
Notions of things also, that have neither Magnitude nor Site, etc. Again, all
the Abstract Essences of things Indivisible. We conceive Extended things
themselves, Unextendedly; the Thought of a Mile, or a Thousand Miles Distance,
taking up no more room in the Soul, then the Thought of an Inch, or of a
Mathematical Point. Moreover, were that which perceives in us, a Magnitude,
it could not be Equal to every Sensible, and alike Perceive things Greater and
Lesser, then it self. Page 827, 828 Besides which, they might Argue thus; That
we, as we can Conceive Extension without Cogitation, and again Cogitation
without Extension, (from whence their Distinction and Separability is
Inferrible:) so can we not Conceive Cogitation with Extension; not the Length,
Breadth, and Thickness of a Thought; nor the Half, or a Third, or Twentieth
Part thereof; nor that it is Figurate, Round, or Angular. Thoughts therefore
must be Non-Entities, if whatsoever is Unextended be Nothing; as also
Metaphysicall Truths, they having neither Dimensions, nor Figure. So Volitions
and Passions, Knowledge and Wisdom it self, Justice and Temperance. If the
things belonging to Soul and Mind, be Unextended, then must themselves be so.
Again, If Mind and Soul have Distant Parts, then could none of them be One, but
Many Substances. If Life Divided, then a Half of it would not be Life. Lastly,
no reason could be given why they might not be as well Really, as
Intellectually Divisible. Nor could a Theist deny, but that Divine Power might
Cleave a Thought, together with the Soul wherein it is, into many Pieces. Page
828, 829 The Sense of the Ancient Incorporealists therefore this; That in
Nature, Two kinds of Substances. The First of them Passive Bulk, or Distant and
Extended Substance; Which is all, One thing without Another; and therefore as
Many Substances, as Parts, into which it can be divided. Essentially
Antitypous; one Magnitude Joined to another, always Standing without it, and
making the Whole so much Bigger. Body all Outside, having nothing Within, no
Internal Energy, nor any Action besides Local Motion; which it is also
Passive to. Page 829 Were there no other Substance besides this, there could be
no Motion, Action, Life, Cogitation, Intellection, Volition; but All would be a
Dead Lump; nor could any one thing Penetrate another. Wherefore Another
Substance, whose Character (...), the Active Nature; Life, Self-Activity,
Cogitation: which no Mode or Accident of Extension; it having more of Entity in
it. Nor are these Two, Extension and Life, Inadequate Conceptions, of One and
the Same Substance. A Thinker a Monad; or One Single Substance. Not
Conceiveable, how the Several Parts of an Extended Substance, should Jointly
Concur to Produce One and the Same Thought. Page 829, 830 The Energies of
these Two Substances, very different. The one Nothing but Local Motion, or
Translation from Place to Place; a mere Outside Thing: The other Cogitation, an
Internal Energy; or in the Inside of that which Thinks. Which Inside of the
Thinking Nature, has no Length, Breadth, or Profundity, no Out-swelling
Tumor; because then it would be Outside again. Were a Cogitative Being
Extended, yet must it have besides this Extended Outside, an Unextended Inside.
But One and the Same Substance cannot be Extended, and Unextended. Wherefore in
this Opinion of Extended Incorporealls, a Complication of Two Substances, and a
Confusion of them together into One. True nevertheless, That all Finite
Incorporeall Substance, is always Naturally united with some Extended Body, as
its Outside. Page 831 All Summed up Together. Page 832 Hitherto the Sense of
the Ancient Asserters of Unextended Incorporealls, represented to the best
Advantage. Nothing Asserted by us; but that these, and other Arguments, do
Demonstrate against the Atheists, some Other Substance besides Body: but
whether or no, they Prove this to be Indistant and Unextended; left to others
to make a Judgment. The Atheists who deny this, must acknowledge every Thought,
to be not only Mentally, but also Physically Divisible and Separable; together
with the Soul: as also deny Internal Energy; and consequently make Cogitation,
Nothing but Local Motion: and Lastly, Hold That no Substance can Co-Exist with
Another Substance, more Inwardly, then by Juxta-Position. Page 832, 833 This
the First Answer to the Forementioned Atheistick Argument against Incorporeall
Substance; made by the Ancients, By denying the Minor; That though whatsoever
is Extended be Body, yet Every thing is not Extended. But the Argument
otherwise Answered, by some Learned Asserters of Incorporeall Substance, By
denying the Major; That though every thing be Extended, or what Unextended
Nothing; yet whatever is Extended, is not Body; they asserting another
Extension Incorporeall, which is both Penetrable, and not made up of Parts
Physically Separable from one another; to which belongs Life, Self-Activity,
and Cogitation. Probable, That some would Compound both the Forementioned
Hypotheses together; by supposing the Deity to be altogether Unextended, and
Indivisibly all everywhere; but Souls, or Created Incorporealls, to have an
Unextended Inside, Diffused, as it were, into an Extended Outside. Our selves
here only to Oppose Atheists; and Dogmatize no further, then to Assert, what
all Incorporealists agree in, That besides Body, there is Another Substance,
which consists not of Parts Really Separable from one another; which is
Penetrable of Body, and Self-Active, and has an Internal Energy, distinct
from Local Motion. All which is Demonstratively Certain. This the Full Answer
to the First Atheistick Argument, Against Incorporeal Substance; That either
there is Something Unextended, or at least Extended otherwise then Body, so as
to be Penetrable thereof, and Indiscerpibly One with it self, and Self-Active.
Page 833, 834 The Second Atheistick Assault against Incorporeall Substance; By
Pretending the Original of this Mistake, to have sprung from the Scholastic
Essences, Distinct from the things themselves; and the Abuse of Abstract Names
and Notions, they being made to be Substances Existing by themselves. For,
though the Opinion of Ghosts and Spirits, (whereof God is the Chief) sprung
first from Fear; yet that these should be Incorporeall, could never have
entered into the Minds of men, had they not been Enchanted with these Abstract
Names and Separate Essences. Page 834 The First General Reply to this, That it
is all but Romantic Fiction. That the Opinion of the Deity, sprung not from
Fear, and That all Invisible Ghosts are not Phancies, already sufficiently
Proved; as also The Existence of a God Demonstrated by Reason. That Apparitions
are Real Phenomenon; and Reasonable to think, That there may as well be
Invisible Aeriall, and Aetheriall; as there are Visible Terrestrial Animals.
Sottishness to conclude, That there is no Understanding Nature, Superior to
Man. Page 834, 835 The Second Particular Reply, That the Opinion of Spirits
Incorporeall, sprung not from the Scholastic Essences, whether considered
Concretely as Universals only, or Abstractly. No man supposing, these to be
Things Really and Substantially Existing without the Mind; either an Universal
Man and Universal Horse, or else Humanity and Equinity: and that these walk up
and down in Airy Bodies; they being only Noemata, or the Intelligible Essences
of Things, as Objects of the Mind. These Essences of Things, said to be
Eternal, as their Verities. The meaning of these Eternal Essences; not, That
they are so many Eternal Substances Incorporeall; but, That Knowledge is
Eternal, and, That there is an Eternal Unmade Mind, that comprehends them;
which all other Minds Partake of. Page 835, 836 Again, That another Atheistick
Dream, That the Abstract Names and Notions of the Mere Accidents of Bodies,
were Made Substances Incorporeall; Souls, Minds, and Ghosts. Conscious Life, no
Accident of Bodies, as Atheists Suppose; but the Essential Attribute of
Another Substance, which Incorporeall; as Magnitude, or Extension, is the
Essential Attribute of Body. Page 836 The following Atheistick Arguments to be
dispatched with more Brevity. That the Four Next, Fifth, Sixth, Seventh and
Eighth, proceed only upon this Supposition, That there is no Other Substance
in the World, besides Body or Matter; and therefore signify Nothing, to the
Asserters of an Incorporeall Deity. Stoics, and the like, only concerned to
Answer them. Nevertheless, From the Impossibility of these Atheistick
Corporealisms, contained in the Fifth, and Sixth, a Necessity of Incorporeall
Substance will be Evinced. Page 836 Here two Atheistick Corporealisms, Founded
upon these Suppositions, That all is Body or Matter; and, That Matter as such,
is devoid of Life and Understanding. The First in the way of Qualities and
Forms, Generable and Corruptible, called the Hylopathian. This the most Ancient
Atheistick Form, as we learn from Aristotle; viz. That Bulky Extension, the
only Substantial and Unmade thing, and all other things, but the Passions,
Qualities, and Accidents thereof; Makeable out of it, and Destroyable into it.
The Consequence from whence; That there is no Substantial Unmade Life and
Understanding: And, That no Mind could be a God, or Creator; it being all
Accidental, Factitious, and Creature. Page 836, 837 This Hylopathian Atheism,
called also by us, Anaximandrian. Though we are not Ignorant, That Simplicius
conceives, Anaximander to have held an Homoeomery, or Similar Atomology, of
Eternal Unmade Qualities, as Anaxagoras afterward: only, that he
acknowledged no Unmade Life or Mind, but Generated it all, from the Fortuitous
Commixture of those Qualified Atoms. (Which no Improbable Opinion, though not
Certain.) Because however, Anaximander supposed Life and Understanding, to be
at least Secondary Qualities, and Accidents of Body, Generable and Corruptible.
And not Fit, to multiply Forms of Atheism. Page 837 The Second Atheistick
Corporealism, in the way of Unqualified Atoms, producing all things, even Life,
and Understanding; from Figures, Sites, Motions, and Magnitudes of Parts. From
whence it will also follow, That Mind is no Primordial Thing, but Secondary,
Compounded, and Derivative; Creature, and no Creator. This called Democritick;
not because Democritus was the First Inventer of the Dissimilar Atomology; but
because he was the First Atheizer of it, or the First, who made Dissimilar
Atoms, the Principles of All things whatsoever, even of Life and Understanding.
ibid. Not to be Denied, But that from these Two things Granted, That All is
Body, and, That the First Principles of Body are devoid of Life and
Understanding; it would follow unavoidably, That there is no God. Therefore the
Stoics, who were Corporeal Theists, denied the Latter; they supposing an
Understanding Fire, Eternal and Unmade, the Maker of the whole Mundane System.
Truly Observed by Origin, That this Corporeal God of the Stoics, was but by
Accident Incorruptible, and Happy; and only because Wanting a Destroyer. This
no Genuine Theism. Page 837, 838 But an Absolute Impossibility, in both these
Atheistick Corporealisms; not only, because they suppose no Active Principle;
but also, because they bring Life and Understanding, that is, Something, out of
Nothing; or Make them without a Cause. Where the Atomick Atheists, of the Two,
most to be Condemned; because so grossly Contradicting themselves. From that
True Principle, That Matter as such, is devoid of Life and Understanding; an
Absolute Necessity of another Substance Incorporeal, which is Essentially Vital
and Intellectual. That All Life, cannot possibly be Factitious and Accidental,
Generable and Corruptible; but there must be Substantial Life; and also some
Eternal. Page 838, 839 The Truth of this Understood and Acknowledged by the
Hylozoists; That there must of Necessity be, both Substantial and Unmade Life
and Understanding: who therefore Attribute the same to all Matter as such; but
without Animality; which, according to them, is all Factitious and Accidental.
Wherefore, this Hylozoick Atheism also, brings Conscious Life and Animality out
of Nothing; or Makes them without a Cause. The Argument of the Epicurean
Atheists, against Stratonism or Hylozoism, Unanswerable: That upon this
Supposition, there must be, in every Man and Animal, a Heap of Innumerable
Percipients, as many as there are Atoms of Matter; and so no One Thinker. The
Pretense of the Hylozoists, That all the Particles of Matter, in every Animal,
do Confederate; Ridiculous, and Impossible. Page 839, 840 Thus the Fifth and
Sixth Atheistick Argumentations, fully Confuted; and from that True Supposition
in them, That Matter, as such, is Devoid of Life and Understanding, Incorporeal
Substance plainly Demonstrated: Which was our Second Undertaking. Page 840 The
Third and Last; That there being Undeniably, Substance Incorporeal, the Two
Following Atheistick Argumentations, (built upon the Supposition of the
Contrary) altogether Insignificant. The Seventh not properly directed against
Theism, but against a Religious kind of Atheism or Theogonism; which supposed a
God or Soul of the World, Generated out of Senseless Matter; and the Offspring
of Night and Chaos. A Sober and True Sense, of the World's Animation; That
there is a Living, Sentient and Understanding Nature, Presiding over the whole
World. But the Sense of Pagan Theists, That the Whole Corporeal World
Animated, is a God, Exploded by us. This Argument therefore being not against
Theism, but Theogonism; the Confutation thereof might be here well Omitted,
without any Detriment to our Cause. But because the denying of a Living
Understanding Nature, presiding over the World, is Atheistical; the Ground of
this Assertion briefly Declared; That Life and Understanding are Accidents of
Bodies, resulting only from Such a Contexture of Atoms, as produce Flesh,
Blood, and Brains, in Bodies Organized; and, That there is no Reason to be
found any-where, but only in Humane Form: which also Confuted. A Brutish
Passage, of a Modern Writer, That it is Inconceivable by Men, How God can
Understand without Brains. Page 840, 841 The Next, (which is the Eighth
Atheistick Argumentation) That there can be no Living Being Immortal, nor
Perfectly Happy; built upon that False Supposition also, That all Life and
Understanding results from a Contexure of Dead and Senseless Atoms, and
therefore is Dissolvible and Annihilable. But that there is Life Essential,
and Substantial, which Naturally Immortal: as also a Necessity, of an
Eternal Life, and Mind Unmade, and Unannihilable; which Perfectly Happy. Page
841, 842
SECT. IV.
THE Epicurean Atheists further Endeavor, to Disprove a God, from the
Phenomenon of Motion, and Cogitation; in the Three Following Argumentations,
the Ninth, Tenth, and Eleventh. From Motion, thus; That from this Principle,
Nothing can move It Self, but Whatsoever is Moved, is moved by Another, it will
follow, That there can be no First Cause, and Unmoved Mover; but One thing
Moved Another, from Eternity Infinitely; Because Nothing could Move Another,
which was not It Self First Moved by Something else. Page 842, 843 Answer: The
meaning of this Axiom; Not, That Nothing can Act from It Self, as the Atheist
Supposes; he taking it for granted, that every Thing is Body, and that all
Action is Local Motion; but, That no Body Resting, could ever Locally Move It
Self. A False Supposition of the Atheists, and some Cartesians; That were there
but once Motion in the Matter, this would of it Self continue to all Eternity.
True, that of Aristotle; That to make an Infinite Progress in the Causes of
Motion, and no First Mover; is all one as to say. That there is No Cause at all
thereof; or, That all the Motion in the World, is a Passion without an Agent,
or Comes from Nothing. Clearly Impossible, That there should be any Motion at
all, were there Nothing Self-Moving or Self-Active. Page 843 Wherefore from
this Principle, That no Body can Move It Self, it follows Undeniably; That
there is Some other Substance in the World besides Body, that has an Active
Power of Moving Body. Page 843, 844 Another Corollary from the same Principle;
That there is another Species of Action, distinct from Local Motion, and which
is not Heterokinesy, but Autokinesy. That the Action by which Local Motion is
first Caused, could not be it self Local Motion. All Local Motion Caused
Originally by Cogitation. Thus the Ninth Atheistick Argument from Motion
Confuted; and from hence, That no Body can Move it Self, Demonstrated, That
there is Something Incorporeal the First Cause of Local Motion, by Cogitation.
ibid. But the Atheists further Pretend to Prove, That Cogitation it self is
Heterokinesy, the Passion of the Thinker, and the Action of some other External
Agent upon him; Because, Nothing takes Beginning from It Self; and, No
Cogitation can rise of It Self, without a Cause. That therefore, Thinking
Beings themselves are Machines, and Cogitation Local Motion. And, No
Understanding Being, a First Cause, nor Perfectly Happy; because Dependent upon
something else. Page 844, 845 Answer. True, That no Substance takes Beginning
from it Self; as also, That no Action Causes it Self. But False, That No
Action takes Beginning from the Immediate Agent; or, That Nothing can Act
otherwise, then as Acted upon by Something else. Atheists here Affirm only,
what they should Prove* and so Beg the Question. If Nothing Self-Active, then
all the Motion and Action in the Universe, must Come from Nothing, or be Made
without a Cause. Page 845 True also, That our Humane Cogitations are frequently
occasioned from External Objects, and that the Concatenations of Thoughts and
Phantasms, often depend upon Mechanic Causes. But False, That all Cogitations
are Obtruded upon us from without; and, That no Transition in our Thoughts,
which was not Before in Sense. The Humane Soul a Principle of Actions, and
therefore also of Cogitations. This a Bubbling Fountain of Thoughts. But that
there is such a Perfect Mind, as at once Comprehends all Truth, and was Before
Sensibles. Page 845, 846 This a Prodigious Paradox, and Falsity of Atheists;
That Cogitation, Local Motion; and Thinking Beings, Machines. Here a Correction
of what we wrote before, P. 761, and a Change of our Opinion, upon further
Consideration; That not only a Modern Writer, but also the Ancient Atheistick
Atomists, did conclude, Cogitation to be Really nothing else but Local Motion.
Nevertheless, these men troubled with the Fancy of Cogitation; which because
they cannot make Local Motion, they would persuade us to be no Reality, or
Nothing. Atheists aware, That if there be any Action besides Local Motion,
there must then be some other Substance acknowledged besides Body. They who
make Cogitation Local Motion, and Men, Machines, no more to be disputed with,
then Senseless, Machines. Page 846, 847 To Affirm, That no Understanding Being
can be Happy, nor a God, because Dependent upon Something without it; all one
as to Affirm, That Senseless Matter is the Most Perfect of all things; and, That
Knowledge, as such, speaking Imperfection, is but a Whiffling and Fantastic
thing. But of this more afterward. Thus the Tenth Atheistick Argument
Confuted. Page 847 Another Atheistick Argument, From the Nature of Knowledge
and Understanding. That the World could not be made by an Underding Being,
Because there was no Knowledge before Things, which are the Objects of it; and
the only Things are Sensibles, which Knowledge a Passion from. Therefore all
Mind, as such, a Creature, and none a Creator. ibid. This already fully
Answered, Page 729, and so forwards. Where Proved, That Singular Bodies are not
the Only Things, and Objects of the Mind, but that it contains its
Intelligibles within it Self. And, That Knowledge, is Archetypall to the World,
and the Maker of All. So the Existence of a God, Demonstrable, from the Nature
of Knowledge and Understanding. Page 847, 848 That the Atheists can no more
Salve the Phenomenon of Cogitation, then that of Local Motion; Evident from
their Many Hallucinations concerning it; whereof a Catalogue subjoyned. First,
That all Life and Understanding, a mere Accidental thing, Generable and
Corruptible, and no Life nor Mind Substantial or Essential. This before
Confuted. Page 848 Again, That Life and Mind, no Simple and Primitive Natures,
but Compounded Syllables of things; and therefore none Immortal nor
Incorruptible. Answer; That Life and Understanding are Active Powers, and could
never result from mere Passive Bulk; nor can any Composition of Dead and
Senseless Matter, possibly beget Life and Understanding. Though no Necessity,
That there should be any Eternal Unmade Red or Green, because these might be
Made out of things not Red nor Green; nor That there should be Eternal Motion,
because Motion might be produced from a Self-Active Principle; nor That there
should be any Eternal Unmade Matter, because were there none, it might
notwithstanding be Created, by a Perfect Incorporeal Being: yet an Absolute
Necessity of Eternal Unmade Life and Mind; because had there been once none,
there could never have been any. Page 848, 849 Another Atheistick
Hallucination, That there is Nothing of Self-Activity in Cogitation; nor any
thing could Act otherwise, then as it is Made to Act by Something else. This to
bring all Action, from Nothing, or to suppose it without a Cause. Page 849, 850
Another Madness of theirs already mentioned, That Cogitation, Local Motion;
and Thinking Beings, Machines. This Equal Sottishness or Impudence, as to
affirm, Number to be Figure, etc. Page 850 Another Paradox of the Epicurean and
Democritick Atheists, That Mental Cogitation, as well as Sensation, the mere
Passions of the Thinker, and the Actions of Bodies Existing without him: Some
of them supposing Thoughts, to be Caused by certain Finer Images, then
Sensations; Others, than they are the Remainders of the Motions of Sense,
formerly made. Answer: That Sensation it self, is not a mere Corporeal Passion,
but the Perception of a Passion, in a way of Fancy; much less Mental
Cogitations such; and least of all Volitions. Page 850, 851 But Consentaneously
hereunto, these Atheists Determine, all Knowledge and Understanding, to be
Really the same thing with Sense. From whence follow Two Absurdities. First,
That there can be no such thing as Error, because all Passion is True Passion,
and all Sense, True Sense; that is, True Seeming and Appearance. This Absurdity
owned by Protagoras. Epicurus Endeavored to avoid this, but in vain, and
contradictiously to his own Principles. Page 851, 852 A Second Absurdity
consequent thereupon; That there is no Absolute Truth nor Falsehood, but all
Knowledge Private and Relative, and nothing but Opinion. This freely owned
likewise by Protagoras. Sometimes also by Democritus. Who therefore but a
Blunderer neither, in the Atomick Philosophy; which plainly Supposes a Higher
Faculty of Reason and Understanding, that judges of Sense, and discovers the
Phantastry thereof; it reaching to Absolute Truth. Page 852, 853 Another
Atheistick Error; That Singular Bodies are the only Objects of Mental
Conception, as well as of Sensation. This imputed by Aristotle, to Democritus
and Protagoras. But sufficiently before Confuted. Page 853, 854 The better to
maintain this Paradox, Added by a Modern Atheistick Writer, as his, own
Invention; That Universals are Nothing else but Names, by which Many Singular
Bodies are called; Axioms or Propositions, the Addition and Substraction of
Names; and Syllogistick Reasoning, the reckoning the Consequences of them: and
that therefore besides the Passions of Sense, we know Nothing at all of any
thing, but only the Names by which it is Called. Whence it would follow, That
Geometrical Truths, not the same in Greek and in Latin, etc. Page 854 That
the Atheists, according to these premised Principles, endeavor to Depreciate
Knowledge and Understanding, as that which speaks no Higher Perfection, then is
in Senseless Matter. Thus the Atheists in Plato, make it but a Ludicrous,
Umbratile and Evanid thing; the mere Image of Bodies, the only Realities.
Their Design in this, to take away the Scale, or Ladder of Entities. Page 855,
856 All the Grounds of this again briefly Confuted; and Particularly, that
Opinion so much favoring Atheism, That there is Nothing in the Understanding,
which was not Before in Sense; out of Boethius. Just and Unjust, Greater
Realities in Nature, then Hard and Soft, etc. Unquestionably, a Scale or Ladder
of Entities; and therefore Certain, that the Order of Things must be in way of
Descent, from Higher Perfection to Lower, and not of Ascent, from Lower to
Higher. The Steps of this Ladder not Infinite: the Foot thereof, Inanimate
Matter; the Head, a Perfect Omnipotent Being, Comprehending in It self all
Possibilities of Things. Mind by Nature Lord over all; and Sovereign King of
Heaven and Earth. Page 856, 859 The Reason why we so much Insist upon this;
Because Atheists Pretend, not only to Salve the Phenomenon of Cogitation
without a God; but also from thence to Demonstrate the Impossibility of his
Existence. Though Modern Writers not so much aware hereof; yet is the
Controversy betwixt Theists and Atheists, thus Stated by Plato; Whether Soul
and Mind Juniors to Senseless Matter, and the Offspring thereof; or else
Substantial Things, and in Order of Nature Before it. Accordingly Plato
confuteth Atheism no otherwise, then by proving Soul not to be Junior to
Inanimate Matter. and Generated out of the same. Evident, That Plato by Soul
here understood, not only the Mundane Soul, but also that Whole Rank of
Beings, called Soul; and, That no Life was Generated out of Matter. Page 859,
860 Those professed Christians, who Generate Rational Souls out of Senseless
Matter, plain Betrayers of the Cause of Theism. Page 860, 861 Nor is the Case
much different, as to others; who, though they professedly Generate only
Sensitive Souls, yet making the Rational, but mere Blanks, which have Nothing
in them, but what was Scribbled upon them by Sense; and so Knowledge, in its
own Nature, Junior to Sense and Sensibles; Highly Gratify the Atheists hereby.
Page 861 If any Life and Cogitation may be Generated out of Dead and Senseless
Matter, then can no good Reason be given, why All should not be. Life not
partly Accidental, partly Substantial: but either All Conscious Life,
Accidental, Generable and Corruptible; or else None at all. ibid. The Doctrine
of Real Qualities Generable and Corruptible, favorable to Atheism also. And
though the Atheistick Atomists Explode all the other Qualities, Because,
Nothing can come from Nothing; yet, contradicting themselves again, do they
make Life and Understanding, Real Qualities, Generated out of Matter, or
Caused by Nothing. Page 861, 862 There being a Seal or Ladder of Entities in
Nature, to Produce a Higher Rank of Beings, out of a Lower; as Life and
Cogitation, out of Matter, and Magnitude; is to Invert the Order of this Scale,
from Downwards, to Upwards; and so to lay a Foundation for Atheism. Wherefore
great Reason, to maintain this Post, against the Atheists; That no Souls can be
Generated out of Matter. Page 862, 863 The Grand Objection against the
Substantiality of Sensitive Souls, from that Consequence of their Permanent
Subsistence after Death. Cartesius so Sensible thereof; that he would rather
make Brutes to be Senseless Machines, then allow them Substantial Souls; which
he granted they must have, if Thinking Beings. What clearly Demonstrable by
Reason, not to be abandoned, because attended with some Difficulties, or
seemingly, Offensive Consequences. Page 863 The Pythagorick Hypothesis; That
Souls all Created by God, not in the Generation of Animals, but in the
Cosmogonia. These therefore, first Clothed with Thin and Subtle Bodies,
Aeriall or Aetheriall Ochemata, wherein they Subsist, both before their Ingress
into Terrestrial Bodies, and after their Egress out of them. Thus Boethius and
Proclus. Ammonius his Irrational Demons Mortal; Brutish Souls, in Aeriall
Bodies. Since the First Creation, no New Substantial thing Made, or Destroyed,
and therefore no Life. This looked upon by Macrobius as a Great Truth. Page
863, 865 That the Pythagoreans would Endeavor to gain some Countenance for
this Hypothesis, from the Scripture. Page 865, 867 But if these Aeriall
Vehicles of Brutish Souls be exploded for a Whimsey, and none but Terrestrial
Bodies allowed to them; though after Death they will not Vanish into Nothing,
yet must they needs remain in a State of Insensibility, and Inactivity, till
reunited to other Terrestrial Bodies. Wherefore these in one Sense Mortal,
though in another Immortal. Silkworms dying, and reviving in the Form of
Butterflies, made an Emblem of the Resurrection, by Christian Theologers. Page
867, 868 But no Absolute Necessity, That the Souls of Brutes, though
Substantial, should have a Permanent Subsistence after Death, either in a
State of Activity, or Inactivity; Because, whatsoever Created by God, may
Possibly by him be Annihilated. The Substantiality only of the Rational Soul,
Demonstrable by Reason; or that it will not of it Self vanish into Nothing; but
not that it is Absolutely Impossible, for it to be Annihilated; The assurance
of this Depending upon a Faith in the Divine Goodness. Porphyrius his
Assertion, That Brutish Souls are Resolved into the Life of the Universe. The
whole Answer to this Objection, against the Substantiality of Brutish Souls;
That they may notwithstanding, Possibly be Annihilated in the Deaths of
Animals, as well as they were Created in their Generations; but if they do
Subsist (without Aeriall Vehicles,) they must remain in a State of Inactivity
and Insensibility. Page 868, 869 That this the Doctrine of the Ancient Pagan
Theologers, That no Life, or Soul, Generated out of Dead and Senseless Matter;
but all Produced by the Deity, as well as Matter; Proved out of Virgil: though
sundry other Testimonies also, might be added thereunto. Page 869, 870 The
Hylozoick Atheists themselves, so Sensible hereof, That there must be some
Substantial and Unmade Life, (from whence the Lives and Minds of all Animals
are Derived) That they attribute the same to Matter; and conclude, That though
the Modificated Lives of Animals, and Men, be Accidental, Generated and
Corrupted, yet the Fundamental Life of them, is Substantial, and
Incorruptible. These also asserted, a Knowledge before Sense, and Vnderived
from Sensibles. Page 870, 871 This Hylozoick Atheism again Confuted. Absurd to
suppose, Knowledge and Understanding, without Consciousness; as also, That the
Substantial and Fundamental Life, of Men and other Animals, should never
Perish, and yet their Souls, and Personalities, Vanish into Nothing. That no
Organization can produce Consciousness. These Atheists not able possibly to
give an Account, whence the Intelligible Objects and Idea's, of this their
Knowledge of Matter, should spring. This Hylozoick Atheism, Nothing but the
Crumbling of the Deity into Matter. Page 871 Concluded, That the Phenomenon of
Mind and Understanding, can no way possibly be Salved by Atheists, without a
God; but affords a Solid Demonstration of his Existence. Page 871, 872
SECT. V.
THERE now Remaining only, the Atheistick Objections against Providence, their
Queries, and Arguments from Interests; Their First Objection, From the Frame of
the World, as Faulty. Or, Because Things are Ill Made, that therefore not made
by a God. This directed against the Sense of the Ancient Theologers; That God
being a Perfect Mind, therefore made the World after the Best manner. Some
Modern Theologers Deviating from this, as if the Perfection of the Deity
consisted not at all in Goodness, but in Power and Arbitrary Will only. The
Controversy betwixt these and Atheists; but Whether Matter Fortuitously Moved,
or a Fortuitous Will Omnipotent, be the Original of all things. No Ground of
Faith in a mere Arbitrarious Deity. To have a Will Undetermined to Good, no
Liberty, nor Sovereignty, but Impotency. God to Celsus, the Head or President
of the Righteous Nature. This not only the Sense of Origin, but of the Ancient
Christians in General. Plotinus; The Will of God Essentially, That which Ought
to be. God an Impartial Balance, Weighing out Heaven and Earth. The Deity, not
Servilely Bound to do the Best; but this the Perfection of its Nature. No
Atheist able to prove, The World to be Ill Made. Page 872, 874 Not to be
Concluded, That whatsoever we cannot find out the Reason or Use of, is
therefore Ineptly Made. For example; The Intestinum Caecum, though seemingly an
Odd Appendix, and which the Generality of Anatomists give little Account of;
yet that, with the Valve at its Entrance, both together, an Artificial
Contrivance of Nature, to hinder the Regurgitation of the Faeces. Page 874, 875
The First Atheistick Instance of the Faultiness of things; In the Disposition
of the Equator and Ecliptic, Intersecting each other in such an Angle,
whereby the Terrestrial Globe rendered not so Habitable as it might have been.
This Objection Founded upon a False Supposition, That the Torrid Zone
Uninhabitable. But this the Best Disposition; which being Contrary to Mechanic
Causes, therefore its Continuance, together with the Constant Parallelism of
the Earth's Axis, a manifest Eviction of Providence; and that the (...), The
Best, is a Cause in Nature. Page 875 In the next place; The Atheists would
prove against some Theists, That All things not Made for the Sake of Man. This
at First but the Doctrine of Streight-laced Stoics only; recommended
afterward by men's Self-Love. Whereas Plato's Doctrine, That the Whole not made
for any Part; but the Parts for the Whole. Nevertheless, Things in the Lower
World, made Principally (though not Only) for Man. Atheists no Judges of the
Well or Ill-Making of Worlds, they having no Standing Measure of Good. That
Nature a Stepmother to Man; but a froward Speech of some discontented Persons,
seeking to Revenge themselves, by Railing upon Nature, that is, Providence.
Page 875, 876 Evils in General, from the Necessity of Imperfect Beings, and
Incompossibility of things. Page 876 Men Afflicted more from their own
Phancies, then Reality of things. Pain (which a Real Evil of Sense) often
Linked with Pleasure, according to the Socratick Fable. This not the Evil of
the Whole Man, but of the Outside only. Serviceable, to free men from the
Greater Evils of the Mind. Death, according to the Atheistick Hypothesis, an
Absolute Extinction of all Life; but according to Genuine Theism, only a
Withdrawing into the Tiring-House, and putting off the Terrestrial Clothing.
The Dead Live to God. Christian Faith gives assurance of a Heavenly Body
hereafter. The Christian Resurrection, not the Hope of Worms. This the
Confutation of the Twelfth Atheistick Argument. Page 876, 877 The Thirteenth;
but Second Objection aAgainst Providence, as to Humane Affairs; Because all
things Fall alike to all; and sometimes Vicious and Irreligious Persons, most
Prosperous. Page 877, 878 Granted, That this Consideration has too much
Staggered weak Minds in all Ages. Some concluding from thence, That there is no
God, but that blind Chance Steereth all. Others, That though there be a God,
yet he Knows nothing done here below. Others, That though he do know, yet he
Neglects Humane Affairs. Page 878 Unreasonable to require, That God should
Miraculously Interpose at every turn; or to think, That every Wicked person
should presently be Thunderstruck. That which Steers the whole World, no Fond
and Passionate, but an Impartial Nature. Yet, That there want not Instances of
an Extraordinary Providence. Good Reasons for the Slowness of Divine Vengeance.
The Notoriously Wicked, commonly met with at the long Run. Page 878, 879 The
Sometimes Impunity of Wicked Persons, so far from Staggering Good men, as to
Providence; that it confirms them in their Belief, of Future Immortality, and
Judgment after Death. The Evolution of Humane affairs, a kind of Dramatick
Poem, and God Almighty the Skilful Dramatist; who always Connecteth that of
Ours, which went before, with what of His follows after, into Coherent Sense. A
Geometrical Distribution of Rewards and Punishments. Page 879, 880 That there
ought to be a Doubtful and Cloudy State of things, for the Exercise of Faith,
and the more difficult Part of Virtue. Had there been no Monsters to Subdue,
there could have been no Hercules. Here, we to Live by Faith, and not by Sight.
Page 880 But that to make a full Defense of Providence, would require a large
Volume. The Reader therefore referred to others for a Supplement. Only some
Few Considerations to be here propounded, not so much for the Confutation of
Atheists, as Satisfaction of Theists, sometimes apt to call in Question the
Divine Goodness, though the very Foundation of our Christian Faith. ibid.
First; That in Judging of the Works of God, we ought not to consider the Parts
of the World alone by themselves, but in order to the Whole. Were Nothing made
but the Best, there could have been no Harmony, for want of Variety. ^lotinus,
That a Limner does not make all Eye, nor place Bright Colors everywhere; nor
a Dramatist introduce only Kings and Hero's, upon the Stage. Page 880, 882
Secondly; That we ought not to Confine God's Creation to the Narrowness of
Vulgar Opinion, which Extends the Universe, but little beyond the Clouds; and
Walls it in, with a Sphere of Fixed Stars. The World Incapable of Infinity of
Magnitude, as well as of Time. Nevertheless, as the Sun is much Bigger then we
can Imagine it, so much more may the World be. The New Celestial Phenomenon,
widen the Corporeal Universe, and make those Phansied, Flaming Walls thereof,
to fly away before us. Not reasonable to think, That all this Immense Vastness,
should be Desert and Uninhabited. Page 882, 883 Thirdly; That we cannot make a
Right Judgment, of the Ways of Providence, without looking both Forwards, upon
what is Future; and Backwards, upon what is Past; as well as upon the Present.
That the Platonists and Pythagoreans, salved many Phenomenon, from the (...),
Things done in a Prae-Existent State. Our Common Christianity supposes but a
kind of Imputative Prae-Existence; to Salve the Pravity of Mankind, and the
Evils of this State. The different Fates and Conditions of Men here in this
Life, to be resolved into a Just, though Occult Providence. Page 883 The Third
Objection against Providence; or Fourteenth Atheistick Argument; That it is
Impossible, for any One Being, to Animadvert and Order all things: and if it
were Possible, that it would be Dist^actious, and Inconsistent with Happiness.
Moreover, That an Irresistibly Powerful and Happy Being, would not concern it
self in the welfare of others: Benevolence arising only from Imbecility. Page
883, 884 The Reply; That because our Selves have but a Finite Animadversion,
and Narrow Sphere of Activity; to measure the Deity accordingly, is but an Idol
of the Cave or Den. Certain, that were there Nothing, but what we could fully
Comprehend, there could be no God. Had the Sun Life, Equally Coextended with
its Rays, it would perceive every thing touched by them. Creatures but the Rays
of the Deity. Men able to manage affairs, in many distant places, without
Distraction. And innumerable Notions, lie together in our Minds, without
Crowding one another, or any Disturbance to us. Page 884 But for the easing the
Minds of weak Mortals, already Suggested; That there is no Necessity, God
should Himself Immediately do all things; he having Ministers Under him,
Executioners of his Providence: as, an Artificial, Plastic Nature, (for this
reason partly before insisted on;) Instincts also in Animals, a Part of that
Divine Fate, which is the Servant of Providence. Above which, other Knowing and
Understanding Ministers of the Deity, appointed to Preside over Humane Affairs.
But all overlooked by the watchful Eye of God Almighty, who may Himself
Extraordinarily Interpose. Page 884, 885 Wherefore no need to Confine
Providence, to a Few Greater things only; to free the Deity from Distraction.
Small things (upon which Greater often depend) not Neglected by it.
Nevertheless the Chief Employment of Divine Providence, in the Economy of
Souls, by Plato Reduced to this Compendium; The Translating of them into Better
or Worser States, according to their Demeanours. Thus may the slow wits of
Mortals, more easily conceive, Providence not to be Laborious and Distractious
to the Deity. Page 885 But that all Benevolence arises from Imbecility, and
that what is Perfectly Happy, would be troubled with no Business, but enjoy its
own Ease; Idols of the Atheists Den. These other, The Narrow Contractedness of
their Minds, by Vice and Immorality. Page 885, 886 The Atheistick Queries, next
to be Answered. The First Querie. If there were a God, who was Perfectly Happy
in himself, Why would he go about to make a World? Answ. The Reason of God's
making the World, was from his Overflowing and Communicative Goodness, That
there might be other Beings Happy, besides Himself. This consistent with God's
making the World, for his own Glory. The reason why Plotinus would explode
that. True, that God did not make the World, merely to Ostentate his Skill and
Power; but to Display his Goodness, which is Chiefly his Glory. The Atheists
further Demand; What hurt would it have been for us, never to have been Made?
Answ. No other then this, That we could never have Enjoyed Good, nor been
Capable of Happiness. If no hurt not to have been Made, then none to be
Annihilated; the Distance being as great, from Nothing to Something, as from
Something to Nothing. Page 886 The Second Atheistick Querie. If God's Goodness
were the Cause of his making the World, Why then was it not made Sooner? This
Question capable of a Double Sense. First, Why was not the World from Eternity?
The Reply; This not from any Defect in the Divine Goodness, but because there
is an Impossibility of the Thing it self; the Necessity and Incapacity of such
an Imperfect Being Hindering it. Our selves Prove to Think, That Could the
World have been from Eternity, it should have been so. Thus Philoponus, in his
Confutation of Proclus his Arguments, for the World's Eternity. And now no
place left, for those Atheistick Cavils, against the Novity of the Creation; as
if God must therefore have Slept from Eternity; or had Contracted a Satiety of
his former Solitude. Another Sense of the Question; Why, though the World could
not be from Eternity, yet was it not made Sooner? Answ. The World could not
Possibly have so been made in Time, as that it should not have been once, but a
Day Old; and also once, no more then five or six Thousand years Old. Page 886,
887 The Third Atheistick Querie. How could God move the Matter of the whole
World; especially if Incorporeal? Answ. That all things being derived from the
Deity, and Essentially depending on him, they must needs be Commandable by him,
and Obsequious to him. And since no Body can Move it self, that which first
Moved the Matter, must be Incorporeal, and not move it by Machines and Engines,
but by Cogitation or Will only. That Conceit, That an Incorporeal Deity, could
not Move Matter, because it would Run through it; Absurd; This moving not
Mechanically, but Vitally. That Cogitative Beings have a Natural Power of
Moving Matter, Evident from our own Souls, Moving our Bodies, not by Machines
or Engines, but merely by Thought. More easy for the Deity, to move the Whole
World, by Will and Cogitation; then for us our Bodies. Page 887, 888 The Last
Head of Atheistick Argumentation, From Interest. First; That it is the Interest
of Particular Persons, there should be no being Infinitely Powerful, who has
no Law but his own Will. The First Reply; Wishing is no Proving. Nor will any
man's Thinking, make Things otherwise then they are. Page 888 But Secondly;
This Wish of Atheists, Founded upon a Mistaken Notion of God Almighty, That he
is nothing but Arbitrary Will Omnipotent. God's Will, not mere Will; but Law
and Equity; Ought it self Willing. Nor does Justice in God, clash with
Goodness; but is a Branch, or Particular Modification thereof. The Interest of
none, There should be no God, unless perhaps of such, as are Irreclaimably
Wicked, and wilfully abandon their own True Good. Page 888, 889 To be Without
God; to be Without Hope. No Faith nor Hope in Senseless Matter. According to
the Atheistick Hypothesis, no Possibility of Happiness, nor Security of Good.
Page 889 God such a Being, as If he were not, Nothing more to be Wished for. To
Believe a God, to Believe the Existence of all Good and Perfection; and that
things are all Made and Governed as they Should be. Peccability, from the
Necessity of Imperfect Free-Willed Beings. Infinite Hopes from a Being
Infinitely Good, and Powerful. Democritus and Epicurus, however cried up so
much of late; but Infatuated Sophists, or Witty Fools, and Debauchers of
Mankind. Page 889, 890 The Last Atheistick Argumentation. That Theism or
Religion is Inconsistent with the Interest of Civil Sovereigns. Their First
Pretense for this, That the Civil Sovereign Reigns only in Fear; and therefore
there must be no Power, nor Fear, Greater, then that of the Leviathan. Page 890
In Answer to this, The Atheistick Ethics and Politics to be Vnravelled. Their
Foundation laid, in the Villanizing of Humane Nature. That there is no Natural
Justice, Equity, nor Charity. No Public nor Common Nature in Men, but all
Private and Selfish. That every Man by Nature, has a Right to every thing,
even to other Men's Bodies and Lives. That an Appetite to Kill and Torment, by
Nature, gives a Right. That Nature has brought men into the World, without any
Fetters or Shackles, of Duty and Obligation; the Hindrances of Liberty.
Lastly, That Nature absolutely Dissociates and Segregates Men from one another,
by reason of the Inconsistency of Appetites, and Private Good. Every Man by
Nature, in a State of War, against every Man. Page 890, 891 But in the next
place, They add, That though this State of Nature, which is Belluine Liberty,
and Lawless Freedom to every thing, be in it self the Best; yet by Accident,
and by reason of men's Imbecility, does it prove the Worst. Wherefore, when Men
had been weary of Hewing and Slashing, they then bethought themselves at length
of Helping Nature by Art; By Submitting to a Lesser Evil, for the Avoiding of a
Greater; Abating their Infinite Right, and Yielding to Terms of Equality with
others, and Subjection to a Common Power. Page 891 Where, these Atheists First
Slander Humane Nature; and then Debase Justice and Civil Authority, making it
the Ignoble and Bastardly Brat of Fear; or a Lesser Evil Submitted to, out of
Necessity, for the avoiding of a Greater. According to which Atheistick
Hypothesis, No man is Willingly Just. This no New Invention of the Writer De
Cive, but the old Atheistick Generation of Justice, and of a Body Politic,
Civil Society, and Sovereignty; (before Plato's time:) it being fully
described, in his Second Book of a Commonwealth. Where the Philosopher
concludes, Justice, according to these, to be but a Middle thing, betwixt the
Best, and the Worst; Loved, not as Good in it Self, but only by Reason of Men's
Imbecility: Or, That Justice is indeed, Another man's Good, and the Evil of
him that is Just. The same Hypothesis also, concerning Justice, as a Factitious
thing, that sprung only from Fear and Imbecility, and was chosen but as a
Lesser Evil; Insis^ed on by Epicurus. Page 891, 893 The vain Attempts of our
Modern Atheistick Politicians, to Make Justice by Art, when there is None by
Nature. First, by Renouncing and Transferring men's Right, by Will and Words.
For If Nothing Naturally Unlawful, then can no man, by Will and Words, make
any thing Unlawful to himself. What Made by Will, may be Destroyed by Will.
The Ridiculous Conceit of these Atheistick Politicians, That Injustice is
nothing but Dati Repetitio, and such an Absurdity in Life, as is in
Disputation, when a man Denies a Proposition, he had before Granted; No Real
Evil in the Man, but only a Relative Incongruity in him as a Citizen. Again,
These Justice-Makers and Authority-Makers, pretend to derive their Factitious
Justice, from Pacts and Covenants. But Pacts and Covenants, without Natural
Justice, (as themselves confess) Nothing but Words and Breath; and therefore
can have no Force to Oblige. Wherefore they make another Pretense also, from
certain Counterfeit Laws of Nature, of their own Devising, that are Nothing but
mere Juggling Equivocation; they being but the Laws of Fear, or their own
Timorous and Cowardly Complexion. They Ridiculously Dance Round in a Circle,
when they Derive the Obligation of Civil Laws from Covenants; of Covenants from
Laws of Nature; and of Laws of Nature again, from Civil Laws. Their vain
Attempt, by Art to Consociate, what Nature has Dissociated, like tying Knots
in the Wind or Water. Their Artificial Obligation, or Ligaments, by which the
Members of their Leviathan are held together, more slender then Cobwebs. Page
893, 895 These Artificial Justice-Makers and Obligation-Makers, Sensible of the
Weakness of these Attempts, Artificially to Consociate, what Nature has
Dissociated; therefore fly at last from Art, to Force and Power; making their
Sovereign, to Reign only in Fear. This the True meaning of that Opinion, That
all Obligation is derived from Law; that is, the Command of him who has Power
to Compel. If Obligation, to Obey Civil Laws, only from Fear of Punishment,
then is no man Obliged to hazard his Life for the Safety of his Prince; and
whoever can promise themselves Impunity, may Justly Disobey. If Civil
Sovereigns Reign only in Fear, then is their Authority Nothing but Force; and
Power would Justify Rebellion. Lastly, If Civil Right or Authority, Nothing but
Force and Violence, then could it not last long: What Natural, prevailing
against what is Violent. Page 895 Wherefore since Civil Authority and Bodies
Politic, can neither be merely Artificial, nor yet Violent things, there must
be some Natural Vinculum, to hold them together; such as will both Oblige
Subjects to Obey the Commands of Sovereigns, and Sovereigns in Commanding, to
seek the Good of their Subjects: Something of a Common, Public and
Conglutinating Nature: Which, no other then Natural Justice. The Authority of
God himself, Founded in Justice; of which Civil Authority, a Participation.
Sovereignty, no Creature of the People, and of Men's Wills; but has a Stamp of
Divinity upon it. Had not God made a City; Men, neither by Art, or Political
Enchantment, nor by mere Force, could have made any. The whole World, One City,
of God and Rational Beings. The Civil Sovereign no Leviathan; that is, No
Beast, but a God. He Reigns not in mere Brutish Force and Fear, but in Natural
Justice and Conscience, and the Authority of God himself. Nevertheless, need of
Force and Fear too, to compel Some to their Duty; nor is the Sovereign's Sword
here alone Sufficient, but he must Reign also in the Fear of God Almighty. Page
895, 896 The Second Atheistick Pretense, to Make Religion Inconsistent with
Civil Sovereignty; Because it Limits and Confines that, which in its own Nature
Is, and Ought to be Infinite. The Reply; That the Atheists Infinite Right and
Authority of Civil Sovereigns, is nothing but Belluine Liberty: But true Right
and Authority is Essentially Founded in Natural Justice; there being no
Authority to Command, where there is not an Obligation to Obey; and Commands
not Creating Obligation, but Presupposing it, without which they would signify
Nothing. The First Original Obligation not from Will, but Nature. The Error
of those Theists who derive all Obligation to Moral Things, from the Will and
Positive Command of God, as Threatening Punishments, and Promising Rewards. From
whence it would follow, that no man is Good and Just, but By Accident only,
and for the Sake of Something else. Justice a different Species of Good, from
that of Private Utility. Infinite Justice, as Absurd, as an Infinite Rule or
Measure. If no Infinite Justice, then no Infinite Right and Authority. God's
own Authority bounded by Justice: His Will ruled by Justice; and not Justice by
his Will. Atheists, under a Pretense of giving Civil Sovereigns Infinite Right,
Really Divest them of all Right and Authority, leaving them nothing but Brutish
Force. Proved here, That the Summae Potestates, must of necessity be (...).
Page 896, 898 The Last Atheistick Pretense, for the Inconsistency of Religion
with Civil Power, Because Conscience is Private Judgment of Good and Evil.
Answer. That not Religion, but Atheism, introduces such Private Judgment, as
is Absolutely Inconsistent with Civil Sovereignty, it acknowledging nothing in
Nature, that tends to Public and Common Good; but making Private Appetite the
only Rule or Measure of Good; and Utility, of Justice. The Desperate
Consequence from hence; That Private Vtility may justify Rebellion and
Parricide. The Atheists Professed Assertion, That they who have once Rebelled,
may Justly Defend themselves afterward by Force. Though Private Persons must
make a Judgment in Conscience for themselves, (the Atheists Public
Conscience, being Nonsense and Contradiction;) yet is the Rule of Conscience,
not Private, but Public, except only to Mistaken Fanatics; who therefore
Sometimes make a Pretense of Conscience and Religion, in order to Sedition and
Rebellion. Religion and Conscience Oblige Subjects, in all Lawful things,
Actively to Obey the Sovereign Powers; in Unlawful, Not to Resist. Page 898,
899 The Conclusion of the Whole Book; That all the Atheistick Grounds being
fully Confuted, and the Impossibility of Atheism Demonstrated; it is certain,
That the Original and Head of all things, is no Blind and Inconscious Nature,
but a Perfect Understanding Being, Self-Existent; Who has Made all that was
fit to be Made, and after the Best manner, and Exercises a Just Providence
over all. To whom be All Honor and Glory, etc. ibid.
The End of the Contents.
ERRATA.
PAge 15. Line 2. read, XIV. Besides. p. 49. l. 9. to 16. read, (And thus --
Body;) p. 61. l. 8. read. (...) 63.9. (...) 66.10. Unextended. 76.25. dele.
but. Lin. ult. read, To this purpose. 102. l. ult. dele, with. 103. l. 3, 4.
read, could not rise from an Egg of the Night, nor be the Offspring of Chaos,
but must be something -- 106. Title, r. Hylozoist 168.19. r. Irregularity
173.19, 20. Reason and Vnd -- Line 37. a Perfect 201.9. (...) 212.34. read,
Scholiast upon him, writing thus, 231.27. plures erunt 251.12. (...) 276.22.
Longinianus 299.36. (...) 300.5. (...) 304.30. Excerption 331.9. Manifested
339. Title, r. Invisible 344.17. Phornutus 351. (false printed 411.) l. 22.
(...) 354. (f. pr. 414.) l. 27. (...) 355.9. (...) 357.37. (...)^ 358.21.
(...), 363.17. dele Justin Martyr, 364.31. read, Third and Fourth Verses,
379.31. (...) 385.31. (...) -- (...), 397. Title, read, Very Good. 404. Marg.
l. ult. r. L. 10.433.30. (...) 457.18. (...) 461.10. (...). Lin. 30. (...)
482.29. by him determined, 508.14. respectively, 516.14. his Fecundity, 518.4.
adored 519.30. Nature, or Natures -- 543 29. (...) 549.13. (as an Image in a
Glass) 553.37. (...) 566.34. (...), 582.2. The Word 585.18. (...), 587.6. Son,
and Grandson, 620.31. it is there -- 624. Title, add, Trinity 632.31. if need
be, for another 684.17. therefore not -- 696. l. ult. as it was.717.39. and
also 742.5. Similar Atoms 745.23. that their Souls cannot 752.2, 3, 4. read,
Proclus, and other Platonists, expressly denied it to have been (...), Unmade,
or Self-Existent, and -- 753.8. no not that 765.24. Matter, together 777.37.
(...) 787.16. Incrassated, 794.31. the Vnevenness 798.11. Earth, in -- Line 33.
dele, it 805. Marg. l. 14. solveret 816.35. ought to be 831. l. penult.
Extended Outside, and an Vnextended Inside, 843.38. dele, yet 883. Marg. l. 9.
(...) 884.35. was One Reason.

FINIS.

