ADVERTISEMENT.
A Confession of Faith, put forth by the Elders and Brethren of many
Congregations of Christians, (Baptized upon Profession of their Faith) in
London and the Country. With an Appendix concerning Baptism. Printed for John
Harris, at the Harrow against the Church in the Poultrey, 1690. Price Bound 1 s.

Page 10, line 12, read of a Title for Baptism to them.

A Solemn Call Unto all that would be owned as Christ's Faithful Witnesses,
speedily, and seriously, to attend unto the Primitive Purity of the Gospel
Doctrine and Worship: Or, a Discourse concerning BAPTISM: WHEREIN That of
Infants is Disproved, as having no Footing, nor Foundation at all in the Word
of GOD. By way of Answer to the Arguments made use of by Mr. William Allen, Mr.
Sidenham, Mr. Baxter, Dr. Burthogge, and others, for the Support of that
Practice.

Wherein the Covenant made with Israel at Mount Sinai, Exodus 20. That in the
Land of Moab, Deuteronomy. 29. As also the Covenant of Circumcision made with Abraham
Genesis 17. 7, 8, 9. Whereon so much stress is laid for the Support of Infants
Baptism, are plainly proved to be no other than three several Editions of the
Covenant of Works; And consequently, that no just Argument can thence be
deduced for the Justification of that Practice.

Together with a Description of that truly Evangelical Covenant* GOD was
pleased to make with Believing Abraham; containing the Sum of the Everlasting
Gospel then Preached unto him; since Proclaimed by the Apostles; and which now
remains to be yet further Published unto every Nation, Kindred, Tongue, and
People, for the Obedience of Faith.

By Philip Carry, a Lover of Truth and Peace.

LONDON: Printed for John Harris, at the Sign of the Harrow in the Poultrey
over against the Church. M.DCXC.

TO THE READER.
WE are doubtless brought forth in a Day to which many Glorious Prophecies
contained in the Holy Scriptures have a special reference; amongst others, that
which is recorded Dan. 12. 4. Many shall run to and fro, and Knowledge shall be
increased. Antichristian Darkness has so covered the European Nations for many
Hundreds of Years, that the Truths and Ordinances of Christ were generally
Corrupted and Obscured; till our Blessed Reformers, Luther, Calvin, etc. were
raised up in some good measure, to detect the corruptions of Antichrist, and to
bring to Light that blessed Doctrine of Justification by Faith, in the Blood of
Christ, with several other Truths of great Importance.

And since that, God has been pleased to raise up many Learned Men, namely Dr.
Ames, Mr. Ainsworth, and Dr. Owen, with others, who have Learnedly, and with
much clearness and strength of Argument made it appear, that a true Gospel
visible Church, is to consist only of such as are Saints by Profession, and who
give up themselves to the Lord, and one to onother by Solemn Agreement, to
practice the Ordinances of Christ.

And now of latter Years the Lord has been pleased to raise up some worthy and
learned Men to detect the vanity of Infant Baptism, who by solid Arguments have
made the unlawfulness thereof appear.

The main Arguments that are made use of by Paedobaptists for the support of
their Practice herein, are taken from the Covenant with Abraham, Genesis 17. 2, 3,
4, etc. Some of themselves confessing, That Arguments taken from the Baptizing
of whole Families, from Christ's blessing little Children, and from 1 Cor. 7,
14. have no weight in them. And as for those Arguments which are taken from the
Covenant made with Abraham abovementioned, several of our Learned Authors have
thoroughly examined, and sufficiently answered. Notwithstanding we cannot without
Injury to Truth omit to reccommend the Labors of this our worthy Brother, who
having had the advantage of other Men's Writings, that have gone before him,
and so standing on their Shoulders, may see further than they did. Yet he has
some Nations of so rare a Nature, that he is not beholding to any other for
them* but only to his own studiousness and dexterity, and the Blessing of God
upon his Labors.

We freely acknowledge, that many Learned and Holy Men, whom we much Honor, do
differ from us in the point of Baptism, yet we must not let go any Truth of God
for their sakes: And we doubt not, but the time is drawing nigh, when God will
cause the Light of His Holy Word so to shine forth, that all remaining Darkness
on the Minds of the Lord's People shall vanish away; and then Sion's Builders
shall no more take a Stone for a Corner, nor a Stone for a Foundation of
Babylons Rubbish.

And now (Ch^i^tian Reader) seeing the Author has taken so great pains in
Writing this Treatise for the Information of thee and ohters, in a great Gospel
Ordinance; be thou persuaded to lay by prejudice, and read diligently, examine
it by the Holy Scriptures; and if thou meet with any thing of Truth, wherein
thou wast not before Enlightened, subject to it, l^ast thou be found rejecting
the authority of Christ. Quod Dei e^t, agnosce, and quod hominis est, ignosce.
If any Glory may come to Christ, or comfort to his Members hereby, it is
enough, and as much as is aimed at by the Author, and thy Soul Friends,

Will. Kiffin, John Harris, Rich. Adams, Rob. Steed, Ben. Keech.


TO THE READER.
READER,
HAving had a sight of this Piece (without the Privity of the Author) before it
went to the Press, I Read it with much Delight (though in great haste) and
thought good without his Knowledge, or being Desired, to give thee (if thou
be a Stranger to him) this assurance by the way, that thou will find his
Lines altogether free from Lightness, as also from Reflections or Reproaches
toward those of the Persuasion he contends with; which is a thing so rare,
that it deserves a Remark, and savours much of a right serious Christian
Spirit. I have had Knowledge of him many Years, but never knew (or heard) him
otherwise represented, then of a very sober Character, suitable to his
Writings; a Man every way free from any of those Temptations that might incline
him to espouse any Interest, or fall in with any Persuasion, otherwise than
what he did freely out of pure Choice, and as satisfi*d with its Purity, upon a
diligent and conscionable Perusal of the Holy Scriptures, in which he has been
a very laborious Searcher these many Years, and in whom that Text is verified,
2 Timothy 3. 15, 16. That they make the Man of God wise unto Salvation, etc. I am
assured that his Papers were intended only for private Use, and for
satisfaction of some that desired to know what he had to say to the Arguments
here replied to. He has all the appearances of a Man low in his own Eyes, yet
willing in his capacity to serve the Lord Jesus freely, without seeking in the
least any advantage to himself in the service of the Gospel; boing much above
those low Ends that too too many are swayed by, of making a Gain by his
Preaching; and though his Labors be constant, yet he seeks no other reward,
then Christ's Well done, etc. being very well contented with that Income for
his Subsistence, which the Lord affords in the use of his honest and honorable
Calling; in which also he has been beneficial to many, and a great Blessing to
the Poor; so that by his Faithfulnoss and Usefulness in his Spirituals and
Temporals he is well reported of amongst all. It would be a great Happiness
both to the Church of Christ and Commonwealth, if the number of such Worthys
were every where increased: And yet I fear that this good Man in these his
Faithful endeavors to reduce Christian Practice to Primitive Institution
(though done with all Mildness and much Demonstration) will meet with hard
Usage from that sort of Men, which in every Age have chiefly sought what would
please Man, and have still quarrelled at all endeavors toward Reformation:
Witness those hardships which the Faithful met with from the Papists for many
Generations, for their Nonconformity to their Inventions, and those
difficulties that obstructed the Reception of the great Doctrine of
Justification by Faith alone in the Mediator. How dear did it cost many of the
Ancients before it could be obtained that the People should receive the Lord's
Supper in both Kinds, which the Papists still deny to them? How long was it
before the Disciples of Augustine and Innocent the First, would give over that
Practice of giving the Lord's Supper in a Spoon to Children as soon as they were
Baptized; which held (as Maldonate affirms) about 600 Years? And to this Day,
How many are contending for the Cross in Baptism? For which thing (though very
Un-scriptural, yet) some of the deep Wits of that Way do form a Plea, but by
mistaken and very invalid Consequences. And many of the Wise and Learned of the
Church of England are of Opinion, That unless it be granted that the Church has
a Liberty from Christ to alter or add Ceremonies at her discretion, they know
no Authority for the Baptizing of Infants, or the Sprinkling of Water upon
their Faces to be accounted Baptism; for few deny but that the ancient way was
by going into the Water, and Plunging under Water. Nay, our Disciplinarians
that have made strong Pleas for Reformation in many things, must, and do
confess, that their strongest Plea for Infant Baptism is drawn from a very
remote Consequence, even as far off from the Command of Christ, or the Practice
of the Apostles; as that they ground it on the First Jewish Ordinance,
Commanded unto Abraham and his Posterity, viz. Circumcision, which was never
intended to be of any value after the time of Christ's Reformation. Heb. 9. 10.
And is it not to be lamented that after so many Years search, no better Footing
should be found for the Practicing a New Testament Sacrament, than an Old
Testament Jewish Institution? May not such men as will infer, that Holy Orders
should be Hereditary, and that the Work of the Ministry should be Intailed upon
their Posterity, because it was anciently settled upon the Children of Levi,
besides whom none might Minister in the Sanctuary? And why may not Infants by a
clearer Consequence partake of the Table of the Lord, as soon as they are able
to Eat and Drink it; it being taken for granted by Paedobaptists that the
Supper comes ^n the room of the Passover, and that all in the Family that were
capable to Eat Flesh might Eat it. Exodus 12. 4. Nay, any Strangers in their
Families were not excluded that we Read of, that might be present at the
Passover. And thus we might Instance in many things.

It is not the business of this Author to prove the Baptism of Believers, for
that is a thing that was never yet denied or opposed, by any that Plead for
Infants right to it: For they confess, That to Baptize Believers is a clear and
unquestionable Truth, agreeing most plainly with the precept of the Lord Jesus,
and Practice of the Apostles. But the Controversy is, whether Infants (of
Believers, or others) have a Scriptural right to it, or not? And here thou
shall find every Point from whence any Plea is deduced, to prove the right of
Infants to that Ordinance answered, with such Evidence of Scripture
Demonstration, and with so much Faithfulness, that (unless thou have no
Conscience toward these things) it must beget in thee at least some new
Considerations about the Point, if not a better Opinion of that despised
People, that make Conscience not to admit any to Baptism, but Professed
Believers.

The Circumcision of Children was not left doubtful to the Jews, but they had
full Direction in the Case, both for the Subject and the Part to be
Circumcised, the time and manner also. Was there such care in that time, and in
such a Point, about a thing that was to end with the Jewish Church, Law and
Priesthood; and yet no care taken by the Lord Jesus to give future Ages Light
in Infant Baptism, in case it were His Mind it should be Practiced? I could
never yet meet with the Man that could pretend to know at what time Children
should or ought to be Baptized, supposing they had a right to it. In Ancient
time it was Administered but twice in the Year; and since that appointed to be
upon some Festival. But I find now, all do act at Pleasure, none among us
regarding the Day of Circumcision, viz. the eighth Day; though some in
Cyprian's time would limit it to that Day, when the practice began first to be
Introduced by some few Persons, out of a conceit of its Absolute Necessity to
Salvation, from a mistake of John 3. 5. But some now hasten it sooner; some
defer it to a Fortnight, some three Weeks, a Month, and more. And several of
the Eastern Churches to this very day, Baptize not, until the 40th. day after
they are born; and then give them the Supper also, as some approved Authors
report. So that all, for the most part, order the time, as may best suit with
their other Aim, of managing it with State, Pomp and Honor, and the presence
of such Friends as may be absent, to make it the more gainful and splendid. Now
if no time can be set exactly, why should they be censured, who out of
Conscience, defer to communicate so Holy an Ordinance to their Children, till
they are taught in the Faith of Christ, and profess to believe it with their
Heart? Must it not seem strange, I say, to any Man that reads, with what care
the Lord gave charge, concerning the Circumcising of Children as well as Men;
giving them the very Circumstance of time as aforesaid, on which it should be
performed, and which Moses enjoined to Israel, which was part of his
Faithfulness in his House, that yet we should think it is the Mind of the Lord
Jesus, (who was most faithful in his own House) that little Children should be
Baptized, and not so much as once express it by Himself, or Apostles? We find
Women and Children particularly mentioned by the Apostle, upon very small
Occasions, as in Acts 21. 5. where the taking notice of Children is of very
little moment; and yet, where we have an Account who should be Baptized, (as in
Christ's Commission) and of those Multitudes, that in many places were
Baptized; Is it not strange that no Child should be mentioned, if such had
been, or were to have been Baptized? The Apostle took care in Acts 8. 12. to
Record, that the Multitude then Baptized, were both [Men and Women.] If
Cbildren had been then Baptized, surely the Holy Spirit, would not have omitted
that one Word [Children.] And so Acts 5. 14. We have mention of Multitudes
added to the Church, and expressed particularly, [both Women (...)] Now if
their Children had been taken in with them, would not the Holy Spirit have
mentioned it, whilst he foresaw of what need it would be in future Ages, to
warrant his People to do the like? The Holy Scriptures therefore being wholly
silent, in the point of little Childrens Admittance, and nothing found for it
in either Precept or President, what may more clearly be inferred. But to
conclude, that the Baptism of little Children, is more of Man than of God, or
wholly of Man, and not of God.

I could never yet learn what material Benefit an Infant received by Baptism.
It cannot be a bringing them into Covenant with God, because it is upon
Supposition, that they are in Covenant, by virtue of their believing Parents,
one or both, that a Plea is made for their Baptism. The most that can be said
or pretended to, is, that it. brings them into Christ's visible Flock. But
alas, what Privilege is this, whilst the Child is there, but as one asleep?
Nay, when this Child comes to Understanding, it must not partake of any other
Benefits in that Church, more than one Unbaptized may do, until it comes to
Confession of Faith and Repentance, and receive Confirmation; and this Child
after Baptism, as it grows up, is Preached to (as much as any other) as in a
state of Nature, and consequently the Child of Wrath, and never like to come
into the presence of God with comfort, without Regeneration, or actual Faith in
the Lord Jesus Christ; by all which it appears, That the Privileges pretended
to, are but Nominal, and without any substance of Reallity. What then is this
noise of Privileges made with Rhetorical Flourishes, but a mere Shadow and
Pretense, to keep up an Opinion, for an Unscriptural Practice in the Favor of
the People, who are ready to be led to any thing by their Guides? As for
Infants being the Subjects of Christian Baptism, it deserves to be well
considered, who gave command for it, either God or Man? And for the manner of
Baptizing by sprinkling Water on the Face only, by whose Direction was it? And
where is the Scripture from whence any Probability may be found, that that part
should be sprinkled more than any other? Why not the Breast, as a sign of the
Hearts being sprinkled from an evil Conscience? Or the Arms that should manage
the Shield? Or the Feet, in token of being shod with the Preparation of the
Gospel of Peace? Or rather that part, that of old was appointed to be
circumcised, in token of Regeneration? I know it is frequently urged by the
Poedobaptists, to those of the contrary Persuasion: Where do you find that
Children are at any time, or in any place forbidden Christian Baptism? Which is
a strange kind of Plea. The very Jews were never in their greatest Apostasy, so
corrupt in their reasoning, that ever I heard of: It was enough that they
practiced what they were commanded. Is the Text of no force, or quite
forgotten, which tells us, That secret things belong to God, but revealed
things to us? Would he have Infants Baptized before Faith, and not Reveal it?

I could wish therefore, that all empty Pleas on either side, were put away,
and careful Attendance given to things weighty and material. The changes that
have been seen in the Opinions of men, as times have varied in these late
years, may justly put every considerate man, upon the conscionable search,
after what is the very Mind of Christ in the Holy Scriptures, and not to take
any thing upon another credit, whilst that Word is made intelligible, and unto
which we may have all free Recourse.

I know there are some profane ones, that will take a Liberty to question the
Truth of the Holy Scriptures, but yet that should not afright good men, from
searching after the very mind of the Spirit in them; if our Fathers had not
done so, we had abode in the depth of Antichristian Darkness. I wonder that
those that plead for the Right of the Seed of Believers, to Christian Baptism,
from Circumcision, do not as earnestly plead for a right for the Unbelieving
Wife, from the right of the Husband, and for the Servants also, whatever they
be, since such were not only admitted, but commanded to be Circumcised? Why are
not our American Planters, that buy multitudes of Negro's, required to baptize
them as fast as they buy them, and their Children born in their Plantations?
Methinks it should clearly follow, from the same way of arguing.

But to conclude, What is Abraham to us? We must make our claim to Holy Things
by a right to Christ, as being begotten by him, who is the great and only Head
of the New Covenant, and prove Infants Right to him, or Descent from him, or
else all will be found as Dung and Dross. I shall not detain thee longer (being
not to dispute, but to glance at things) from beholding at large in this
Treatise, this great Point particularly handled; and if thou art but as serious
and Impartial, in reading it, as the Author, (whose Pardon I crave, for adding
this without his Knowledge) I verily believe was in writing it, thou will not
think thy money nor labor lost. Now the God of Truth and Peace, that has made
his very mind communicable to us, through his dear Son, give us all Light
therein, and willing minds to obey him. So Prays

Thy Faithful Friend, M. E.

THE PREFACE TO THE Christian Reader.
I Do now Present Thee with a New Treatise of Baptism, wherein that of
Believers, is Asserted to be the only true Christian Baptism, by way of
Opposition to that of Infants: Which I hope thou will find in the Ensuing
Discourse to be Demonstrated, and with Scripture Evidence to be cleared up,
notwithstanding the many plausible Arguments or Objections which are usually
urged for the support of the contrary Practice. In the Compiling of which,
after having Humbly and Earnestly Implored the Divine Assistance. I do confess
that I have been much beholding to the pious Industry, and laborious Travels of
others that have trodden the same Path, and have gone before me treating upon
the same Subject, from whom I have been supplied with many of the Materials in
point of Argument, which this present Discourse is furnished with.

I know it will be objected, that the present Work is needless, unless any
thing further be produced than has been by others already Urged, and argued in
this present Controversy. By way of Answer unto which, I have two things to
offer.

First; That though very much has been already said by others, that have
Labored in the same Province, and that with that clearness of Evidence, and
Scripture Demonstration, by way of Opposition unto Infant Sprinkling, as cannot
be refuted, unless another Canon or Scripture Oracle can be produced for the
Justification thereof, than we have yet met with; yet those several Works of
their having their several Excellencies, and some of them being Voluminous, I
judged it no needless or unprofitable Labor, to Collect the Sum or Substance
of what has been already said in this Respect, and to present it to thy View
in one Entire Piece; and that with as much Succinctness and Brevity as the
Matter would well require.

The Second is this; That peradventure thou may find, upon a due Perusal of
the ensuing Discourse, an Improvement of several Considerable Scriptures and
Arguments to this purpose, in the present Essay, that has not yet been made
public, that I know of, by any other hand; and in particular, among diverse
others, as to what concerns the true Nature and Difference betwixt the two
Covenants, that of Works, and that of Grace: Wherein I think I have plainly
proved, that the Covenant which God made with Israel at Mount Sinai. Exodus 20.
That made with the same People in the Land of Moab. Deuteronomy. 29. As also the
Covenant of Circumcision made with Abraham. Genesis 17. 7. 8. 9. Whereon so much
stress is laid for the support of Infants Baptism, were all of them no other
than three several Repetitions of the Covenant of Works; and that as
contra-distinct, or essentially different from the Covenant of Grace, and
consequently now Repealed. Which I have the rather taken the pains distinctly
to prove, because upon this Hypothesis, or Supposition, that these were Gospel
Covenants, differing from the New Covenant only in the manner of
Administration, the greatest part of the most plausible Arguments for the
support of Infants Baptism, are founded. But if I have substantially proved
that neither of these forementioned Covenants were Gospel Covenants, reaching
Gentile Believers and their Seed, but Essentially different therefrom, and
consequently now repealed; no wonder if I have made an answerable Improvement
thereof, by way of Opposition to the forementioned Practice.

The Design therefore, and Scope of the following Treatise, (Beside what
concerns the Nature and Difference betwixt the two Covenants, the true
Knowledge and Understanding whereof, is indeed of highest Importance to us) is,
with all Humility, to endeavor the Rectification of that which I cannot but
apprehend to have been amiss, and the promoting of that which I cannot but
Judge to have been greatly defective among many that are right dear and
precious in the sight of GOD; And that is (among other things) in respect of
the Purity of that Divine Worship, which as the Servants of Christ we are
obliged to offer up to Him, in a due Susception and Administration of that
Sacred and Solemn Ordinance of Baptism, we are now contending about. My Reasons
why I so think, I have now given you in this present Discourse. And certainly
the Purity of Divine Appointments, is worthy pleading for; it has been the
subject matter of many Prayers, and should be of our joint Endeavors.

We Read in the Prophecy of Zechary, of a Candlestick all of Gold. Zec. 4. 2.
3. And he said unto me, What see thou? And I said, I have looked, and behold
a Candlestick all of Gold, with a Bowl upon the top of it, and the Seven Lamps
thereon, and Seven Pipes to the Seven Lamps, which were upon the top thereof;
and two Olive Trees by it, one upon the right side of the Bowl, and the other
upon the left side thereof. And Verse 12. I answered again and said unto him;
What be these two Olive Branches, which through the two Golden Pipes, empty the
Golden Oil out of themselves? By the concurring consent of all Interpreters, I
suppose by this Candlestick all of Godl here spoken of, we are to understand
that pure Church State which God has promised to erect unto Himself in Gospel
Times. And certainly that must be a blessed Day, and a glorious Privilege,
when we shall come to have a Candlestick all of Gold. A Candlestick that has a
Golden Bowl, Golden Lamps, and Golden Pipes, for the reception and conveyance
of the Golden Oil. Will it not be a singular Favor to be the Children of that
Church: All whose Members are Golden Members; whose Ministers and Ordinances
also are All of Gold, for the conveyance of the Golden Oil of the Heavenly
Blessing to the Comfort, Enlightening and Satisfastion of the whole? But alas!
So it is, that for the most part of those that call themselves, or that pretend
to be the true Churches of Christ at this day in the World, they are far from
being a Candlestick all of Gold, whether in respect of their Constitution and
Ministry, or in respect of that Purity of Ordinances which God requires. For
whilst men do content themselves rather, as it were with Leaden Pipes, that is,
with Ordinances of an Humane Invention, the Golden Pipes, or Ordinances of
God's Appointment, are thereby neglected and made void. And then no wonder if
such a Church have also many Leaden Members, or such as are unsuitable unto the
Gospel Characters All of Gold, being rather ignorant, profane and scandalous;
who coming in, or being admitted at the wrong Door, are there suffered also to
continue, to the hardening, and Soul* ruin of themselves: which is the case of
Millions, who without Christ's Appointment, having been Sprinkled, or as they
call it, Christened in their Infancy, as having by virtue of their Natural
Birth, an Interest in the Covenant of Grace, are Induced thereby to reckon
themselves good Christians, and in a State of Salvation, without looking after
the New Birth, or being acquainted with the Mystery of the Spirit of
Regeneration.

It is no way to be doubted, but that where there is a pure Church, there are
pure Ordinances. The Pipes are all of Gold, as well as the Church or
Candlestick it self; that is, it has only such Ordinances, as have the stamp
of Heaven upon them; even the things which Christ has commanded, and those
observed as he has commanded, and not otherwise. And it is equally as clear,
that where those Golden Pipes are wanting, or where the purity of Gospel
Ordinances is neglected, and Pipes of a baser Alloy, are substituted in the
Room of those of Christ's Appointment; and those also mis-applied about wrong
Subjects, there can be no true Church; much less can it pretend to that Purity
that Christ expects. There can be no true Church, but what has a Golden
Constitution, Golden Lamps, and Golden Pipes for the Conveyance of the Golden
Oil. And if you say that you have not been without sufficient Experience of the
Gracious Presence and Blessing of Christ, with and upon you in your present
way; I will not deny, but take it for granted that so it is: Yet this I will
say, that we are under no Promise of having thc Golden Oil conveyed unto us,
but through the Golden Pipes. Teach them (says Christ) to observe all things
whatsoever I have commanded you; and lo, I am with you always, even unto the end
of the World. If therefore we step out of Christ's way, we cannot rationally
suppose our selves, to be, at least, so immediately, under the Influence of
Christ's Blessing. What Christ may graciously afford unto his People that
sincerely seek unto him, according to the best light they have, though the
Sanctuary Preparation may in some Points be Defective, is one thing; and what
we may justly expect by virtue of a standing Promise, is another. Certainly,
the nearer we come to him, and the more Exact and Punctual we are in the
Expressions of our Love and Friendship to him, the more groundedly may we
Expect the Answerable Discoveries of his Loving Favor unto us; and we can no
otherwise demonstrate our Friendship, than by being obedient to him, in the
Observation of all those things which he has commanded us; and that both
whatsoever they are, and howsoever he has enjoined the Performance of them.
That the Baptism of Believers is appointed by Christ as a Golden Pipe, among
the rest of the Golden Pipes of the New Testament Church, for the Conveyance of
the Golden Oil, or the Heavenly Unction, from himself to his Members, is an
undeniable Truth, and cannot with any Justness of Pretense be contradicted.
That the Baptism of Infants deserves that Character, is more than what the
Scriptures do declare unto us; and peradventure at long run, you also may see
Cause to say the same.

Indeed, if a through Reformation in this Point might once be obtained; that is,
if Ministers Teach First, and then Baptize such only as Profess Faith in the
Lord Jesus, and newness of Life, evidenced by a Holy Conversation (that being
the only Practice warrantable by, and Exemplified in the Word of God.) We might
then justly hope to see the Accomplishment of the forementioned Divine
Prediction: A Candlestick all of Gold: A Candlestick that has a Golden Bowl,
Golden Lamps, and Golden Pipes; that is, a Pure Church State, wholly
Constituted and Regulated according to the Divine Prescription and Pattern. And
then also it would inevitably follow, that the Papal Antichristian Church must
of Necessity Vanish and Expire: Since the Matter of that Synagogue, is the
Collective Body of the Nations, who having been sprinkled in their Infant
State, are thence beguiled into a Blind and Soul-cheating Delusion, that they
are good Christians, and true Members of the Catholic Church; whom yet,
because of their Unbelief and Profaneness; the Word of God Excludes from the
Gospel Church, and consequently from Baptism till Converted. And I make no
question but it will be at last found, that to uphold the present Practice of
Infant Sprinkling, is no other than to uphold and support the main Pillar of
that Apostate and Adulterous Church; that is, by bringing the Church into the
World, and the World into the Church. And when the World is once brought into
the Church; let us show any difference if we can, betwixt that and the World;
which yet our Savior tells us are distinct, having chosen his Church out of
the World. John 15. 19. It Is true, the time will be when the Kingdoms of this
World shall become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ: But that cannot
be pretended unto, in the present Administration of things, in the Heavens, and
Earth that now are; wherein, we cannot say that one of a Thousand, much less,
that the whole World, is subject unto Christ's Scepter; and consequently, far
from the true Characters of Church Membership, according to the Gospel Rule,
All of Gold. Indeed it is great pity, but that every Plant which our Heavenly
Father has not planted should be Rooted up, and the present Corrupt Practice
of Infant sprinkling among the rest; since there is nothing that can be more
evident than this, that were but this corner Stone, that supports the
Antichristian Fabric, quite removed, the whole Building must of necessity
totter; and then we might justly hope for a pure Church State: Till which, as
we cannot groundedly expect true Peace or Settlement in the World; so neither
can we justly expect that the Name of the City should be called Jehovah
Shammah, the Lord is there.

The Occasion of the present Discourse, was from a late Treatise of Mr. William
Allen; Entitled, A Serious and Friendly Address to the Nonconformists.
Beginning with the Anabaptists: Or an Addition to a former Treatise of his;
Entitled, a Persuasive to Peace and Unity. Wherein he does Labor with utmost
Strength, and force of Argument, to induce those of a contrary Persuasion from
himself to a Conformity, and Compliance with the Church Discipline, and
Government then Established in these Nations; and particularly, in Respect of
the present Practice of Infants Baptism. An Answer to which you will find in
the Ensuing Sheets; together, with Answers to all other the most considerable
Arguments, which are urged by others also to the same purpose As for Mr. Allen,
he is a Person, altogether unknown to me: But though his Apprehensions and
mine, are different in the present point: And though he has endeavored to
whet up his Arguments with utmost keeness, and lays them on with greatest
force; condemning us as guilty of the greatest Schism, and of all those Direful
Evils that are the Natural Consequents of a Schismatical Separation from a true
Church; yet to give him his due, his Language is fair, and his Discourse free
from those Fiery and Passionate Heats, that usually attend Discourses of this
Nature from other Pens. I suppose he will have no Cause to complain of being
otherwise dealt with in the present Answer. Sure it is, That the Wrath of Man
works not the Righteousness of God. I pray God that the present Reply may be
made Instrumental to the opening his Eyes, that he may see from whence he is
fallen, and Repent, and do his first Works. Since the Writing of this, I am
informed of Mr. Allen's Decease. I make no question but that he and others
also, will sooner or latter be convinced, that the horrible guilt of Schism,
and the consequent Evils attendant thereon, were so far from being justly
Chargeable on us, because of our present Practice; that these things do rather
lie at the Doors of those that thus condemn us. I have endeavored indeed to
speak with as much Advantage as I could, to the Conviction of him, and others,
that I cannot but apprehend, to walk in a corrupt Path in this Respect: And
having so done, I know no Reason any have to be offended, if they be in Love
exhorted also to their Duty. Exhort one another daily (says the Holy Spirit)
lest any of you be hardened through the Deceitfulness of Sin. And in like
manner, we are bid to provoke one another to Love, and to good Works. Whereof,
this is none of the least, and Wherein, peradventure, upon a due and further
Consideration, you may find your selves to have been as yet Deficient.

I Would by no means be understood in all this Discourse, as if I intended to
lay more than the proper stress, upon the Ordinance we are Contending about.
For most true it is, that though the Golden Oil of the Heavenly Blessing,
according to the standing Promises of the Gospel, is only, or for the most
part, to be Conveyed to us, through the Golden Pipes of Gospel Ordinances,
which should Engage us to the faithful Owning and Practice of them, and not to
Indulge our selves in any Negligence, Deviation, or Regardlessness about them;
yet nevertheless, as great would the Error be on the other hand, and it may be
greater, to take up our Rest here: For let the Pipes be never so pure and
clean; Or let the Ordinances we plead for, be never so punctually Observed,
according to the Divine Institution, and the Pattern received in the Holy
Mount; yet it is the Fountain must supply the Pipe, else it will yield nothing.
The best Ordinances are dry and barren things in themselves, unless by them,
the Golden Oil from (...) himself be derived unto us. It is an undoubted Truth,
that these he is pleased to make use of; and therefore we are bound
Conscionably to attend upon the Ministration of them: But if our Faith ascend
no higher, than to fix upon the means; no wonder* if the best means, or the
clearest Popes do not yield forth unto us, that Spiritual Relief we are seeking
after.

*To Conclude; I hope therefore, it will be our Joint Prayer and Endeavor, to
be more than Outward Court-Worshippers: Even that we may be such, as are got
into that; that is, within the Vail, having the Father's Name Written in our
Foreheads, Redeemed from the Earth, and being without Fault before the Throne
of God. The Purity of Divine Institutions, we must not forget, or be Regardless
concerning; Otherwise, we cannot please our Great Lord and Master: But let us
be sure to press through all External Mediums, whatsoever, that we may not fail
of being admitted into the Innermost Recesses of the Divine Glory, even in that
Secret of God's Presence, wbich is the proper Receptacle, and Habitation of the
Blessed. Thus prays,

Thy most Unworthy, but Affectionate Servant, for Christ's Sake, Philip Carry.

THE CONTENTS OF THE FIRST PART.
MR. Allen's First Argument against Antipaedobaptists; from the silence of the
Scripture concerning the Baptism of Persons at Age, whose Parents were
Christians. Answered. Page 1 His Second Argument from Mat. 19. 14. Suffer
little Children, and forbid them not, to come unto Me, etc. Answered. p. 2 3 4
5 His Third Argument from Romans 11. 16, 17. If the Root be Holy so are the
Branches, etc. Answered. p. 6 His Fourth Argument from 1 Cor. 7. 14. Else were
your Children unclean, but now are they Holy. Answered. p. 8 9 His Fifth
Argument from Acts 2. 38, 39. The Promise is to you and your Children, etc.
Answered. p. 9 10 His Sixth Argument from Col. 2. 11. Buried with him in
Baptism, etc. Answered. p. 10 11 12 13 His Seventh Argument from the Church
Member-ship of Infants under the former Administration. Answered. From p. 11 to
13 14 15 16 The latter part of Mr. Allen's Discourse; wherein he Labors to
prove the Lawfulness of Imposing other Ceremonies in the management of God's
Worship, beside what God Himself has Appointed. Answered from p. 17 to p. 3
The Second Part.
Containing a distinct and more particular Consideration of the Arguments drawn
from Romans 11. 16. 17. Together with all other the most material Arguments,
whech are usually urged for the support of Infants Baptism. As for the
Arguments drawn from Romans 11. 16, 17. From thence it is urged; First, That the
Gentiles have the same Graffing into the true Olive which the Jews formerly
had; Our Graffing in being Answerable to their present Casting out: Now when
they were taken in, they and their Children were taken in; when they were
broken off, they and their Children were broken off: And therefore if our
Graffing in be answerable to theirs, we and our Children are Graffed in
together. Answered. p. 23 24 Secondly; Since our Graffing into the Olive Tree,
the Church, is answerable to that of the Jews; Their Infants being Graffed in
by Circumcision, so must ours by Baptism. Answered. p. 24 25 Thirdly; If the
Fruit be Holy, the Lump is also Holy. And if the Root be Holy, so are the
Branches. Answered. p. 26 Fourthly. The Church of the Jews, and that of the
Gentiles is still the same; that is, it is still the same Visible Church now
that it was then. And so much the Apostles Simile or Metaphor of Ingraffing
will bear, or it signifies nothing: And if the visible Church be the same, why
should not the Subjects be the same, viz. Children; and the Privilege be the
same, viz. an External Badge given to the Children of the Church now, as well
as under the Law? Answered. p. 27 Fifthly. As the same Church continued under
the Gospel which did exist, or was in being before: So the very same Church
Members kept their places and standing in it, which were of it before, except
such as were broken off by Unbelief, which must not be understood in reference
to the little Children of the Believing Jews; unless it can be made out that
their little Children were guilty also of the same Sin of Unbelief, upon the
Account of which others were thus broken off. Answered. p. 32 Sixthly. Since
the Jewish Infants were under the former Administrataion; at the Call,
Election, and Appointment of God, admitted with their Parents, as visible
Members of the Jewish Church; And since the Gifts and Callings of God are
without Repentance. Romans 11. 29* We have Reason therefore to Conclude, that the
Infants of Christian Parents have the same right to a visible Church Membership
now, as theirs had then. Answered. p. 23. Seventhly. If such Infants are as
much of the Church, and as much Abraham's spiritual seed, as ever Infants in
the Old Testament Church were; then they can be no more incapable than they
were, of a Sollemn Admission into the Church by the Ordinance of Initiation for
the time being, as Baptism is now, as Circumcision was then. Answered. p. 34.
Eighthly. The Believing Gentiles are now graffed in not upon the Legal Branch,
but upon the Root Olive, which affords all the Nourishment that either the
Jews had, or the Gentiles have; which Root Olive is the Covenant of Promise,
that was 430. years before the Law. Now unto that state of things, wherein not
the Law, but the Gospel preached to Abraham did Obtain, God was God not only
to (...) Father, but to the Children; ye^ to all his Family. And the Father of
the Family did not only give himself, but all his Children, and even his
Servants, all his, to God, to take his Sign upon them; and so it must be now.
Answered. p. 28, 29.
But for the further support of Infants Baptism; it is Objected, First. That
since Infants stood visible Members of the Church for 2000 years under the
Legal Administration; It is unlikely they should be now Excluded. Answered.
from p. 27 to 30. Obj 2. If Infants are now Excluded, there would be a very
great change in the Extent of the Covenant; Narrower under the Gospel, than it
was under the Law; And yet no notice in all the Book of God given of such a
change. Answered from. p. 30 to 36. Obj. 3. The Believing Jews should have loss
upon their Repentance, and belief of the Gospel; if their Children formerly
Church Members should now be Excluded upon the Faith and Repentance of their
Parents. Answered. p. 37. Obj. 4. What hope can we have of our Infants, if they
must not be admitted to Christian Baptism, nor reputed as Members of the common
Body, and Church of the faithful. Answered. p. 38. Obj. 5. If Children may not
now be Baptized, this makes the Privilege of Believers under the Gospel to be
less than was theirs under the Law: for their Children were all admitted as
Members of the Visible Church, by the Ordinance of Circumcision, and we cannot
but Conclude that Privileges for our selves and for our Children, are at
least, as Honorable, Large, and Comfortable as theirs. Answered. p. 38, 39.
Obj. 6. Circumcision was a Seal of the New Covenant to Believers and their Seed
under the Law; and therefore so is Baptism to the Seed of Christian Parents
under the Gospel: The denial therefore of Baptism to Infants, in the denial of
a great Privilege which of Right belongs unto them. Answered. p. 39, 40. Obj.
7. Circumcision was Administered to Believers as Believers; and to their Seed
after them as such; to which Baptism was to correspond. Answered. p. 40, 41.
Obj. 8. Since by the Express Command of God, the Jewish Infants were
Circumcised; Are not now Infants as Capable of Answering the Ends of Christian
Baptism, as theirs of Circumcision? Answered. p. 41, 42. Obj. 9. If the Infants
of Believing Gentiles are not to be Baptized; How does the Blessing of Abraham
come on the Gentiles? Gal. 3. 14. Which Blessing of Abraham was, I will be a
God unto thee and to thy Seed, Genesis 17. 7. Answered. p. 42. 43. Obj. 10. Then
also how can Believers be Heirs according to the Promise, Gal. 24. If their
Children should be excluded from the Promise? For the Childrens right to the
Promise, is part of the Fathers Inheritance: For the Promise unto Abraham was;
I will be a God to thee and to thy Seed after thee. Answered. p. 44, 45. Obj.
11. Those to whom the Gospel Covenant belonged, to them the Seal thereof
appertained: But to Believers and their Seed the Gospel Covenant belonged, Genesis
17. 7. I will be a God to thee and to thy Seed; therefore to them the Seal
thereof did appertain: For the Faederati, were to be Signati; that is those
that were in Covenant, were to have the Seal thereof, Genesis 17. 10. By way of
consequence therefore it naturally follows, that if Circumcision, the Seal of
the Gospel Covenant, belonged to the Seed of Believers under the Law, then does
the Gospel Seal Baptism, much more appertain to the Seed of Believers now,
Answered from p. 45. to 61. Obj. 12. Though it is true, when God made a Promise
to Abraham, to be a God to him and to his Seed, Genesis 17, 7. The Seed there
mentioned, is by the Apostle applied to Christ, Gal. 3. 16. He says not unto
Seeds as many, but as of one, and to thy Seed which is Christ; yet this is not
to be understood of Christ Personal, but of Christ Mystical, as in 1 Cor. 12.
12. And so it is to be understood of the Visible Church, of which Infants Born
of Believing Parents are a part. Answered p. 61 62. Obj. 13. In the Commission,
Mat. 28. The Apostles are commanded to teach or disciple all Nations, Baptizing
them: But Infants are Disciples, and therefore to be Baptized. Answered. from
p. 62 to 65. Obj. 14. The Infants of Believers, even while they are Infants,
are capable of being made Partakers of the Inward Grace of Baptism, as well as
grown Men. And therefore they ought to receive the outward Sign of Baptism.
Answered. p. 65. Obj. 15. Our Savior tells us, that unto such belongs the
Kingdom of Heaven. If Children therefore are capable of the greater, then they
are capable of the lesser. If capable of a Membership in the Kingdom, then of
the Sign and Cognizance thereof. But the first is true, Ergo the latter.
Answered. p. 65, 66. Obj. 16. The Gospel took place just as the Old
Administration did, by bringing in whole Families together. When Abraham was
taken in, his whole Family was taken in: So in this New Administration; usually
if the Master of the House turned Christian, the whole Family came in, and were
Baptized with him. The whole Household of Cornelius, the first Converted
Gentile. Act. 11. 14. The Household of Stephanus. The Household of Lydia. The
Household of the Jailer. Answered. from p. 66. to 69. Obj. 17. As there is no
Express Command or Example in the Scripture, concerning the Baptism of Infants;
So neither is there any concerning the Baptism of Persons at Age, whose Parents
were Christians when they were Born, and who have been educated from their
Childhood in the Christian Religion: The Scripture giving no Account of the
Baptism of any in the Apostle's days, but such as were Converted from Judaism,
or Paganism, to Christianity: And therefore the Baptizing of Infants is as
Lawful as the Baptism of such, there being no Express Warrant or Example in the
Scripture, for the one more than for the other. And if a just Consequence may
be admitted for the proof of the one, why not for the other also? You are wont
to reject all Scripture Consequences in Respect of Infants Baptism; and yet
here you must of Necessity admit of the same: So that this Argument therefore
returns upon your selves. Answered, from p 69, to 71, Obj, 18. Infants were by
God's Express Command to be Circumcised under the former Administration; and
all God's Commands about his Institutions then, (according to the Rule of
Analogy or Proportion) are equally binding unto us, as well as to the Jews
then. As in the Case of the Christian Sabbath unto us, which the Fourth
Commandment binds us, as it did the Jews to the former. And thus it is in
Reference to Infants Baptism. In Respect of which, though there is no Express
Command to that Purpose recorded in the New Testament; yet we cannot but
conclude that God's Command unto the Jews to Circumcise their Infants under the
Law, carries with it the force (at least) of a virtual Command unto us to
Baptize ours. Answered. p. 71, 72, 73. Obj. 19. If the Baptism of Believers be
the only Baptism which Christ has appointed: How comes it to pass that so many
Learned and Pious Men should for so long a season, and throughout so many
Generations, cleave to Infants Baptism, whilst so few in Comparison do embrace
the contrary Practice? Answered from p. 73 to 79. Obj. 20. The Apostle tells us
that neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision, but a New
Creature. It is our main business therefore to press after the Power of
Godlyness; And we are afraid that while there is so much stress laid upon the
Circumstantials of Religion, it tends to the losing the Substance. Besides
having been already Baptized in our Infancy, what Necessity is there for the
Repetition thereof? Answered, from p. 79 to 82.
The Conclusion of the Second Part. 82, 85.
The Third Part.
Containing Some Animadversions on Mr. Sidenham's Treatise of Baptism; Wherein
that of Infants is further disproved. Together, with some further Reflections
on Mr. Allen's forementioned Discourse, to the same purpose. Whereunto is
Annexed an Answer at large unto Mr. Baxter's chief Argument for the
Church Membership of Infants, from the Nature of the Covenant made with Israel
in the Land of Moab. Mentioned Deuteronomy. 29. where Children are Represented as
fellow Covenanters with their Parents; which (says he) was a Covenant of
Grace, or a Gospel Covenant. And therefore neither it, nor the
Church Membership of, Infants which was built thereon, Repealed.
The Fourth Part.
Wherein the Baptism of Infants is further Disproved; By way of Answer to the
Arguments made use of by Dr. Burthogge and others, for the Support of that
Practice. Wherein the Covenant made with Israel at Mount Sinai. Exodus 20. as
also the Covenant of Circumcision made with Abraham, Genesis 17. 7, 8, 9. (Whereon
so much stress is laid for the Support of Infants Baptism) are plainly proved
to be no other than two Several Editions of the Covenant of Works. And
Consequently that no just Argument can thence be deduced for the Justification
of that Practice. Together, with a clear and distinct Explanation of the true
Nature and Difference between the two Covenants, that of Works, and that of
Grace.
The Fifth Part.
Containing a Description of that truly Evangelical Covenant God was pleased to
make with Believing Abraham; wherein lies the Sum of the Everlasting Gospel
then Preached unto him; Since Proclaimed by the Apostles; And which now Remains
to be yet further Published unto all Nations, for the Obedience of Faith. Romans
16. 25. 26. Rev. 14. 6. 7. Wherein the true Nature and Difference between the
two Covenants, that of Works, and that of Grace, is further Explained. Wherein
Mr. Baxters Argument also concerning the Morality of Infants Church Membership,
is duly weighed and Answered. The Conclusion; Containing a Solemn Call unto all
Gods People Speedily and Seriously to attend unto the Primitive Purity of the
Gospel Doctrine, and Worship.
THE FIRST PART.
Containing some Animadversions and Reflections upon a Late Dicourse of Mr.
William Allen; Entitled, A Persuasive to Unity: or, A Serious and Friendly
Address to the Nonconformists. And first in reference to his Arguments against
the Antipaedobaptists.

MR. Allen's first Argument is; That a known Anabaptistical Principle Condemns
the Practice of Anabaptists themselves. The Principle is; That Christ's
Commission is to be Interpreted as to the Extent of it, only by Scripture
Examples. And it Condemns the Practice of Anabaptists; because there is no
Scripture Example for the Baptizing such Persons as they Baptize, viz. those of
grown Age whose Parents were Christians, and who have been Educated from their
Childhood in the Christian Religion; but only such as were newly Converted
from Paganism or Judaism, to Christianity.

To this we Reply. First, That though it should be granted, that there is no
express Example in the Scripture, concerning the Baptizing Persons at Age,
whose Parents were Christians; yet it is sufficient unto us, that there are
Examples enough in the Scripture concerning the Baptism of Believers: So that
let a Person be but a Believer, and we have no reason to enquire into his
Pedigree; nor have we any Rule that so directs us, in Order to his Admission to
Baptism. And as we have no Rule nor Reason to accept of a Person that Believes,
the rather because he had Christian Parents; so neither to Reject him on that
Ground. Could the like Command or Examples be produced from the Scripture
concerning the Baptism of Infants, as can easily be produced concerning the
Baptism of Believers, (for under that Notion only are we bound to take
Cognizance of those Baptized by us;) the present Controversy would soon be
concluded between us.

Secondly, This Argument will easily fall to the Ground, if we duly consider
the Scope of the forementioned Commission concerning Baptism, as it is
Recorded. Mat. 28. 19, 20. Go ye therefore and Teach, or Disciple all Nations,
Baptizing them, etc. Wherein, as the Order to be observed, is plainly Exclusive
of Infants, who are incapable of Teaching, or Discipleship by Instruction, as
the Rule here directs: So it is as evident, that it Includes all other sorts of
Persons that are capable of Actual Teaching, whether they be Jews or Gentiles,
or whether they be the Offspring of Pagans or Believers; there being therein
no Exception of any, it extending to all sorts of People in all Nations that
are capable of being effectually taught or instructed in the Rudiments of the
Christian Doctrine, so as to make an Answerable Profession of the same; which
we hope it will not be denied, but that the Offspring of Christian Parents are
as capable of, as others, if not more, by the Advantage of their Education,
when coming to years of Understanding, and therefore are plainly included in
the Commission concerning Baptism, as well as others; which Infants are not,
because incapable of being taught, as the Commission directs.

But against this it is objected, That if the Commission. Mat. 28. 19. Excludes
none from Baptism but such as are to be excluded by the Order therein to be
observed: And if Baptizing and Teaching are to precede or follow one the other
as there named by Christ: Then these two Conclusions will follow. First, That
Infants are not there Excluded from Baptism. Secondly* That a Person may be
Baptized before he is Taught. And that these Propositions do follow from those
before mentioned, will appear from that Text in the Original, where, on a
little Consideration it may be observed, that the Order so much talked of* and
which so much stress is laid upon by the Anabaptists, is clearly for the
Paedobaptists, and not for them. We have there First (...) which will be easily
allowed to signify, Disciple all Nations, Make them Disciples o^ Christians.
Secondly, we have (...), etc. and (...), etc. which literally to translate is,
Baptizing, -- Teaching. -- Now then Discipling being a general Word, that
centains in it the two other that follow, Baptizing and Teaching; and being the
Imparative Mood, whereas the other two are Participles; it is manifest that the
whole Command or Commission is given in that, and that the Mode of Execution is
expressed in these: And if the Mode of executing that general Commission be
expressed in these where Baptizing is first, and Teaching comes after: What is
become of the Order the Antipaedobaptists have so long talked of? Certainly,
the insisting on the Order in that place, proves to them an unhappy Weapon to
stab that Cause, for the defense of which it has been brought into the Field.

For Answer hereunto, we say; That how fatal soever you suppose it may prove to
us, or the Cause we plead for, to insist on the Order there mentioned: Of this
we are sure, that if we neglect the Order Christ himself has appointed, we
shall come short of pleasing him; and consequently so to Teach, must needs
prove an unhappy Weapon to stab that Cause, in the defense of which it is
engaged.

In the Scripture before us, Mat. 28. 19, 20. there are plainly 3 distinct Acts
required by Christ, in the Commission he there gave his Apostles. First, Go
Teach, or Disciple all Nations; that is, not by Baptizing them, as the
Objection supposes, and afterward to teach them,; but singly by the Preaching
of the Gospel unto them: For so it must of Necessity be understood, as appears
by the Parallel Account that is given us of the same Commission. Mark. 16. 15.
Go Preach the Gospel to every Creature. Secondly, to Baptize them. So it
follows in Matthew, that is; such as shall give a believing Entertainment
thereunto: For so it follows in Mark. He that Believes and is Baptized shall
be saved: And accordingly, this was the consequent Practice of the Apostles.
Act. 8. 37. If thou believe with all thine Heart thou may. Thirdly, To
teach them their following Duty; Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever
I have commanded you.

You tell us indeed That a Person may be Baptized before he is Taught, and that
if the Mode of executing the general Commission be expressed in these, where
Baptizing is first, and Teaching comes after; What is become (say you) of the
Order the Antipaedobaptists have so long talked of? But it may rather be
demanded; What then is become of the Order the Scriptures have so long spoken
of? For if Baptizing is first, as you say, and Teaching comes after, then it
will follow that the Apostles understood not their Commission aright; for they
always first endeavored to make Disciples by the Preaching of the Gospel, and
then Baptized those that gave a Believing Entertainment thereunto. So did
Philip to the Eunuch, he first Preached the Gospel to him, and then Baptized
him. Act. 8. So did Peter to Cornelius, and the rest with him. Act. 10. And so
did the same Peter to the 3000. Jews that were converted by that Gospel Sermon,
Recorded Act. 2. And accordingly, upon the Profession of their Faith and
Repentance, we are told Verse. 41. Then they that gladly Received his Word were
Baptized: And thus runs the whole Current of the Scripture, and no Example to
the contrary. But according to your Doctrine, neither Philip nor Peter did well
in Preaching to them first, and Baptizing them afterward: for (say you)
Baptizing is first and Teaching comes after. It Is true, there is a sort of
Teaching that comes after, as has been before expressed: But to say that a
Person may be Baptized before he is Taught, is certainly Repugnant to the whole
Doctrine and Practice of the Gospel.

And indeed, according to this Reckoning; If a Minister were to be sent into a
Foreign Land, among a Company of Ignorant Heathens, to Disciple them to the
Practice and Profession of Christianity: His first work must be to take them by
the Shoulder, and to lead them into the Water; or at least by Surprise, to
sprinkle a little Water upon their Faces: For it may justly be doubted, few
would readily submit thereunto; unless they were first Taught, and Instructed
in the Mystery of that sacred Institution. And if any should be induced to
submit thereunto, without the Precedence of Preparatory Instructions: This
Practice you see would be Foreign to the Doctrine and Practice of Christ and
his Apostles. And therefore, certainly to insist on such an Order must needs
prove an unhappy Weapon, to sta^^ that Cause, in the defense whereof it is thus
engaged.

The Scripture is indeed full in the Justification of the Order we now plead
for, and to affirm the contrary, carries with it no small Absurdity, Go Teach,
or Disciple all Nations (says Christ to his Apostles) that is, according to
the scope of the forementioned Objection, Baptize them first, and Teach them
afterward, this being the mode of executing that General Commission: But is the
Opus Operatum of Baptism, think you, a likely way or means to beget or bring
forth Disciples unto Christ? If Men be Preached by the Gospel into
Discipleship, it is no wonder, For it is the Wisdom of God, and the Power of
God unto Salvation, unto every one that believes. 1 Cor. 1. 21. 24. And
accordingly where the Spirits Energy does accompany it, it Disciples Men into
the very Life and Spirit of Christianity. But we never read that Baptism was
ever appointed for that end, whether by it self, or in Conjunction with
Preaching. It follows after, it is true, but not to make us Disciples, but to
show that we are such, as a visible Mark to this purpose to be taken on us.
Gal. 3 26, 27.

If you say that Baptism is not sufficient to make a Disciple or Christian,
without the after-Teaching; How comes it then to pass that Infants are
Baptized, who are incapable of the after-Teaching you speak of? Many of whom,
also dye in their Infancy, and so are never Taught, whether before or after: Of
whom nevertheless it is affirmed; that the Baptized Infant is Regenerate,
received into the Number of the Children of God, and an Heir of Everlasting
Life. And hence it is that the Baptism of Infants is commonly called the
Christening of them; that is, they are thereby made Christians. So that though
you seem to allow the Necessity of joining Instruction with Baptism to make a
Disciple or Christian; yet the common Practice shows that Baptism aloue is
reckoned sufficient for that Purpose.

But (say you) These two Conclusions do plainly flow from the Premises. First,
that Infants are not there excluded from Baptism. Secondly, That a Person may
be Baptized before he is Taught. For Answer, you see we have plainly proved to
you, from the constant Doctrine and Practice of Christ and his Apostles, that
none ought to be Baptized before they are Taught. And then it will equally
follow, and that with the same Clearness, that Infants are there excluded from
Baptism, because incapable after an ordinary rate of being taught as the Gospel
directs.

So that you see, the whole of your Argument falls to the ground. You may
Criticize therefore at Pleasure, and talk what you will of Imparative Moods,
and Participles: You see we have diligently considered the general Scope of the
Commission, by comparing Matthew and Mark together, and the consequent Practice
of the Apostles thereon, who were best able to understand the meaning of it;
wherein we have plainly proved to you the Antecedency of Teaching or Preaching
to Baptism: And therefore, unless you can produce another Commission for the
Baptism of Infants, who are incapable of being thus Taught, all you can say
besides will avail you nothing.

Mr. Allen's Second Argument is derived from those Words of our Savior. Mat.
19. 14. Suffer Little Children, and forbid them not to come unto me, for of
such is the Kingdom of Heaven. From whence it is Inferred, that if little
Children are capable of a Membership in the Kingdom, from the gracious Respect
Christ bears unto them, then they are equally capable of the Sign or Cognizance
thereof, which is, Baptism:

For Answer, Frst, it must be considered, that it remains as yet unproved, that
the little Children here spoken of were Infants; the Context both here and
elsewhere giving shrewd ground of Conjecture, that they were rather such little
Children as were capable of making an Actual Profession of their Faith in
Cbrist; which seems to be intimated by our Savior. Mat. 18. 2. When having
called a little Child unto him, and set him in the midst of them, he says,
Ver. 6. Whosoever shall offend one of these little Ones that believe in me, etc.
Which after an ordinary rate cannot with any shadow of pretense, be intended of
Young Sucking Infants: For Faith comes by Hearing, and Hearing by the Word of
God; which such little Children, according to an ordinary Reckoning, are
utterly incapable of. Nor does the Greek Word used Luke 18. 15. Which is
translated in English, Infants, prove it: For the Greek Word which is there
translated, Infants, as Piscator himself tells us; signifies a Child capable of
Teaching: As when it is said, Timothy knew the sacred Scriptures from a Child;
that is, ever since he was a Boy, not an Infant; it being the same Greek Word
that is used in both places. It is an ungrounded Supposition therefore, that
these were sucking Infants of whom Christ here speaks; which till it can be
proved, the Inference that is hence drawn, concerning the Baptizing of such,
must needs be acknowledged to have a very infirm and slender bottom.

Secondly, Though it should be granted that they were indeed Young Infants,
that are here spoken of, as such unto whom belongs the Kingdom of Heaven: It
may be (as Piscator also observes) referred not to their present state, as if
for the present they were in the Kingdom of God, that is, Believers, and
Justified; but that they were Elect Persons, and so in time, of them should be
the Kingdom of God. Now that which gives right to Baptism, is the present state
of a Person. And

Thirdly, It ought also to be duly considered; that the little Children here
spoken of, whatever they were, are expressly ordered to be brought unto Christ,
who himself Baptized not, and not unto his Disciples; whose proper Work that
was: Nor is there any mention made at all of their Baptizing; but his laying
his Hands upon them and blessing them. And from the Action of Christ's blessing
them, to infer that they are to be Baptized, proves nothing so much as that
there is a want of better Arguments: For the Conclusion would with more
probability be derived thus. Christ blessed Children, and so dismissed them,
but Baptized them not; therefore Infants are not to be Baptized. But let this
Argument be as weak as its Fellow; sure we are that Christ has other ways of
bringing them to Heaven, than by Baptism. And as we are sure that God has not
commanded Infants to be Baptized; So we are sure God will do them no Injustice,
nor damn them for what they cannot help, viz. If the Parents Baptize them not.
Many Thousand ways there are by which God can bring any reasonable Soul unto
him; but nothing is more unreasonable, than because he has tied all Men of
Years and Discretion to this way, therefore we of our own Heads shall carry
Infants to him that way, without his Direction. So to conceive is groundless,
and the Action consequent to it is too bold and venturous. Let him do what he
pleases with our Infants, we must not.

But it is Objected, That as it cannot be denied, but that it is our Duty to
bring our Children unto Christ in the Arms of Faith and Prayer, (at least,) in
order to their receiving the Holy Spirit; so we are assured, that in all the
things that we ask of him according to his Will he hears us: And if so, who
can forbid Water that these should not be Baptized that have received the Holy
Spirit as well as we? Act. 10. 47.

To this we Reply, That though it is indeed our Duty to be Wrestling with God
for our selves, our Children, and others also, in Order to our obtaining the
blessings of the Holy Spirit, for our selves and them; yet we have no ground
certainly to conclude that God hears our Prayers in this respect, for others
than our selves. Of this we are assured, that if we sincerely desire it for our
selves, God will not deny us the same; having to this purpose given us his most
faithful Promise, That he will give the Holy Spirit unto them that ask him.
Luke 11. 13. But we have not the same Assurance in respect of others; the
Promise being only to those that ask it for themselves: He says not, that he
will give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him not, or that desire not the
Knowledge of his Ways. True it is, that God is found sometimes of them that do
not seek him, and he may accordingly give the Holy Spirit to them that do not
desire him, when so it pleases him: But he has no where bound himself so to
do. What he may do is one thing, and what he has promised is another; and it is
God's Promise only that we are to build upon in this respect. It Is true, we are
to ask Gods Spirit, as for our selves, so for others also, that if peradventure
they may receive the same benefit with our selves: And much more are we bound
to become Petitioners to Heaven for our Children upon that Account: But till
they are able to give some Convincing Evidence that our Prayers are heard, we
have no just Reason to conclude that they are actually possessed of so rich a
Benefit, there being no Promise giving us Assurance to this purpose.

As for that Promise, Isa. 59. 21. which is mentioned by Mr. Allen, upon this
Account; It cannot without palpable streining be applied to the Natural
Offspring of Believers, now as he supposes: It having a most plain and
absolute Reference to the Redeemer, spoken of in the foregoing Verse, and can
be applied unto none other than unto him, and his Spiritual Seed; and that at
the time of his second Appearance according to Romans 26. 27. Out of whose Mouth,
God there Promises, That his Spirit should never depart, nor out of the Mouth
of his Seed, nor out of the Mouth of his Seeds Seed for ever. Indeed, If God's
Holy Spirit were absolutely and everlastingly entailed upon all the Natural
Offspring of Believers; now, as our Opponents from this Scripture do affirm it
is; this would be comfortable Tidings indeed, could it be substantially proved
unto us: But alas! As the present Scripture proves it not, so neither does any
other that we know of; and were it so that God had any where promised, that at
the Request of the Believing Parents he, would not fail to give his Holy Spirit
unto all their Natural Seed: No doubt, Noah, Abraham and David, with many other
choice Believers, recorded in the Scripture, were not defective in their Duty,
to be wrestling with God for their Offspring in this Respect, that they all
might be Partakers of his Holy Spirit, and consequently that they all might be
made Inheritours of the Heavenly Kingdom, (For the Holy Spirit once given, as
the Scripture before alleged, proves, was never more to depart from them.) But
alas! Most evident it is, that notwithstanding their most Zealous Prayers, and
other Pious endeavors, for the Spiritual benefit of their Natural Offspring;
they had many of them such Children, as were very Wicked, Flagitious and
Profane, and such as were rejected by God; which yet they had not been, had
they been at all possessed of Gods Holy Spirit, as the Fruit of their Parents
Prayers and Supplications to God for them. And to this does the daily
Experience that occurs to our own Observation, very sadly testify.

The Sum then of our Answer to the forementioned Objection, is this; They that
have Received the Holy Ghost, or such at least, concerning whom there is any
convincing Evidence thereof (as was the Case of them in the 10. Act. of whom
this word was spoken) such are the proper Subjects of Baptism. For who can
forbid Water that such should not be Baptized? But till there can be convincing
Evidence given concerning our Children, that either all or any of them are
actually partakers thereof; according to this Rule, they are not the proper
Subjects of Baptism: And therefore till then they are not to be Baptized.

As for Mr. Allen's Third Argument, drawn from Romans 11. 17. We say that that
Scripture is by him and others impertinently alleged to this purpose: It being
to be understood not of ingrafting into the visible Church by an outward
Ordinance, as Baptism; but into the Invisible by Election, and giving of Faith,
as the whole Chapter shows.

His Fourth Argument is drawn from. 1 Cor. 7. 14. For the Unbelieving Husband
is sanctified by the Wife, and the Unbelieving Wife is sanctified by the
Husband, else were your Children unclean, but now are they holy; from whence he
would infer, that the Children of Believers are Holy with a faederal or
Covenant Holiness, and therefore to be Baptized.

To this we Reply; That the same sort of Holiness is ascribed to the Children,
as is to be understood in reference to the Unbelieving Husband, or the
Unbelieving Wife, who are both here said to be Sanctified by their Respective
Yoak-Fellows; which cannot be understood of a Faederal or Covenant Holiness,
but that which is Matrimonial: For if we must understand it of a Covenant
Holiness, then it will follow that the Unbelieving Wife, or the Unbelieving
Husband, may upon the same ground lay claim to Baptism as well as their
Children; which yet your selves will not grant. Besides, it is evident from the
Words themselves, in which the term Believer is omitted, which would not be, if
the Holiness were derived from the Faith of the one Party, and so to be
understood of a Covenant Holiness. And the single terms of Husband and Wife are
twice used, which shows that the Holiness is from the Conjugal Relation, and
cannot b^ meant of any other than Legitimation. And the term Unbeliever is also
twice used, and said to be Sanctified; which can have no other sense but this,
That the Unbelieving Yoke Fellow is Sanctified in respect of Conjugal Use to
his or her Yoke Fellow; and so though the one be an Unbeliever, they might
comfortably enough live together in Lawful Wedlock. For else, says he, your
Children were to be accounted Unclean, that is Illegitimate: But this being
determined, that the Husband is thus Sanctified to the Wife, and the Wife to
the Husband, though the one be an Unbeliever, hence it follows that your
Children are Holy, that is, Lawfully begotten, which is the only sense ^pposite
to the Determination. verse 12. 13. And as for the use of the Word Holy for
Legitimate, that it is in this Sense used elsewhere in the Scripture is evident
from Mal. 2. 15. Where a Seed of God can be understood in no other sense than
that of a Lawful Seed in Opposition to those born by Polygamy.

But though it should be allowed that the Holiness in the Text is indeed to be
understood of a Faederal or Covenant Holiness; yet we cannot therefore grant,
That that is a sufficient Reason for the Baptism of Infants: For let the
Holiness in the Text be what it will, whether Moral, Faederal, or Matrimonial,
neither of these is either there, or elsewhere assigned to be a Ground of
Baptizing Children upon; that which is laid down in the Institution being that
alone that can Warrant the same. It is God's Word only, not our Reason that can
Justify our Practice in God's Ordinances. That a Profession of Faith and
Repertance is a Substantial Warrant for Baptism, is undeniable to be proved
from the Scriptures: But that so is Faederal Holiness, or any other
Indiscernable Qualification in Infants; the Scripture is altogether silent
therein.

His Fifth Argument for Infants Baptism, is derived from Acts 2. 38, 39. Repent
and be Baptized every one of you, in the Name of Jesus Christ for the Remission
of Sins, etc. For the Promise is unio you, and to your Children* and to all
that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall Call.

But whatever Mr. Allen or others suppose, First it is Evident that the Promise
here spoken of, is not to be understood of a Promise of External Privileges,
but the Promise of the Gospel, or the Grace of God ^^ Christ Jesus, which was
now freely held forth unto them upon their Repentance, notwithstanding they had
been the Actual Murderers of the Lord of Glory, which he had before charged
upon them; which only could be a Suitable Plaster for the Wound now given them
thereby; telling them that they might have Remission of Sins, even of that Sin,
if they did Repent: Because, beyond and contrary to their Acting, in Crucifying
Christ, God had brought to pass the raising up of Christ for their Salvation,
and their Children, and all whom God should Call, though a far off, if they
also did Repent, and were Baptized into the Name of Christ.

Nor indeed, Secondly, was the Promise to their Children, as Believers Seed;
nor to them or any other uncalled by the Lord; But with this express Proviso;
Even as many as the Lord our God shall Call. Which calling alone made them
Christ's, and capable of Baptism. Nor are the Words, To you and your Children,
mentioned as an acknowledgment of a Privilege to them before others; but by
reason of their Wish. Mat. 27. 25. His Blood be on us, and on our Children: And
so as a Remedy of their Perplexity, v. 37. When they heard this they were
pricked to their Heart, etc. Nor is any Intimation given of a Title Baptism to
them, or their Children as the Children of Believers, but an Exhortation to
them and theirs to Repent and be Baptized, as their duty for their benefit; The
Promise being not mentioned, as though of it self it gave a Title to Baptism,
either to them, or to their Offspring, without Repentance: But as a Motive why
both they and theirs should actually Repent, and be Baptized; because in so
doing they would be in the way of obtaining the Remission of their Sins, and
Receiving the Holy Ghost, the two grand Branches of the Promise here mentioned:
Which duty of Repentance, Little Children being incapable of performing,
neither are they therefore, according to this direction of the Apostle, the
proper Subjects of such an Ordinance. So that this Text is grossly abused by
such as infer from thence, a Title to Baptism for the Children of Believers, by
virtue of a Promise to them, as such; Whereas it is manifest from the whole
Scope of the Con-text; that it is only an Encouragement to the Jews against
Despair, by reason of their Crucifying of Christ; Letting them know, that yet
there was hope of Mercy and of Pardon for them, and theirs, upon the Respective
Repentance of either of them.

A Sixth Argument for Infants Baptism is drawn from Col. 2. 11. In whom also
you are Circumcised with the Circumcision made without Hands, in putting off
the Body of the Sins of the Flesh by the Circumcision of Christ. Ver. 12.
Buried with him in Baptism, wherein you are also risen with him, through the
Faith of the Operation of God, who has raised him from the Dead. From whence a
groundless Inference is drawn, concerning the Succession of Christian Baptism,
into the Room, Place, and Use of Jewish Circumcision. And that therefore, as
the Jewish Infants were Circumcised, so by way of Analogy, those Born of
Christian Parents ought to be Baptized.

To this We Answer; First, That to suppose that Christian Baptism comes in the
Room, Place, or Use of Jewish Circumcision, is a mistaken Inference, which can
neither be truly drawn from those Words of the Apostle to the Collossians, nor
from any other place of Scripture. Not from the present Words, where no
Circumsion in the Flesh is at all Expressed, or can be meant, but that of
Christ's in his own Person; which is there made the Exemplary Efficient of
Spiritual Circumcision: for so it is expressly told us. In whom also you are
Circumcised with the Circumcision made without Hands, in putting off the Body
of the Sins of the Flesh, by the Circumcision of Christ. So that this Text
avails nothing at all to the present purpose; it being e^^dent that the Scope
of the Spirit of God there, is to show that we are complete in Christ. v. 10.
And to this purpose he Subjoyns. v. 12. Buried with Him in Baptism, wherein ye
are also risen with Him, through the Faith of the Operation of God. But whereas
we are told that the Jewish Teachers would be ready to Object, that the
receiving of the Inward Grace of Circumcision did not make them so complete as
Abraham and his Seed was, because they had also an Outward Visible Sign. This
is a groundless Conceit that either the Jews were ready thus to Object, or that
the Apostle intended to Answer such an Objection: But supposing it were so,
Does it therefore follow that because the Jewish Infants were Circumcised,
therefore ours must be Baptized? Is there a Syllable of that sound or
signification in the Text? For it is plain that the Apostle is not there
speaking of Infants, but concerning Adult Believers only; nor can it with any
shadow of Reason be affirmed that Baptism is appointed to have the same Place,
and Use in the Church of God that Circumcision had: For if so then it would
also follow, that Females must be Excluded from Baptism, because incapable of
Circumcision. And that because Circumcision bound Men to keep the whole
Ceremonial Law of Moses; therefore so does Baptism also. And indeed, to affirm
that there is the same Ground for Infant Baptism, as for Infant Circumcision,
is to assert that the command of Circumcision is Obligatory to us. And to
Imagine that there is a Parity of Reason from Analogy or Proportion between
them, is no other than a groundless Supposition, that there is a Reason of them
to direct us in their Use, besides what God has expressly declard unto us; and
to say, That tho Christ and His Apostles have not told us so; yet we think it
should be so, is to Impute a defect in them of what they should have done, and
more Wisdom and Diligence in our selves about Ordering the Divine Service.

We can fetch (says Mr. Baxter in his late Treatise of Episcopacy) no Model of
a Gospel Ministry, nor proof of our Authority or Obligation as Instituted, from
the Instituted Ministry of the Mosaical Church: Because the Law of Moses is
Abrogate, and indeed did never bind the Gentiles. Nor is it safe (says he) to
Argue from Parity of Reason, that we must now be, or do, as they did, in point
of pure Institution, while we so little know the total Reason of God's
Institutions. And when He Himself has taken them down and set up new Ones, we
must not then plead our Reason against the Alterations which God Himself has
made. P. 29. Besides which.

Secondly, The Argument from Circumcision is invalid upon many Considerations;
For Figures and Types prove nothing, unless a Command go a long with them, or
some Express to signify such to be their purpose: For the Deluge of Waters,
and the Ark of Noah, were a Figure of Baptism, said Peter: And if the
Circumstances of the one should be drawn to the other, we should make Baptism a
Prodigy rather than a Rite. The Feast of the Passover was a Type of the Supper,
which succeeds the other as much as Baptism does to Circumcision: But because
there was in the eating of the Paschal Lamb, no prescription of Sacramental
Drink, shall we thence Conclude, that the Supper is to be Administered but in
one kind? Or, that because the Passover was to be eaten in haste, with a Staff
in their Hand; Must we thence conclude, that the Lords Supper ought to be so
Celebrated also? No, we will easily conclude that we are duly to attend unto
the Words of the Institution, which particularly concerns the right Celebration
of that Ordinance of the Supper, whatever Circumstances were by the command of
God to be Observed in the Celebration of the Type. And after the same sort must
we Reason, if we will Reason aright, concerning Circumcision and Baptism also.
And yet again,

Thirdly, Even in the very Instance of this Argument; Supposing a Corespondency
of Analogy, between Circumcision and Baptism; yet there is no Correspondency of
Identity. For although it were granted that both of them did Consign the
Covenant of Faith; yet there is nothing in the Circumstance of Childrens being
Circumcised, that so concerns that Mystery, but that it might very well be
given to Children, and yet Baptism only to men of Reason: Because Circumcision
left a character in the flesh, which being Imprinted upon Infants, did its work
to them when they came of Age. And such a Character was necessary, because
there was no word added to the sign: But Baptism Imprints nothing that remains
on the Body, and if it leaves a character at all, it is upon the Soul, to which
also the word is added, which is as much a part of the Ordinance as the Sign it
self. For which cause therefore it is highly requisite that the Parties
Baptized should be capable of Reason, that they may be capable both of the word
of the Ordinance, and the Impress to be made thereby upon the Soul. Since
therefore the Reason of the Parity does wholly fail, there is left nothing to
Infer a Necessity of Complying in this Circumstance of Age more then in the
other Annexes of the Type. Then also the Infant must be precisely baptized upon
the Eighth day; And Females must not be baptized, because such were not to be
Circumcised. But it were more proper if we would understand it aright, to
prosecute the Analogy from the type to the Antitype, by way of letter and
Spirit and Signification. That as Circumcision figures Baptism; so also the
Adjuncts of the Circumcision, shall signify some thing Spiritual, in the
Adherences of Baptism. And therefore as Infants were Circumcised; So Spiritual
Infants shall be Baptized, which is Spiritual Circumcision. For therefore Babes
had the Ministry of the type, to Signify that we must, when we give our Names
to Christ, become Children in Malice and then the type is made Complete.

The Seventh Argument for Infants Baptism, and whereon the greatest stress is
laid, by Mr. Allen, Mr Baxter, and others; is drawn from the Church-member-ship
of Infants under the former Administration. That because Infants were
comprehended with their Parents in the Jews Church state; they are so still
under the Gospel, and therefore to be baptized.

Reply. We know very well that Mr. Baxter and others, do Assert the
Church Membership of Infants before Abraham's time; and that therefore it is a
Moral Institution, and so not Capable of being Repealed as other Jewish Rites
were. But that is a groundless Fiction, and cannot be at all proved from the
Scripture: The Discussion whereof shall be reserved for the latter part of this
Discourse. In the mean season, That they were admitted Members of the Jewish
Church is Evident. And it is also as Evident that God has now quite pulled
down that House of his, broke up Housekeeping, and turned the Servants,
Infants, and all out of Doors, Romans 11. 17. 24. The Natural Branches are broken
of, and God has now built him a New house into which God has admitted none as
his Household Servants but Believers only, or such as Profess so to be. Moses
says the Apostle, Heb. 3. 5. 9. was faithful as a Servant in all his house:
But Christ as a son over his own House: Whose House are we, if we hold fast the
Confidence, etc. Where the Servants of the new house, are discribed te be
Beleivers, not Infants, and therefore called Living stones and a Spiritual
House. 1. Pet. 2. 3. And that the Old House, the Jewish Church, with all the
Appurtenances and Privileges of it, is pulled down, and a new One Built, into
which Infants are not to be admitted, is Evident from the Apostles Reasoning.
Heb. 7. 12. For the Priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a
change also of the Law. Which must needs Include Circumcision with all the
Appurtenances and Privileges belonging to it. And therefore, as Infants
Church Membership came in with the Law of Circumcision, So it went out and was
repealed with it. They were it is true of the Household of Old, but it was by a
positive Law. Show us the like now, or you say nothing? Sure it is, There is
now no Institution that makes Infants fellow Citizens with the Saints, and of
the Household of God, neither are they to bo so accounted till they believe and
are able to do Service in the House. And if you say, that among men Infants are
counted of the Household tho they can do no Service: we Answer; that as
Comparisons do not run upon four feet: so it does not follow that because we
count our Infants of our Family, therefore they are to be accounted members of
Gods Family, the Gospel Church, unless God by any Institution had made them so.
The Household of God is called the Household of faith, or a House Consisting of
Believers. Now unless you can prove Infants to be Believers, they are not of
this House: For all the Servants here must be Believers; either Really, or at
least historically and Professedly, which Infants cannot be.

If it be Objected, That as the Jews and their Children are broken off: So the
Gentiles and their Children are Ingraffed in their Room, according to Romans 11.
20. Because of unbelief they were broken off; and thou stand by faith.

We Answer, That the Reason why the Jews and their Children were broken off,
was not because they had not Believing Parents: For Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob
were still the Parents of them all. They were Abraham's seed when they were
broken off) as well as before: But the true Reason was because the terms of
standing in the Church were now altered. For before the Gospel came, they stood
members of the Old Jewish Church, though as much unbelievers, for many
Generations, as they were when they were broken off. But now Abraham's Church
state is at an end, and all the Privileges and Immunities cease. The Jewish
Church must give way to the Gospel Church; The Messiah being come, and about to
build him a New House, into which none are of Right to enter, but such as are
professed Believers: For the Old House or Jewish Church was not intended to abide
for ever, but only to the time of Reformation. And then the Law must be
changed, the Priesthood changed, the Privileges and Ordinances changed, yea
the Covenant changed: Which they not believing, being willing to abide in the
Old House still, and to remain Church Members upon the account of a mere
Fleshly and Natural Birth, still crying out, Abraham is our Father, and we are
his Seed, and are Free, and were never in Bondage: Wherefore they were broken
off, and that whether they would or not, by reason of their unbelief, that is,
because they would not believe that the Old Covenant, and all the Privileges
thereof were ended, and the Substance come, the Lord Jesus, who was the true
Antitype, and Substance of all these Shadows. So that thus then, the Jews were
then broken off by Unbelief; And thou and thine (O! Gentile Believer) must
stand by Faith: Mark it, thou stand by Faith; not by Virtue of any Birth
Privilege whatsoever, but thy standing is by Faith; yet not thy Seed by thy
Faith, but thou thy self by thine, and they by their own. Faith is that by
which (thou standing and not thy Seed) have right to stand in the Church, and
not they. But if thy Seed have Faith, and thou have none, they have right to
stand in the Church, and thou shall be Excluded.

Most certain it is, that under the Law the Natural Seed or Progeny of Abraham
were all Holy, with an External, Ceremonial, or Typical Holiness, and
consequently they were then all admitted to an External Participation of Church
Privileges. But remarkable to this purpose is that passage of the Apostle. 2
Cor. 5. 16. Wherefore henceforth know we no Man after the Flesh. It seems then,
that heretofore, there had been a knowledge taken of Persons after the Flesh.
And it is plain there was, that because the Jews were of the Natural or Fleshly
Seed of Abraham, they were therefore all of them admitted to the Privilege of
an External Church Membership, while others were Exempted. But we see the
Apostle resolves henceforth to disclaim any such Cognizance of them, or any
others, upon the Account of a mere Fleshly Descent. And to this very purpose
immediately subjoins in the following Verse. Therefore if any Man be in Christ
he is a new Creature: Old things are past away, all things are become New: A
new Church State, and new Ordinances, a new Seed. and a new way of
Introduction, unto the Participation of the Privilege of Church Membership
under the Gospel Dispensation. Now nothing but a New Creature will serve the
turn; for God expects that they that Worship him now, do Worship Him in Spirit
and in Truth; The Privilege of being admitted into God's House, and to stand
before His Presence in the Actual Celebration of Gospel Ordinances, being now
Entailed only upon the Spiritual Seed, even such who as lively Stones are built
up a Spiritual House, a Holy Priesthood to offer up Spiritual Sacrifices
acceptable to God, by Jesus Christ. 1. Pet. 2. 3. 4. Or such at least as make a
visible Profession thereof.

And therefore, when this New, and more Spiritual Dispensation was now about
actually to be Introduced into the World; John, who was the Harbinger of it,
gives sufficient notice thereof, and to this purpose deals plainly with the
Jews, the Pharisees and the Sadduces that came to be Baptized of him; And tells
them upon this Account, Mat. 3. 9. Think not to say within your Selves, We have
Abraham to our Father: For I say unto you that God is able of these Stones to
raise up Children unto Abraham. And now also the Axe is laid unto tho Root of
the Trees; therefore every Tree that brings not forth good Fruit, is hewn
down and cast into the Fire. It cannot be denied but that they had Abraham to
their Father as much now as before; only the terms of their standing in the
Church were now changed: So that now every Tree of whatsoever Natural Stock, or
External Production, that brings not forth good Fruit must be hewn down. And
the Reason is rendered for that Now the Ax is laid unto the Root of the Trees.
Mark it, [Now] it is so; It was not so before. The Ax was never 'till now laid
at the Root of the Trees; which must needs be understood in reference to that
Birth Privilege before spoken of, which they had so long boasted of, as the
whole Context shows. But now God is resolved to make other manner of Work of
it, under the Gospel Dispensation than he did before. Now the Root of the Trees
must belevelled at. A bare natural Descent, or Extraction from a Religious
Root, will not now serve turn, as in times past it did, to give any right or
title to Church Privileges.

Whereas therefore Mr. Allen does endeavor to demonstrate that the Jewish
Church was as Pure and Spiritual in its Frame and Constitution as that of the
Gospel, it does from hence most plainly appear that there is a vast difference
between them, in respect of the manner of their Constitution, or the terms upon
which the Members of either were to be admitted. And as there is no particular
Person in the World, whether before or since, that can pretend unto the like
Privilege, or Prerogative as Abraham had, to be the Father of the Faithful;
whose Natural Seed also were dignified with many External Privileges: So the
Dispensation being now changed, and the Privileges that once belonged unto
Abraham's Natural Seed being now Repealed, or rather expired: There is
therefore no just claim that henceforth can be duly made unto any other of a
like signification under the Gospel, by the Natural Posterity of any Believer
whatsoever, but such alone as are found actually bearing and bringing forth the
same Fruits of Faith and Holiness that Abraham did, or such at least as make a
visible Profession of the same.

As for the latter part of Mr Allen's Discourse, Wherein he labors to prove
the Lawfulness of Imposing other Ceremonies in the Management of God's Worship,
beside what himself has appointed. In order to the Refutation of this
Assertion of his, there needs no more to be done than attentively to give heed
unto the Words of the Commission given by Christ to his Apostles, and in them,
unto all true Church Guides, or Governors unto the end of the World; to this
purpose; as it is Recorded. Mat. 28. 19. 20. Go Teach all Nations. etc.
Teaching them to Observe all things whatsoever I have Commanded you, and lo I
am with you always, etc. Where we are to Note, that he says not that they
should teach them to Observe all things in the matters of his Worship which the
Church Governors should hereafter Judge Decent or Convenient: But whatsoever I
have Commanded. that is either by himself or his Apostles. Which words must of
necessity be Exclusive of all humane Inventions, or Additions to the Worship of
God; For that he has frequently discovered his severest Displeasure against
his People of Old, for their Presumption in adding those things to His Worship
which He Commanded not. A Lively Instance whereof we have in the Case of Nadab
and Abihu, in their Offering up of strange Fire, Lev. 10. 1, 2, 3, The
Punishment Inflicted on whom was not for doing what was Expressly forbidden; but
for their Presumption in doing that which God had not Commanded. In Matters
purely Civil, it is true, We are to Submit to Every Ordinance of Man for the
Lord's Sake; and that even in such things as are not expressly Commanded,
provided they be not some way or other forbidden in the Word. But as for the
matters of God's Worship, We have no such Rule, but rather the contrary: Render
therefore to Caesar the things which are Caesar's; and unto GOD, the things
that are GOD's. Mat. 22. 21. God having above all things expressed His
Jealousy concerning the same, and has frequently given Testimonies of his
severest Displeasure against His People because of their Presumptuous Additions
thereunto. Witness. Deuteronomy. 12. 32. and 18. 20. Prove. 30. 6. Ezekiel. 43. 8. Mat.
15. 9. Exodus 39. 43. And among the rest to this purpose; Remarkable is that
Reprehension given by our Savior unto the Scribes and Pharisees; when he tells
them that their Worship of this kind was but vain Worship. Mark 7. 7. 8.
Howbeit, in vain do they Worship me, Teaching for Doctrines the Commandments of
Men. For laying aside the Commandment of God, ye hold the Tradition of Men, as
the washing of Pots and Cups; and many other such like things ye do. And he
said unto them, ver. 9. Full well ye reject the Commandment of God, that ye may
keep your own Tradition.

Neither indeed is there any Power on Earth that has Authority sufficient to
Innovate, or Institute any thing in the Worship of God; the highest Government
that Christ has ordained in His Church being but of a Subordinate and
Ministerial Property; and therefore not Absolute, but limited in its Commands
by the Word of God. Deuteronomy. 12. 32. Whatsoever I command you, Observe to do it,
thou shall not add thereunto nor diminish from it. Deuteronomy. 18. 20. The Prophet
that shall speak a Word in my Name, that I have not commanded, even that
Prophet shall Dye. Ezekiel. 43. 7, 8. Son of Man, the place of my Throne, and the
place of the Soles of my Feet, where I will dwell in the midst of the Children
of Israel for ever; and my Holy Name shall the House of Israel no more defile,
neither they nor their Kings, by their Whoredom, nor by the Carkases of their
Kings in their high Places; In their setting of their Threshold by my
Thresholds, and their Post by my Posts. In the Work of the Tabernacle of Old
nothing was to be Superadded, but what God had Expressly appointed. Exodus 39.
43. And the Reason is the same in the Gospel Ministration.

But by way of Opposition hereunto, is that general direction of the Apostle
urged, 1 Cor. 14* 40. Let all things be done decently and in order. From whence
it is Inferred that whatsoever Church Governors shall Judge decent and orderly
in God's Worship, ought to be submitted unto.

We Answer; That this cannot be justly Inferred from these Words for the
following Reasons.

For First, To Worship GOD in a way that is not decent and orderly according to
Scripture Rule, is manifestly our Sin. 1 Cor. 14. 40. But to Worship Him in the
use of those enjoined Ceremonies, is to Worship Him in a way not decent and
orderly according to Scripture Rule, Therefore so to do would be manifestly our
Sin.

The Major is proved; the Minor is thus proved.

If to Worship GOD in the use of such Ceremonies be decent and orderly
according to Scripture Rule; then to Worship Him without such Ceremonies is not
to Worship GOD decently and orderly, according to Scripture Rule: For one Rule
cannot make the same Worship, decent and undecent, orderly and disorderly.

But to Worship Him without the use of these Ceremonies is to Worship Him
decently and orderly, according to Scripture Rule; the Apostles and Primitive
Christians Worshipping Him decently and orderly without them; Ergo, etc.

Second Argument.
To part with our Christian Liberty purchased for us by the Blood of CHRIST, is
our Sin. But to submit unto the Injunction of such Indifferent things, is to
part with our Christian Liberty. Therefore so to do is our Sin.

The Major is undeniable, from Gal. 5. 1. Stand fast therefore in the Liberty
wherewith Christ has made us Free; and be not entangled again with the Yoke of
Bondage.

The Minor is Evident from Scripture. 1 Cor. 7. 23. Ye are Bought with a Price,
be not ye the Servants of Men. And from Reason: For all Actions fall into these
three Classes, viz. Things Commanded, Things Forbidden, and Things Indifferent.
In the two former we have no Liberty; it remains therefore our Liberty must
consist wholly in the Latter, and to submit to the Injunction of those things
as necessary, is to part with that, and consequently with all our Liberty;
which would therefore be our Sin.

Third Argument.
To Derogate from Christ's Honor and Royal Authority is manifestly our Sin. But
to submit to the Imposition of unnecessary Rites in the Worship of God by the
Authority of Man, is to derogate from the Honor and Royal Authority of Christ:
Therefore to submit to their Imposition is Sin.

The Minor only needing Proof has it abundantly, from all those Scriptures
that Assert Christ to be the only Lord and Lawgiver to His Church. Mat. 23. 8.
Be ye not called Rabbi: For One is your Master, even Christ. Jam. 4. 12. There
is One Lawgiver who is able to Save and to Destroy. And all those Scriptures
that Assert the Plenitude and Perfection of His Laws for Government. Heb. 3. 5.
6. Moses verily was Faithful in all his House as a Servant: But Christ as a Son
over His own House, etc. 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. All Scripture is given by
Inspiration of GOD, and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for
Correction, for Instruction in Righteousness: That the Man of GOD may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good Works. And by all those Scriptures
which Condemn the Observance of any Religious Rites, Imposed by any other
Authority. 2 Col. 21, 22, 23. Touch not, Taste not, Handle not; which all are to
Perish with the using, after the Commandments and Doctrines of Men. Which
things have indeed a show of Will Worship and Humility, etc. Mark, 7. 7. For
laying aside the Commandment of God, ye hold the Tradition of Men, as the
Washing of Pots and Cups: and many other such like things ye do.

Fourth Argument.
To cross the Imitable Example of Christ in our Practice is Sin: But to submit
to the Imposition of things Indifferent, though by Men in a Lawful Authority,
is to cross the Imitable Example of Christ. Therefore so to do would be our Sin.

The Major is plain from all those Precepts that make it our Duty to follow
Treading in His Steps. 1 Pet. 2. 21. To Walk as He Walked. 1 John, 2. 6. To be
followers of God a^ dear Children. Ephe. 5. 1.

The Minor is as Evident from Mat. 15. 2, 3, 11, 13. Washing of Hands there
spoken of, was an Indifferent Ceremony. The Authority Commanding it was Lawful,
the Elders, or Sanhedrim, who at this time were not only their Ecclesiastical
but Civil Rulers: Besides, the Argument from Decency to Induce it; yet all
these Motives, in a thing so Innocent and Small as that was, could not prevail
with our Savior to quit His Liberty of Eating with unwashed hands; calls them
Superstitious and Blind Guides who were offended at him; And Justifies His
Disciples non Compliance by 3 Arguments! First that it was and Un-Scriptural
Tradition, ver. 9. In vain do they Worship me, Teaching for Doctrines the
Commandments of Men. Secondly; That the neglect of it Inferred no Moral Evil;
That these things did not defile a Man. i. e. as to his Mind and Conscience. v.
11. Thirdly; That it being not of God's Appointing, must be plucked up. ver.
13. Every Plant which my Heavenly Father has not Planted, shall be rooted up.
Whereby our Savior intimates, that as the Pharisees had no Divine Warrant to
prescribe such a Toy as that was, so God would at last declare His Indignation
against their Supererogatory Worship, by pulling it up Root and Branch. From
whence we gather this Rule; That when once Humane Inventions become
Impositions, and lay a Necessity upon that, which God has left free; then may
we Lawfully reject them, as Plants of Man's Setting, and not of GOD's owning.

To Conclude; The Apostles praised the Corinthians for that they had kept the
Ordinances as he delivered them. 1 Cor. 11. 1. 2. For surely GOD is more
Jealous of His Honor, and tender of His Worship, than to leave it to our
Pleasure, to Invent or to Add what we shall Judge Decent thereunto, beyond what
Himself has prescribed. And though it is true he has not in so many Words
Expressly forbidden the things in Controversy between us; yet he has in all
Ages testified His Dislike; yea, Abhorrency of Will Worship; and that for this
very Reason, because He had not Commanded it, nor ever came it into His Mind.
So Jer. 7. 31. Chap. 19. 5. and 32, 35. Deuteronomy. 12. 32. And so likewise in that
forementioned Scripture, Ezekiel. 43. 8. Where God discovers His severe
Displeasure against His People of Old, not for neglecting any part of His
Worship which He had Commanded them: But for their Presumption in adding
something to His Worship which He had not Commanded. In setting their Threshold
by GOD's Threshold, and their Post by GOD's Posts. It appears not that they
justled out any thing that GOD required; but only thought fit to Join something
of their Own therewith: But for this very Reason must they be Consumed in GOD's
Anger, as the following Words declare.

Certain it is, that this very Principle is that which has brought in all the
Popish Ceremonies into the Romish Church: It cannot be denied that those things
which Christ or His Apostles have expressly Commanded, we are to Receive and
Practice, as they have Comwanded them: But if any others shall take upon them
to appoint unto Men's Consciences any Rite or Ceremony, on their own Conceived
Reason, because they are such things as themselves do reckon decent or comely
in the Worship of God; It is an high Presumption in such against Christ; and
against the Apostles Command, to yield Obedience thereunto. Col. 2. 20. Though
it has a show of Wisdom. ver. 23. And not only does the Apostles Example. Gal.
2. 3, 4, 5. bind us to (...) it; but in the Name of Our Lord Jesus Christ are
we Commanded to withdraw our selves from such disorderly Walkers. 2 Thessalonians. 3.
6. Now we Command you Brethren, in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye
withdraw your selves from every Brother that walks Disorderly, and not after
the Tradition which he received of us.

THE SECOND PART.
Containing a Distinct and more Particular Consideration of the Arguments drawn
from Romans 11. 16, 17. Together with all other the most Material Arguments which
are usually urged for the Support of Infants Baptism.

WE shall begin with those Arguments which are drawn from Romans 11. 16, 17.
Where the Apostle tells us; That if the First Fruit be Holy, the Lump is also
Holy. And if the Root be Holy so are the Branches. And if some of the Branches
be broken off, and thou being a Wild Olive Tree were graffed in among them, and
with them partakest of the Root and Fatness, of the Olive Tree, boast not
against the Branches, etc. From whence it is urged; That We Gentiles have now
the same Graffing into the true Olive which the Jews formerly had; and that our
graffing is Answerable to their present Casting out. Now when they were taken
in, they and their Children were taken in. When they were broken off, they and
their Children were broken off. And therefore if our graffing in be answerable
to theirs, We and our Children are graffed in together.

To this we Reply; That the Incision, or Ingraffing here Spoken of, may be
either into the Visible, or Invisible Church. The graffing in may be either by
Faith, or by Profession of Faith, or by Some outward Ordinance. Children may be
either grown Men, or Infants. The graffing in may be either certain or
probable. Certain, either by reason of Election, the Covenant of Grace made
unto them, or their Natural birth, being Children of Believers. Probable, as
being likely, either because frequently, or for the most part it happens so;
though not necessary and so not certain. The thing that is to be proved is;
That all the Infants of every Believer, are in the Covenant of Free Grace in
Christ, and by Virtue thereof to be Baptized into the Communion of the Visible
Church. Now it may be granted that Infants of Believers are frequently or for
the most part under the Election and Covenant of Grace, and so in the Invisihle
Church (which whether it be so or no, no mere Man can tell) And yet it not
follow that every Infant of a Believer, in as much as he is the Child of a
Believer, is under the Covenant of Grace, and therefore by Baptism is to be
admitted into the visible Church. Now let it be never so probable that God
continues His Election in the Posterity of Believers, and accordingly has
promised to be their God in the Covenant of Grace; yet if this be the Rule of
Baptizing, then the Infants of Believers only and no other are to be Baptized:
For the Practice must agree with the Rule. And so not all Infants of Believers
neither, are to be Baptized, but the Elect in the Covenant of Grace only. If it
be said, But we are to Judge all to be Elected, and in the Covenant of Grace,
'till the contrary appears. We Answer, That we are not to Judge all to be
Elected, or in the Covenant of Grace, because we have the Declaration of GOD's
Mind to the contrary. Romans 9. 6, 7, 8. And all Experience proves the contrary
to be true. Nor is the Administration of an Outward Ordinance, Instituted by
God according to such a Rule as is not possible to be known; but according to
that which is manifest to the Ministers of it. And therefore since God conceals
His Purpose of Election, and the Covenant of Grace which is Congruous to it, in
respect of the Persons Elected; It is certain God would not have this the Rule
according to which outward Ordinances are to be Administered.

But it is Urged, That our Graffing into the Olive Tree, the Church, is
Answerable to that of the Jews. Now their Infants were Graffed in by
Circumcision, and therefore ours are to be Graffed in by Baptism.

Reply. Can we indeed think that the Apostle here means by Graffing in,
Baptism, or Circumcision; or an Incision by an outward Ordinance? If that were
the meaning, then breaking off must be meant of Vncircumcising, or Vnbaptizing.
The whole Context speaks of the Election of some, and the Rejection of others:
Of the Breaking off by Unbelief, and the Standing by Faith: And therefore the
Graffing must be meant of the Invisible Church, by Election and Faith; which
Invisible Church was first among the Jews, and therefore called the Olive, out
of Abraham the Root, who is therefore said to bear them. And because Abraham
had a double Capacity; one of a Natural Father, and the other of the Father of
the Faithful: In respect of his former Capacity, some are called Branches
according to Nature. In respect of his latter Capacity, others are called Wild
Olives by Nature, yet Graffed in by Faith. And therefore when it is said that
some of the Natural Branches were broken off, the meaning is not, that some of
the Branches in the Invisible Church may be broken off: But it is plainly to be
understood in reference to the Natural Branches only; that is, of such alone
who had nothing but their Natural Pedigree, or descent from Abraham as a
Natural Father to insist upon. And in this respect it is expressly told us, that
some of the Natural Branches only were broken off: For some of them were
Branches in both respects, and accordingly were not broken off; but we
Believing Gentiles are said to be Graffed in amongst them, and with them are
partakers of the Root and Fatness of the Olive Tree.

If you say then, that the Gentiles have now the same Graffing into the true
Olive, which tho Jews formerly had; We must Remember that known and allowed
Distinction, Concerning the Substance of the Covenant, and the Administration
of it. Now it is true that in respect of the Substance of the Covenant, we have
the same Graffing in to the Olive, the Church of the Faithful, of which Abraham
is the Root, that the Believing Jews had: And so we by Faith are said to be
made Partakers of the Root and Fatness of the Olive Tree: Or in plainer Terms,
as the Apostle Phraseth it. Ephesians. 3. 6. We are now made Fellow Heirs, and of the
same Body, and partakers of his Promise in Christ, through the Gospel. In
respect of which all Believing Gentiles are Abraham's Seed, the Israel of God,
One in Christ. But if you mean it of the Outward Administration of this
Ingraffing, by Circumcision or Baptism; nothing is more untrue: For indeed the
Outward Administration which then was, is utterly taken away, removed, and
changed; It being that which whilst it stood was the Ground of a Separation
between the Jews and the Gentiles. And it is therefore taken away on this very
purpose, that the Enmity betwixt Jews and Gentiles might be removed, and they
made One in Christ by his Death.

And if you say that our present Graffing In must be answerable to their
present Casting Out. It is true, our present Graffing In, is answerable to
their (or rather for their) Casting out. That is, GOD would supply in His Olive
Tree the Church, the casting away of the Jews, by the Calling of the Gentiles,
who are now by Faith Graffed in among the Remaining Believing Jews, who
continued as yet unbroken off: But it does not therefore follow that the
Infants of Believing Gentiles are Graffed In together with themselves, as the
Jewish Infants were; because incapable of making that Profession of Faith which
the Gospel now requires.

But it is further Urged, that if the Fruit be Holy, the Lump is also Holy. And
if the Root be Holy, so are the Branches As for that of the Root, it is
variously Conceived by Interpreters, some understanding thereby the Covenant to
be meant; some Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; and some Abraham only; which last, in
its proper Sense, I Conceive to be most Genuine. Whereas therefore the Apostle
tells us, that the first Fruit is Holy; the Lump Holy, The Root Holy, and the
Branches Holy: From whence some would Infer a derivative Holiness from the
Parents to the Children; that is, the Father being Holy, and accepted in
Covenant with GOD, the Children are so too, being Beloved for the Fathers Sake.
The Truth is, the Holiness the Apostle speaks of, is First in respect of GOD's
Election, Holiness Personal; and Inherent in GOD's Intention. He has chosen
us, that we should be Holy. Ephesians. 1. 4. Secondly, It is also Holiness derivative
or descending, but not from any Ancestors but from Abraham only; and that not
as a Natural,, but as a Spiritual Father, or the Father of the Faithful,
wherein he was a Lively Image or Figure of Christ Himself; and is derived from
the Covenant of Grace which passed in his Name to him and to his Seed. And
Lastly, It shall be Inherent, being actually Communicated by the Spirit of GOD,
when they shall be actually Called. And this is such a kind of Holiness, as is
more than a bare Adherent or Relative Holiness; being also inherent by Faith,
whereby they are Holy as the Root is Holy.

Now whereas you understand it to be the Case of any Believers to be a Holy
Root to their Posterity: This is not true: For in the Apostles Resemblance,
Abraham only is a Holy Root, in whose Name the Covenant runs: No other Man,
though a Believer, being the Father of the Faithful but Abraham only; And the
whole Body of Believers is compared to the Olive, and each Believer to a Branch
that partakes of the Root and Fatness of the Olive Tree; not in outward
Dispensations only, but in Saving Graces also; which indeed is mainly here
intended: For it cannot rationally be Supposed that by the Fatness of the Olive
Tree we are to understand any External Privilege whatsoever in its self,
belonging to us or ours: For that of it self would be but a dry, a barren, and
a sapless Advantage: But by the Fatness of the Olive Tree, we are certainly to
understand that Spiritual Benefit and Advantage that from Christ is to be
Communicated or Derived unto us, who was indeed herein Represented by Abraham,
who is to this purpose therefore called the Friend of God, and the Father of
the Faithful: And whose Prerogative herein no other Man, though a Believer,
whether before or since, could ever justly pretend unto.

But whereas it is yet further Urged; That the Church of the Jews, and that of
the Gentiles is still the same; that is, It is still the same Visible Church
now, that it was then. And so much (say you) the Apostles Simile or Metaphor of
Ingraffing will bear, or it signifies nothing. And if the visible Church be the
same, Why should not the Subjects be the same, viz. Children, and the
Privilege be the same, viz. an External Badge and Cognizance given to the
Children of the Church now, as well as under the Law?

We Answer; That true it is, the Church of the Jews and that of the Gentiles is
one and the same, in reference to the true Essence, or Inward Substance of
either: In which respect, as we have said before* the Believing Gentiles
(according to the Apostles Metaphor) are here said to be Graffed in amongst
them, and with them to be made Partakers of the Root and Fatness of the Olive
Tree. And in reference hereunto, it is rightly added by the Apostle; that the
Gifts and Callings of God are without Repentance; The Inward Substance of the
Church, and of the Covenant of Grace whereon it is Founded, being Invariable and
that which shall remain for ever Immovable. But it does not therefore follow
that there should be no Alteration, in respect of the Outward Form, or
Administration of either: For in this Respect, as has been already proved,
there is a wide Difference between them: For barely to be of the Natural Seed
of Abraham was sufficient to be admitted a Member of the Jewish Church; but not
so under the Gospel, unless we be of the Seed of Abraham according to the
Spirit. And till this be Evidenced, neither therefore does the External Badge
or Cognizance belong unto us.

And thus it may appear, that this Illustrious Scripture is very much darkened,
by applying that Holiness and Incision here spoken of, to Outward Dispensations
only in the visible Church; which is meant of Saving Graces in the Invisible by
Faith. And whilst you make every Believer a like Root to his Posterity, as
Abraham the Father of the Faithful was to his; Since no Believer in the World,
whether before or since, had ever the like Privilege or Prerogative conferred
upon him, to be Called the Father of the Faithful, as Abraham was.

But for the further support of Infants Baptism, It is Objected.

First, That since Infants stood visible Members of the Church for 2000 Years
under the Legal Administration; It is unlikely they should be now Excluded.

To this we Answer; First, That they stood Excluded altogether as much, above
2000 Years before Circumcision, as they do now: So that an Ordinance for their
Church-member-ship was not so from the Beginning; but came in by special
Institution long since.

Secondly, The other Administration in which they stood, was Established with a
Seed to be Propagated by Natural Generation according to express Command. Genesis
17. 9, 10. Thou shall keep my Covenant therefore, thou and thy Seed after thee
in their Generations. Verse 10. This is my Covenant which ye shall keep --
Every Man-Child among you shall be Circumcised. But where have we Command for
the like in this Administration? For though it should be granted that the
Believing Gentiles are intended as the proper Subjects of the general
Obligation mentioned Verse 9. which yet cannot be for the Reasons given in the
latter part of this Discourse upon that Subject. Yet the Baptism of Infants
cannot thence be justly Inferred: For there God only says; Thou shall keep my
Covenant therefore, thou and tby Seed after thee in their Generations. It is
true by the Seed there spoken of, you understand the Spiritual Seed in the
Gospel Day; and by keeping the Covenant, their keeping it in the proper Sign of
it belonging to the Gospel, that is, Baptism: But where lies the Ground for
Infants Baptism in all this? Is there a Syllable there concerning Infants that
they also must be Signed? To keep the Sign of GOD's Covenant (say you) is to
wear it themselves, and to put it upon all theirs: The Believing Gentiles are
to keep the Sign of GOD's Covenant: Therefore the Believing Gentiles are to
wear it themselves, and to put it upon all theirs. But who told you so? Or what
Scripture is there that proves that thus stands the Case with the Believing
Gentiles? That is, that they are not only to wear the Sign of the Covenant
themselves, but to put it upon all theirs? All that you can prove, is, that
thus it was with Abraham and His, under the former Administration; and when you
can also prove that thus it must be now; you say something, otherwise all you
say is Impertinent. The Covenant of Promise, it is true (Genesis 12. 2, 3. Genesis 22.
16, 17, 18.) is one and the same to them and to us; but the Covenant of
Circumcision, Genesis 17. 7, 8, 9, was plainly Typical and Temporary; and in a
Figure it Ministered unto the ends of the Everlasting Covenant. And therefore it
sufficed as unto that Administration, if the People, the Children thereof were
of the Natural Seed of Abraham; because by that shadowy Covenant, Young and
Old, Good and Bad, were all alike Covenanters; and all alike in a Capacity to
be the Subjects of an Administration, which was to serve unto the Example and
Shadow of Heavenly things, till the Seed should come to whom the Promise was
made. Gal. 3. 19. But the Gospel Administration, that brings Christ, and all
the Mystery of His Grace, in the Truth and Reality, and not in the Figure and
Example; is not Receptive of Children, as to the Principle upon which it
stands, any other way than upon some visible Demonstration of Faith, whereby
CHRIST comes to be received, who are therefore called the Sons of God. John 1.
12, 13. As many as Received Him, to them gave He Power; that is, the Right or
Privilege to become the Sons of GOD; Even to them that Believe in His Name:
Born not of Blood, nor of the Will of the Flesh, nor of the Will of Man, but of
GOD. Thus the Apostle, Gal. 4. 28. Calls the Saints of the Churches of Galatia,
Children of the Promise, in Opposition to the Seed according to the Flesh.
Verse 7. Neither because they are the Seed of Abraham are they all Children,
but in Isaac shall thy Seed be called, that is, they which are the Children of
the Flesh, these are not the Children of GOD; but the Children of the Promise
are counted for the Seed. Whereunto many other Scriptures might be added; yea,
the whole Stream of the New Testament witnesses to a Seed' according to
Calling, and (as to the (...) of their Admission) all Living Stones for the
Constitution of the Church of GOD; and not one Word in Favor of a Seed
according to the Flesh, as to Admission into the Church upon that Principle of
Birth Privilege.

We are told indeed, that the Believing Gentiles are now Graffed in, not upon
the Legal Branch, but upon the Root Olive, which affords all the Nourishment
that either the Jews had, or the Gentiles have. Which Root Olive is the
Covenant of Promise, that was 430 Years before the Law. Now into that State of
things (say you) wherein not the Law, but the Gospel Preached unto Abraham, did
Obtain: God was a GOD, not only to the Father, but to the Children; yea to all
his Family. And the Father of the Family did not only give Himself, but all his
Children, and even his Servants, all His to GOD, to take his Sign upon them,
and so it must be now.

To which We Reply; that it is indeed the unspeakable Blessedness of the
Believing Gentiles, to be Graffed in upon such a Stock; not upon the Legal
Branch, but upon the Root Olive, which affords all the Nourishment, that
either the Jews had or the Gentiles have; that Root Olive being no other than
Christ Himself; who was given for a Covenant of the People, and a Light to
Lighten the Gentiles. The Gospel of whose Grace was indeed Preached to Abraham
430 Years at least, before the Law was given. But what then? Does it therefore
follow that the Believing Gentiles are put into that very State of things as
under Circumcision? Where is that Scripture that affirms it? Evident it is that
though Circumcision was in use before, as well as under the Law; and though
Jesus Christ Himself is by the Apostle Styled, the Minister of the
Circumcision, for the Truth of God, to confirm the Promises made unto the
Fathers; yet as it cannot be denied, but that it was adopted into the Legal
Family: And that it was also adopted unto the Nature and Quality of the Legal
Dispensation: So it is as evident that it is now Abolished. And we can meet
with no one Text in all the New Testament that tells us that Baptism is
appointed to have the same Place and Use in the Church of God that Circumcision
had; but rather much to the contrary, as has been already proved. And it being
manifest that the External Administration of the Covenant is changed, to what
it was in Abraham's Time, it plainly follows that there is an Alteration of the
Rule that must direct us in our Practice in that Respect.

Obj. 2. If this Interpretation hold good, there would be a very great Change
in the Extent of the Covenant; narrower under the Gospel, than it was under the
Law; and yet no notice in all the Book of God given of such a Change.

We Reply. First, That the Covenant of Grace, has one and the same Extent,
before, under, and since the Law, in Respect of the Substance of it, or
considered singly in its self, as has been already declared. In Respect of the
Administration of it; indeed it is Changedble, and has been often Changed.

Secondly, we say, that the Administration under the Gospel, is not narrower,
than that under the Law, because it admits not Infants Baptism. The
Administration under the Law was Circumscribed to a little Land, and a small
People; the Bounds of the other are stretched from Sea to Sea, and from the
River to the ends of the Earth. That was restrained to the Seed and Family of
Abraham; the other extends to the Seed and Family of Christ. That had its
Existence but 2000 Years, upon an Occasional, Temporary Principle; the other is
suited to Answer a Principle existing from Everlasting to Everlasting. That
Administration was the Shadow, Figure, and Example; the other, the Substance.
That was the Handmaid, the other the Mistress. And if the Case be thus between
these two Administrations, can we Reasonably Charge the Gospel Administration
with more narrowness than the Law, because of the Discontinuance of the
Birth-Priviledge?

Thirdly. Although the Grace of the Gospel be extended far beyond the Grace
under the Law; yet as to Persons, the Children of the Gospel, are formed to so
strict, and refined a Qualification; that in that Respect, we grant that the
Law had a Latitude beyond the Gospel: But yet with this Mark; that the
Indulgence of the Law was one of the great Imperfections, which the Gospel came
to Reform. Mat. 3. 10, 11, 12. And of this Change, the Book of God does give
abundant Notice. Genesis 21. 10. Cast out the Bondwoman, and her Son, etc.
Shortly after the Institution of the Ordinance of Circumcision, for the
Privilege of the Seed according to the Flesh. The Lord brings forth a
Prophetical Instance in the very Family of Abraham, wherein this great Change
of Church Privilege, was revealed, viz. That it was to be taken from the
Carnal Seed, and that it should be given to the Seed according to Grace, under
the Gospel Administration. And to put that matter out of Question, we have the
unvailing of this Prophetical Instance to the very same purpose, in Gal. 4. 30.
So also, Isa. 14. 1. Sing O Barren, thou that bear not. What she was the
Apostle tells us. Gal. 4. 26, 27. ver. 5. Thy Maker is thy Husband, the Lord of
Hosts is his Name, and thy Redeemer the Holy One of Israel. At ver. 13. We have
the Refined Qualification of her Children and People. And all thy Children
shall be Taught of the Lord: Where we have a Prophetical Description of the
Gospel Church State, which the People of a Fleshly Extraction only, from the
most sanctified Saints, cannot possible compare unto. It must therefore
necessarily be understood of another Seed, even of a Seed begotten of God, by
the Word of Truth. Jam. 1. 18. the Gospel People. And this was a fair Notice
given of the Change in Question; to wit, narrower as to the Qualifications of
the Persons, but more extended in Grace. Another fair warning for the Fleshly
Seed; is, Isa. 65. 15. For the Lord God shall slay thee, and call his People by
another Name. In all which, we find plain notice given of the Change of the Old
Administration, which gloried in the Seed of Abraham, after the Flesh; and as
plainly foretelling the Cessation of that Propagation, to give place to the New
Administration, and the true Seed of Abraham, the Seed according to the Spirit.
And indeed, the Change of the Administration, necessarily removes the fleshly
Seed, because it has a standing by no other Right, than what it had under that
Covenant.

As for the New Testament, it every where abounds with Evidence to the Proof
hereof, as appears from the several Scriptures that have in part been already
opened and discussed, in the former part of this Discourse: Wherein it has
been proved, that though Infants were comprehended with their Parents in the
Jewish Church; yet none but such as are capable of making an Actual Profession
of Faith and Repentance, with some competent Measure of Fruitfulness,
answerable thereunto, are to be admitted to the Privilege of
Church Membership, under the Gospel. To this purpose we are told. Mat. 3. 7.
That when many of the Pharisees and Sadduces came to be Baptized of John:
Though their being of the Natural Seed of Abraham, was a sufficient ground why
they should be Circumcised; yet it was no sufficient ground why they should be
Baptized: And therefore their Birth-Priviledge notwithstanding, John rejects
them as a Generation of Vipers, and bids them bring forth Fruits meet for
Repentance. It Is true, those that John had now to deal with were Men at Age,
and such also as were exceedingly Debauched, and Vicious in their
Conversations: But then it must be withal considered, that we Read of none at
Age that were rejected upon any such Account from Corcumcision, which is a
clear Argument of the Change of the Administration, and that the terms of
Admission into the Gospel Church, were far stricter now than they were before.
And to take off their former Plea, he deals therefore plainly with them upon
that Account, And tells them, ver. 9. Think not to say within your selves, we
have Abraham to our Father; for God is able of Stones to raise up Children unto
Abraham. And now also, the Ax is laid unto the Root of the Trees, therefore,
every Tree which brings not forth good Fruit is hewn down; which has been
already explained to be clearly Exclusive of a mere Carnal Seed, or a Seed
barely after the Flesh, in respect of Gospel Church Ordinances: For upon that
Account, the Ax is here said to be laid unto the Root of the Trees.

And as plainly does the Spirit of God by the Apostle, give us an Account of
the Exclusion of the Fleshly Seed, in that respect; when he tells us as he
does, 2 Cor. 5. 16, 17. Wherefore, henceforth know we no Man after the Flesh,
etc. For if any Man be in Christ, he is a New Creature, Old things are past
away, all things are become New; which has been already distinctly explained
to the same purpose: Together, with Romans 11. 17. 24. Where he tells us, that
the Natural Branches are broken off, And that the Gentiles have their Standing
in the Church, only by Faith. And no where does the New Testament Countenance
that conceit, that our Posterity have any Right of standing as Members of the
Christian Church, by Virtue of our Faith: But we our selves must stand by our
Faith, and they (if they have any) by their own: Otherwise, they are of course
excluded; The Natural Branches being now broken off, and no others in their
Room, barely as such, according to Gospel Rule, to be admitted to Gospel
Ordinances.

But against this it is Objected; That as the same Church continued under the
Gospel, which did exist, or was in being before: So the very same Church
Members kept their places and standing in it, which were of it before; except
such as were broken off by Unbelief; which must not (say you) be understood in
Reference to the Little Children of the Believing Jews, unless it can be made
out that their Little Children were guilty also of the same Sin of Unbelief,
upon the Account of which, others were thus broken off.

To this we Reply. First, that as it is Evident that the Children of the
Unbelieving Jews, are to this day, together with their Parents, broken off and
unchurched (which can be upon no other Account, than because of the Personal
Unbelief, both of the Parents and Children: For they have both of them
Believing Abraham to their Father, as much now as before) So it is as Evident,
that the same Sin of Unbelief, was as justly Chargeable upon the Children of
those of them that did believe, until wrought upon as their Parents were by the
Preaching of the Word. And by Reason hereof it was that all sorts of Little
Children, as well as those at Age, that were destitute of actual Faith, were
now to be broken off from the Gospel Church. For though it is true, the Children
of the Believing Jews, and the Children of the Unbelieving Jews also, were upon
the bare Account of their Relation to Abraham, only, by the Express Command of
God, under the former Administration, admitted to a State of Church Membership,
their Unbelief notwithstanding: (For whether they were Believers or no, was not
at all any Matter of Enquiry, in Respect either of the Parents, or the
Children, as to a State of Church Membership then) yet as has been already
proved, the Case is now altered: A New Law, and a New Church State, (in Respect
of the External Administration thereof,) was now to take place in the World: So
that the terms of their former standing in the Church would not suffice for
their standing now: For nothing short of Actual Faith and Repentance, or an
External Profession thereof, could be now sufficient; which Qualifications not
being to be found in Young Infants, whether those of Believers, or those of
Unbelievers; they were therefore both broken off, as well the one, as the other
of them.

Secondly, In this Respect therefore it ought to be duly considered, that the
Holy Scripture does conclude us all, by Nature, to be in a state of Unbelief,
and Children of wrath, as well as others; and such we continue from our
Infancy, 'till converted, and wrought upon by the Grace of the Gospel. A vain
thing it is therefore to pretend unto a Faith wrought in us from our Natural
Birth, as the Seed of Believers: For Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by
the Word of God. Romans 10. 17. As the ordinary means by which it is wrought in
us. And this way of Conveyance, little Infants, as well those of Believers, as
those of Unbelievers being incapable of; they are therefore all of them, till
then, to be reckoned as the Scripture concludes them, in a state of Unbelief.
Romans 11. 32. And this being the true state of the Case; No wonder if the
Children of Believers, as well as others, were broken off from the Olive Tree,
the Church, the terms of standing therein being now altered, as has been
declared.

Mr. Allen indeed also tells us; that since the Jewish Infants were under the
former Administration, at the Call, Election, and Appointment of God, admitted
with their Parents, as Visible Members of the Jewish Church: And since the
Gifts and Callings of God are without Repentance, Romans 11. 29. We have Reason
therefore to conclude, that the Infants of Christian Parents have the same
Right to a Visible Church Membership now, as theirs had then.

But then Mr. Allen should have considered, that though the Gifts and Callings
of God are indeed without Repentance, in respect of the Inward Substance of the
Covenant of Grace: Or of an Invisible Membership, in the Invisible Church; yet
it does not therefore follow, that they are without Repentance, in Respect of
an External Membership in the Visible Church; but are and were Repealable, as
by sad Experience it is found to be too true, by the main Body of the Jewish
Nation, Children and all, who by Reason of their Unbelief, are actually, and
undeniably, both Parents and Children also, un-Church'd, broken off, and
rejected to this very day. True it is as the Apostle also tells us; if they
abide not still in Unbelief, they shall be graffed in again. And he there also
tells us, God is both able and willing so to do: But then we must also
remember, that as they and their Children were both broken off because of
Unbelief; upon which very Account, they do both still continue broken off to
this very day: So therefore as a Just and a Necessary Consequence of the
former; it will also naturally follow, that it is only by the Actual Faith of
both Parents and Children, as an Instrumental means, by which either of them,
shall be blessed with that their desired Restoration.

And this may serve also for a Confutation of that Groundless and Unscriptural
conceit of Mr. Allen; when he affirms that the Infants of Believers are
Abraham's Spiritual Seed, and that upon this Account it was that they were
admitted to the Privilege of Church Membership under the Law. For thus he
tells us; If such Infants are as much of the Church; and as much Abraham's
Spiritual Seed, as ever Infants in the Old Testament-Church were; then they can
be no more incapable than they were of a solemn Admission into the Church, by
the Ordinance of Initiation for the time being, as Baptism is now, and as
Circumcision was then. But this which Mr. Allen takes here for granted, and is
indeed the Foundation of his Argument, we utterly deny, as not having been at
all proved, nor indeed can be proved by him, or any other; to wit, That the
Infants of Believers have any where in Scripture, the Denomination of Abraham's
Spiritual Seed. This is a most certain Truth, that as Abraham himself had a
double Capacity, one of a Natural Father, the other, the Father of the
Faithful: So he had a twofold Seed. For First, he had a Seed that proceeded
from him, according to the Course of Natural Generation only. And Secondly,
some were his Natural and Spiritual Seed also; such as was Isaac, and all the
Faithful, who proceeded from Abraham's Loins. To which, we must add a Third
sort, and that is, all true Believers, or the Elect of God in all Nations, who
by Virtue of their Interest in Christ, have also in Scripture, the Denomination
of Abraham's Seed, who yet can lay no claim to Abraham as their Father,
according to the common Course of Nature. And to imagine that Abraham has any
Seed in any other Religious or Spiritual Consideration whatsoever under the
Gospel, is to be wise above what is written: For (whatever the Jewish Children
were,) to say that the Children of Christians are Relatively Holy, that they
are Church Members, and as much Christians externally, as the Children of the
Jews were Jews externally, as some have suggested: All these are but unproved
Figments, and Unscriptural Dictates. And therefore from hence to infer their
Relation to Abraham as his Spiritual Seed; and thence that they are the proper
Subjects of Baptism, is no other than to build a lofty Structure upon a Sandy
Foundation. If then we shall affirm that the Infants of Believers now are
Abraham's Seed, they must of Necessity come under one or another of these
Heads. To say that they are so, in either of the two former Respects, cannot be
at all pretended unto, if in the latter; neither can this with any shadow of
Truth be affirmed: For thus it was not with all the Natural Seed of Abraham
himself, as the Apostle expressly affirms. Romans 9. 7, 8. Neither (says he)
because they are the Seed of Abraham, are they all Children; but in Isaac shall
thy Seed be called, that is, they that are the Children of the Flesh; these are
not the Children of God, but the Children of the Promise are counted for the
Seed. So likewise, Gal. 3. 29. If ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's Seed,
and Heirs according to the Promise. Therefore to affirm that all the Infants of
Believers are the Spiritual Seed of Abraham, as there is no Scripture that
proves it, so it is directly contrary to the Scripture; and indeed, contrary to
our own most common and obvious Experience; whilst we consider with all, that
as for many of Abraham's own Natural Posterity, they are so far from being his
Spiritual Seed, that as has been already observed, together with their
Children; they are Unchurched, broken off, and rejected by God, because of
their Unbelief, to this very day: Which yet had not been, had they been the
Spiritual, as well as the Natural Seed of Abraham: For sure it is altogether
Inconsistent with the terms of the Covenant of Grace, the Gifts and Callings
whereof are without Repentance, that Abraham's Spiritual Seed, or that such as
are Members of the Invisible, as well as the Visible Church, should be at all
cast off, rejected and forsaken as the Jews now are.

Upon the whole therefore of our Answer to the forementioned Objection; That if
this Interpretation hold good, there would be a great change in the extent of
the Covenant, narrower under the Gospel than it was under the Law; and yet no
notice in all the Book of God given of such a Change: We say that there is
abundant notice given unto us, in the Book of God, and that both in the Old and
New Testament also, concerning the change in question, viz. the
disfranchisement of Infants, from their so long enjoyed Privilege of
Church Membership. We grant that under the Law they were admitted thereunto
with their Parents: But the Scriptures already alleged, do abundantly prove
their Exclusion under the Gospel Administration. Unto which we shall only at
present add, Heb. 7. 12. For the Priesthood heing changed, there is made of
Necessity, a change also of the Law; which Change of the Law there spoken of,
must needs include Circumcision, with all the Privileges and Appurtenances
belonging to it. And therefore, as Infants Church Membership, came in with the
Law of Circumcision; so it went out, and was Repealed with it.

Objection 3. If this Interpretation be true, the Believing Jews should have
loss upon their Repentance and Belief of the Gospel, if their Children formerly
Church Members, should now be Excluded upon the Faith and Repentance of their
Parents.

To this we Answer; First, It is true that insome Sense a Jew converted to the
Gospel should have loss; and particularly in that point of Signing his Fleshly
Seed, by an Ordinance; together with the Fall of all the Glory of their
Sanctuary, and pompous Priesthood, so much, and so long, the joy and boasting
of that Nation: Which the Spirit of GOD foresaw and foretold. Isa. 8. 14. And
hence it came to pass that Christ became so great an Offense, and the Gospel so
sore a Stone of Stumbling, and Rock of Offense to them all; yea, even to many
of them, after they had submitted to the Gospel: yea, the Gentile Churches were
scarce, if at all, preserved from Stumbling hereat, with the Jews. But all this
Loss, well considered, would amount to no more, than what befalls a Man, who
from the Privileges of a Servant, is Invested into the Privileges of a Son.
And this was the very Case. Gal. 4. 4. God sent forth His Son, etc. Verse 5. To
redeem them that were under the Law, that we might receive the Adoption of
Sons. Verse 7. Wherefore thou art no more a Servant, but a Son. And the Reason
of this Change the Apostle plainly shows us, Verse 23. He that was after the
Bondwoman was Born after the Flesh, but He of the Freewoman was by Promise.
There was an Infinite difference in the Propagation of the Seed of the former
Church State, and of the Seed of the Gospel-state; no less than between Nature
and the power of God, as was in the Types Ishmael and Isaac.

Secondly; Neither has this Change brought any other loss upon the Child: But
First, The Interest which it had in the Everlasting Covenant under the former
Administration, it still retains. Secondly, The Benefits and Advantages which
it had by the Parent, are so much bettered, by how much the Spiritual State of
the Parent under the Gospel, by Baptism after Faith, is better ratified than
under the Law. Thirdly, All other and further Benefits from the Covenant, are
more freely and fully tendered, and with many enforcing Advantages brought near
to be had and enjoyed. Fourthly, It is an Advantage, that as a Token of the
Expiration of the Bondage Church State, their Signing upon the Natural Birth is
also at an end; and their Signing into all these Privileges transferred to an
Ordinance upon the visible Test of their New Birth: Without which no Word of
GOD can be found to raise them to the visible Dignity and Prerogative of the
Sons and Heirs of Sarah, the Gospel Covenant, or Administration.

Thirdly. There is no Color or Warrant from the Word of GOD, that Jesus Christ
in the Day of His Appearing, did Establish any one Ordinance in the Church,
which did Import a Communion in his Intercession, to be practicable duly, by a
Person in an unregenerate State; or at least, that makes not an External
Profession thereof.

Object. 4. But what hope can we have of our Infants, if they must not be
admitted unto Christian Baptism, nor reputed as Members of the Common Body and
Church of the Faithful?

We Answer: First, If the Hope of the Parent for the Child's Salvation be
grounded upon the Administration of an Ordinance in Infancy; then neither had
the Patriarchs for above 2000 Years, Hope of their Children; which we find
untrue by Noah's Prophecy, Genesis 9. 26, 27.

Secondly, We demand what Hopes are intended; and by what Scriptures the same
are Annexed to the Administration of an Ordinance in Infancy?

Thirdly, We justify a Holy Hope in Believers in behalf of their Children,
which is grounded upon plain Scriptures without Infant Baptism.

Fourthly, This Argument seems to carry in it this Conclusion, That Christian
People by Infants Baptism, are by Scripture Grounds assured according to Gospel
Hope, of the Salvation of their Children. But there wants a Proof for it; and
we suppose it is not received as a Truth by many that Oppose us in this Point.

Object. 5. If Children may not now be Baptized, this makes the Privilege of
Believers under the Gospel to be less than was theirs under the Law: For their
Children were all admitted as Members of the Visible Church by the Ordinance of
Circumcision; and we cannot but conclude, that our Privileges for our Selves
and for our Children, are at least as Honorable, Large, and Comfortable as
theirs; and therefore our Infants are to be Baptized.

To this we Answer, That it is true our Privilege is the same with theirs, in
respect of the Substance of the Covenant of Grace: But neither was that made to
the Jews Natural Posterity, as such, nor is it made to ours. As for
Circumcision, It was indeed a Privilege to the Jews, in comparison of the
Heathens, but a Burden in comparison of us; And it is accordingly so termed by
the Apostle, Acts 15. 10. Now therefore why tempt ye God to put a Yoke upon the
Neck of the Disciples, which neither our Fathers nor we were able to bear. And
to the same purpose the Apostle Paul also exhorts the Believers. Gal. 5. 1, 2,
3, 4. to stand fast in their Christian Liberty, and not to be Entangled again
in their former Yoke of Bondage in this respect. And therefore it is so far
from being a Privilege to our Children that they should have either it, or any
other thing in the place and use of it, that the Truth is, it is a great
Privilege that they have neither it, nor any other thing in the stead of it,
but Christ manifested in the Flesh. And the Parents lose nothing by denying
Baptism to Infants, in the place and use of Circumcision; but it is indeed, if
rightly considered, a Benefit to them to want it, God not appointing it, nor
making a Promise of Grace to be confirmed by it to the Infants of Believers.

Clear it is, that we have no better Promises in respect of the Substance of
the Covenant of Grace now, than they had then; only the Administration of the
Covenant is now better than it was to them. Then it was with Expectation of
Christ to come; now, with Assurance of Christ already come in the Flesh, and
accomplishing what was foretold of Him. Then Christ was shadowed with dark
Types; now we see Him unvailed in a plain History: So that though it be true
that the Privileges of Believers are now many ways Enlarged in some respects;
yet simply the Covenant of Grace is not enlarged in respect of the Substance of
it. The Promises of Grace are still belonging to the Elect and Believers, and
to no other.

In respect of the Covenant made with Abraham, Genesis 17. 7, 8, 9. it is plain
the Jews had some Privileges above us: but the want of some Privileges which
they had, is abundantly recompensed unto us, by other Privileges which they
had not: Particularly in respect of the clearness of the Revelation of the
Gospel Covenant; and also in respect of the universal tender and publication of
it; in as much as now not only the small Nation of the Jews, but also of all
Nations, Believers are brought into the participation of the same; together
with the more abundant Communication of the Holy Spirit. To which purpose we
are told that the Holy Spirit was not yet given; to wit, neither in that
manner, nor measure, as afterward, because Christ was not yet Glorified. Jo. 7.
39. So that it is no Absurdity to grant that the Jews might have more
Privilebges in some things than we; and yet our Case and Condition to speak
simply better than theirs, by reason of other Privileges we have above them,
which abundantly recompense the defect of those Privileges of theirs, whether
real or supposed. And the Truth is, Privileges are so Arbitrary and Various,
that God gives them as He thinks good, often times, without assigning any special
Reason. So that no Argument can be drawn, thus; GOD gave such a Privilege to
the Jews; therefore we must have such a Privilege too, except we can prove it
is GOD's Will it should be so. And therefore this Argument is of no force
without an Institution, to attempt to prove, that because the Jews* had a
Privilege to Circumcise their Infants, therefore we must have a Privilege to
Baptize ours. Nor indeed is there any Scripture that proves that Baptism of
Infants is a Privilege granted by GOD in lieu of Circumcision.

Object. 6. But Circumcision was a Seal of the New Covenant to Believers and
their Seed under the Law; and therefore so is Baptism to the Seed of Christian
Parents under the Gospel: the denial therefore of Baptism to Infants, is the
denial of a great Privilege which of right belongs unto them.

To this We Answer in the Negative; That neither was Circumcision a Seal to
them; nor much less a Seal to them of the New Covenant; for then they had been
all Saved. It is true it was a Seal, Confirmation, or Ratification of the Faith
that Abraham had long before he was Circumcised: But so it could not be said of
Infants that had no Faith. It was indeed a Sign put into the Flesh of the
Infant; but a Sign and Seal only to Abraham, Witnessing to Him that he not only
had a Justifying Faith, but to the Truth of the Promises, viz. That he should
be the Father of many Nations, Romans 4. 17. Genesis 12. 2. 3. The Father of the
Faithful. Romans 4. 11. Heir of the World. Romans 4. 13. Which was no way true of
any Infant that ever was Circumcised; for none had before their Circumcision
such a Faith, that entitled them to such singular Promises and Prerogatives.
The Scope of that place, Romans 4. being to show that Abraham himself was not
Justified by Works; no not by Circumcision, but by Faith, which he had long
before he was Circumcised, and so but a Seal or Confirmation of that Faith
which he had before; and to assure him of the Truth of those special Promises
then made to him.

So that though Circumcision is rightly termed by the Apostle, A Seal of the
Righteousness of Abraham 's Faith, which he had yet being Uncircumcised; of
which see further p. 51. 52. 53. but more especially from p. 205 to p. 206. Yet
the Scripture no where affirms that so it was to any others; neither indeed
could it be a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith to Infants that had no Faith;
Besides, diverse others, who as it appears from the Scriptures, were utterly
destitute of that Saving Grace: For some were Circumcised, to whom no Promise
in the Covenant made with Abraham did belong. Of Ishmael GOD had said that His
Covenant was not to be Established with him, but with Isaac; and yet he was
Circumcised. Genesis 17. 20, 21, 25. Romans 9. 7, 8, 9. Gal. 4. 29, 30. The like may
be said of Esau. Together with which it must be considered; That all that were
in Abraham's House, whether Strangers bought with Money, or Born in his House,
though not of his Seed, were to be Circumcised: To whom nevertheless, none of
the Promises of that Covenant were made, as is plain from Genesis 17. 7, 8, 20,
21, 23, 27. So that as far as appears to us from the Scriptures, Circumcision
was a Seal of the Rightcousness of Faith only to Abraham, not so to the rest;
as all the Jews also were not called the Fathers of the Faithful, or the
Fathers of many Nations, as Abraham was:

Secondly, Neither is Baptism: more than Circumcision, called a Seal. It is
indeed called a Figure, 1 Pet. 3. 21. And it is a Sign also; but a Sign and
Figure proper only to Men of Understanding; not as Circumcision, which was a
Sign not Improper for Infants, because it left a signal Impression upon their
Flesh to be remembered all their Days: But so cannot Baptism be to any Infant.
To affirm Baptism therefore to be a Seal of the Covenant of Grace is
groundless; for that is the peculiar Work and Office of the Holy Spirit. Ephesians.
1. 13. and 4. 30. And since neither has GOD any where Commanded Infants to be
Baptized, the denial therefore of Baptism to Infants, cannot be the denial of
any Privilege due unto them.

Object. 7. But Circumcision was Administered to Believers, as Believers, and to
their Seed after them as such; to which Baptism was to correspond.

We Answer; That Circumcision was an Ordinance, which by the Institution,
belonged to all the Natural Lineage and Posterity of Abraham, good or bad,
without any such Limitation as was put upon Baptism; If thou Believe with all
thine Heart thou may. Acts 8. Or any such Qualification that an Infant
capable to receive it must of necessity have a Believing Parent: For we know
that the Servants Born in Abraham's House, and Strangers Bought with Money,
were also to be Circumcised, as well as those proceeding from Abraham's Loins;
who yet surely could not pretend to be all of them the Offspring of Believing
Parents: Which clearly shows, that Circumcision was not Administered to
Believers as Believers, and to their Seed after them as such: But though the
Natural Posterity of Abraham, whether they were Believers or no, were to be
Circumcised, because God had so Commanded it; yet this was not sufficient for
their Admission to Baptism. The main Plea indeed of the Jews in John's time
was, That they had Abraham to their Father; But notwithstanding this he rejects
them, and bids them bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance, as that which alone
would give them Admission to the Baptism of Repentance. And if you say that
this concerns the Adult only; We say that it concerns Infants as much; who are
incapable of that Faith and Repentance which the Gospel every where requires in
those to be Baptized.

From what has been already said therefore, it clearly appears that the not
Baptizing Infants makes not our Privilege under the Gospel less than theirs
under the Law, to which Circumcision was annexed, inasmuch as they were not
Circumcised because they were the Children of Believers, but because GOD had
Commanded it; neither were they by Circumcision Sealed with a New Covenant
Seal, as being thereby Interessed in the Mercies of God's New and Everlasting
Covenant; many being then Circumcised, as Ishmael and others who had no right
or title at all thereunto: But they were Circumcised by the Command of God, to
distinguish them from the Nations, and to keep that Line clear from whence
Christ, according to the Flesh should come; and to oblige them to keep the Law,
etc. but no such thing in the Gospel. The Body and Substance being come, the
shadow was to vanish and pass away. No common Father now but Christ; and if
Christ^ then Abraham's Seed, and Heirs according to Promise. No Birth
Privilege but the New Birth: therefore to go back to the National Birth
Privilege, is so far from being a Privilege, that it is a Bondage rather; and
no other than to rt^urn to the Type and Shadow, the Antitype and Substance
being come.

Neither ought such a thing to be any more esteemed the loss of a Privilege,
than our not enjoying literally a Holy Land, City, Temple, a Succession of a
High Priest, and a Priesthood, by Generation, or Lineal Descent, as it was
with them; since all these Types are Spiritualized to us the Believers under
the Gospel, who are now the Holy Nation, City, Temple, and Royal Priesthood;
being all Church Members by Regeneration, not Natural Generation. And therefore
we are so far from being Losers by the Bargain, that as far as Christ exceeds
Moses and Aaron; the Gospel the Law; the Antitype the Type; the Spiritual
Birth the Carnal; and the extent of all Nations the Confines of Judea: so far
are we better, and not worse than they.

Obj. 8. But since by the express Command of God, the Jewish Infants were
Circumcised: Are not our Infants as capable of answering the ends of Christian
Baptism, as theirs of Circumcision?

Reply. This is a true and a satisfactory Answer, that they are not: Forasmuch
as the Profession of a saving Faith is expressly required in order to Baptism.
Mark 16. 16. Act. 8. 37. And in like manner, Repentance upon the same Account,
Mat. 3. 7, 8. Act. 2. 38. Whereas neither of them were a^ all required, whether
of Children, or others, in Order to Circumcision. Abraham, it is true, in his
own Person, received the Sign of Circumcision, a Seal of the Righteousness of
Faith, which he had being Uncircumcised, that he might be the Father of all
them that believe, whether Circumcised or no: But it follows not, that because
thus it was with Abraham, the Father of the Faithful; that therefore it was
either a Sign or Seal of the Righteousness of Faith unto others: For as Faith
was no where required in Order to the Admission of any to a participation
thereof; so it is as plain, that for the greatest part of the Subjects of that
Ordinance, they were according to ordinary Rule utterly incapable thereof; such
as were Infants of Eight Days Old. And as for others, who were then to be
Circumcised, that were of Age, there is sufficient Evidence in the Scripture,
that they were many of them, not only destitute of the inward Habits of that
saving Grace; but for ought as we find, did not make so much as any Profession
thereof: For not only were believing Proselytes to be admitted to that
Ordinance; but Strangers bought with Money also, whether Proselyted to the
Jewish Religion or no, Genesis 17. 30. So that since it is evident that a
Profession of Faith and Repentance is indispensibly required under the Gospel
of all that are to be admitted to Baptism; which was not at all required,
neither of Children, or those at Age, in Order to Circumcision; from hence it
plainly follows, that our Infants are not as capable of Baptism as theirs of
Circumcision. And there being no Institution in the whole New Testament in
reference to Baptism; but what concerns such only as are so qualified, which
Infants are incapable of; we cannot therefore but reckon it a great
Profanation of so sacred an Institution as Baptism is; upon an ungrounded
Supposition of Analogy or Proportion between that and Circumcision, to proceed
to an answerable Practice, without a Divine Warrant.

Obj. 9. If this be so, then how does the Blessing of Abraham come on the
Gentiles, according to Gal. 3. 14. which blessing of Abraham was, I will be a
God to thee, and to thy Seed. Genesis 17. 7.

In this Objection it is supposed; that if the Infants of believing Gentiles
are not to be Baptized; then neither can they pretend to any share in the
Blessing of Abraham, mentioned, Gal. 3. 14. Genesis 17. 7.

To which we Reply. First, That it follows not that because the Carnal Seed of
Abraham, had a day wherein they were Privileged under Circumcision; that
therefore the Carnal Seed of every Believer should in the Gospel Day be
admitted into the visible Privileges of the Sons and Heirs of Christ. It is a
very undue Supposition, that the Proportion between Abraham in the Flesh, and
his Carnal Seed, in the time when Circumcision was in date; should be the same
to Abraham in the Spirit (who is Christ) and the Carnal Seed of every Believer,
in that season when Circumcision is out of date.

Secondly, If we will know what is this Seed of Abraham, to whom God does here
promise to be a God; according to the Letter indeed Abraham obtained the
Blessing and Privileges of the whole Inheritance which came by the Law, to be
the peculiar Inheritance of himself, his Fleshly Seed and Family; together,
with all the singular Advantages, which thereby were ministered among them, for
calling and gathering a Seed unto Christ in an Everlasting Covenant; whereunto
that Covenant in which they stood, under Circumcision, with the Prerogatives of
the Inheritance thereof, did Minister as an Example, Figure, and Shadow. The
Sum of the Covenant of Circumcision, See Genesis 17. 10. This is my Covenant which
ye shall keep between me and you, and thy Seed after thee: Every Man Child
among you shall be Circumcised, unto ver. 15. That Circumcision was part of the
Law is plain. John 7. 23. And that it obliged all that were under it to the
keeping of the whole Law, is also as evident, Gal. 5. 3. That the Law was a
Covenant Ministering as an Example, Figure, and Shadow of Heavenly Things, to
wit, of the Sanctuary, and of the true Tabernacle, whereof Christ alone was the
High Priest and Minister, See Heb. 8. 1, 2. 5. Chap. 9. Verse. 1. 9. Chap. 10.
Verse. 1. That the Covenant of Circumcision fell with the Law. See Acts 15. 24.
Subverting your Souls, saying, you must be Circumcised, and keep the Law. As
also, Col. 2. 14. In this Sense, the Blessing of Abraham was not to come upon
the Gentiles; neither consequently the Birth-Priviledge, which had its
Institution from that Covenant only, and was a principal part of the Blessing
thereby given.

Thirdly; The Blessing therefore of Abraham, in the Mystery, and according to
the Gospel, is the Manifestation of Jesus Christ, with all the Blessings of the
Everlasting Covenant, to be the peculiar Privilege, Inheritance, and Right of
every true Believer; who therefore are called the Children of Abraham, that the
Type, and the Substance, having a mutual, and respective Application each to
other, the mind of God might be clearly seen in them both, for the
distinguishing of Shadows and Figures; which were to be done away from the
Substance, that was not capable of any Change. Which we are manifestly
instructed in by the Apostle. Gal. 3. 26. Ye are all the Children of God by
Faith in Christ; Jew, Greek, Bond, Free, Male, Female. Mark ye how the Apostle
resolves the point in Question. at Verse 29. And if ye be Christ's, then are ye
Abraham's Seed, and Heirs according to the Promise; not if ye be the Seed of
Believers, then are ye Abraham's Seed; as is suggested. And this is the Blessing
of Abraham which was to come on the Gentiles, even this, that Christ with all
his Benefits, should be given to the Believing Gentiles for a Covenant.

Objection 10. Then how can Believers be Heirs according to the Promise. Gal.
3, 29. If their Children should be Excluded from the Promise: For the Childrens
right to the Promise, is a part of the Fathers Inheritance: For the Promise
unto Abraham was; I will be a God to thee, and to thy Seed after thee.

We Answer; First, That we know of none that do affirm, that the Children of
Believers are Excluded from the Promise. But this we say; That as the Denial of
Infants Baptism, imports no Exclusion from the Promise; so neither does every
Right to the Promise; Instate a Person into the Inheritance. The Jew had a
Right to the Promise, uncalled. First, As God had his Remnant among them
according to Election. Secondly, He had a Right to the Promise, as God gave him
a Priority, and Precedence in the tenders of the Promise above and before all
other People. Thirdly, They had a right to the Promise, as they were lost
Sinners, whom Christ came to seek and to save. But in neither of these
Respects, was the Jew an Heir in the Promise: Such an Interest and Right to the
Promise, declares the Person to be a Son by Adoption. And if Sons, then Heirs
of God through Christ. Gal. 4. 7. a Privilege which no title to the natural
Father could ever prefer a Creature unto, whether under the Gospel
Administration, or before.

Secondly, The Scripture made use of for Infants Baptism in this Objection, is
this. If ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's Seed and Heirs according to the
Promise. How plainly does this Scripture lay the Title of the Heir upon this
conditional Qualification of being Christ's? And he that is Christ's, is an Heir
by this Text, be the Children never so great Aliens and Strangers.

Thirdly, It is said, that the Childrens right to the Promise, is part of the
Fathers Inheritance: For the Promise is to thee, and to thy Seed; whereby is
intended, that if the Father be Christ's, and so comes to be an Heir, then the
Promise carries the same Title of the Inheritance down to the Children; that
is, if the Father be a Son of Abraham, (which in Gospel Construction, is a
Believer) then the Child must be a Son of Abraham, and a Believer also, even by
his Birth Privilege; directly confronting many Scriptures, which restrain the
Blessing of Sonship to Abraham, and the Inheritance in all manner of Persons,
to Faith in Christ; Gal. 3. 9. They which are of Faith, are blessed with
faithful Abraham. Not they which are the Children of Believers. And in the Text
alleged; If ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's Seed; not if ye be the
Children of Believers.

Fourthly, As to the Interpretation of that Passage, taken from Ver. 16. The
Promise is to Abraham and his Seed: Besides what has been said in Answer to
the foregoing Objection: It ought to be duly considered, that the Covenant of
Grace, or the Gospel Covenant which God made with believing Abraham, before his
Removal out of his own Country; Genesis 12. 1, 2. was not made with Believers and
their Seed; but with Abraham and his Seed. In thy Seed, says the Text, shall
all the Nations of the Earth be blessed, Genesis 22. 18. compared with Genesis 12. 2,
3. In thy Seed, that is, Christ. For so the Apostle tells us expressly, That to
Abraham and to his Seed, were the Promises made; He says not unto Seeds, as of
many; but as of one; and to thy Seed, which is Christ, Gal 3. 16. So that all
Gospel Promises run directly to Christ the Inheriting Seed. To him they are
made. In him do they all center, and ^^ him alone, all the Blessings in Promise
are to be communicated to all his Members.

It Is true in the Covenant of Circumcision which God made with Abraham, Genesis
17. 7, 8, 9. which was a legal conditional Covenant: As God does therein
promise to be a God unto Abraham, so he had also a Noble Seed, to whom the
Blessings therein promised as an Inheritance, did inure: But under this
Qualification, as they were his Natural Seed, privileged under that Typical
Administration, by which this Prerogative was so settled. Now to improve this
aright, the Heavenly Mystery veiled in this Dispensation, must be sought out:
For although Abraham stood a common Father under the Law; yet Christ is the
only Father, the Everlasting Father under the Gospel Administration. And this
Ancestour has also his Seed more nobly descended than the Natural Seed of
Abraham; being all the Sons of God by Faith in Christ, ver. 16. Yea it is
impossible, that by any other Qualification, men can come to be the Sons of
this Ancestour, than by being made one with him in the Participation of the
Everlasting Grace of the Unchangeable Covenant. Now then it is an incompetent
Application of Persons, to compare every particular Believer and his Children,
to Abraham, the common Ancestour of a whole Administration, and the Seed
privileged thereby. And no less incompetent is the Application of the
Qualification, requisite in Persons to be accounted Heirs; that because it
sufficed to Abraham's Heirs, that they were the Sons of his Natural Generation,
and that they were thereby made capable of an Inheritance in the Figure and
Letter; That therefore it suffices by being the Child, according to Natural
Generation of any Believer, to be upon that account an Heir of God, and joint
Heir with Christ, in the very Substance and Mystery, which the former
Administration did Prefigure. Upon the whole then, as to this; We say, that it
is no right Reasoning to infer or suppose, that the Infants of Believers, are
Joint Heirs with Christ and their godly Parents, under the Administration of
Grace; because of the Birth Privilege given to Abraham and his Seed, by the
Law.

Objection 11. Those to whom the Gospel Covenant belonged, to them the Seal
thereof appertained: But to Believers and their Seed, the Gospel Covenant
belonged. Genesis 17. 7. I will be a God to thee and to thy Seed; therefore to
them the Seal thereof did appertain: For the Faederati, were to be Signati;
that is, those that were in Covenant, were to have the Seal thereof. Genesis 17.
10. By way of Consequence therefore it naturally follows; that if Circumcision,
the Seal of the Gospel Covenant, belonged to the Seed of Believers under the
Law; then does the Gospel Seal Baptism, much more appertain to the Seed of
Believers now.

To this we Reply; First, That there is no natural Consequence at all from this
Scripture, to infer the Baptizing of Infants; nor any ground to build the
Gospel Ordinance, Baptism, upon the command of the legal Ordinance,
Circumcision; as has been already manifested by what we have said in our
Answers, to several of the foregoing Objections; wherein it has also been made
evident, that neither the one, nor the other are Represented in the Scripture,
as the common Seals of the New Covenant; that being the peculiar Office of the
Holy Spirit. Ephesians. 1. 13. We shall therefore in Answer to the present Objection,
take occasion, more particularly to consider the Nature and Scope of the
Covenant God made with Abraham, in the Text alleged. Genesis 17. 7. And therein
to enquire, whether the New Covenant made with Believers under the Gospel, and
that be one and the same? In order to the Resolution whereof, we must
understand, that as Abraham by Promise stood in a double Capacity; viz. First,
As he was a natural Father unto the Jews, who proceeded from him in a course of
Natural Generation. Secondly, As he was a Spiritual Father; in which respect he
was the Father of many Nations. comprehending the Spiritual Israel, whether
Jews or Gentiles throughout the World: So accordingly, the Promises made unto
Abraham, were of two sorts; some respecting his Natural Seed; whether Domestic
or National, which were Typical of the Spiritual; as the Birth of Ifaac; the
Deliverance of his Posterity out of Egypt; the possessing of the Land of
Canaan, with many other temporal Blessings and Benefits, Annexed thereunto. And
others again respecting in a peculiar manner, the Spiritual Seed, the Family of
the Faithful, the Elect, of whom through Christ he was the Father; and which
are Evangelical, belonging in an especial manner to the Gospel Covenant; As
Genesis 17. 5. I have made thee a Father of many Nations. And that which we find,
Genesis 15. 5. So shall thy Seed be. In which it is promised, That there should be
of the Nations innumerable, that should be Abraham's Seed by believing. Romans 4.
17, 18. And again it was an Evangelical Promise that we find, Genesis 12. 3. and
Genesis 18. 18. And in thy Seed shall all the Families of the Earth be Blessed.
For in these is promised a Blessing to Believers, of whom Abraham is Father.
Gal. 3. 8, 9. And by Christ who is the Seed of Abraham. Gal. 3. 16.

And therefore Secondly; It is of great moment in the present Case, rightly to
distinguish, and truly to apply the several Promises God made unto Abraham,
according to their proper Subjects: It being evident from what has been
already said, that though under the Domestic, or National Promises to Abraham,
peculiar to him and his Posterity by Sarah, Spiritual Blessings in Christ were
shadowed; yet Circumcision was not a Token to every one Circumcised, that the
Promises, whether National or Spiritual, did belong to him. Nor was Interest in
the Covenant, the Adequate, Formal, or proper Reason of the Circumcising of
them: For Ishmael was Circumcised, and others were to be Circumcised, to whom
none of the Promises in that Covenant were made; as is plain from Genesis 17. 21.
Romans 9. 7, 8. Gal. 4. 28, 29. It is no good Argument therefore, to say they
were in the Covenant; therefore to be Circumcised: For Females were in the
Covenant, yet not to be Circumcised. Nor on the other side, Males were to be
Circumcised; therefore they were in the Covenant: For Ishmael and others were
to be Circumcised, yet not in the Covenant. Whereby it is plain, that the true;
Reason why any were Circumcised, was the Command, not Interest in the Covenant.
Much less is it true that is suggested by some; That Children are to be
Baptized by Virtue of the Promise, first to the Parents, as Believers, and in
them, to their Seed as subordinates: For besides that, there is no such Promise
in Scripture, that God will be a God to every Believer, and his natural Seed:
So the Rule of Baptizing, either Parents or Children, is not Interest in the
Promise, by God's Promise to them: But their Profession of Faith, or being
actual Disciples of Christ, whom alone Christ has appointed to be Baptized.

Thirdly, As to what concerns the Covenant of Grace therefore, or the Gospel
Covenant, which according to the foregoing Argument, is said to be now made
with Believers and their Seed, as the ground of their Admission to Baptism: We
must know that the Covenant of Grace is to be considered, either in respect of
the Promises of Eternal Life, made to all the Elect in Christ, the which
remains one and the same in all Ages, though variously Administered in the times
of the Old and New Testament, or else in respect of the manner of its
Administration.

For if the Covenant be understood in the first sense of the Promise of Eternal
Life and Salvation, made to the Elect in Christ; That did never belong to all
the Children born of Believing Parents, as has been already Instanced in
Ishmael and Esau, etc. but only such as are Elected of them. Romans 9. 7, 8, 9.
Neither because they are the Seed of Abraham, are they all Children, etc. The
Covenant of Grace being first made between God and Christ, and all the Elect in
Christ. And therefore in Scripture it is called, The Promise of Eternal Life,
which was made to the Elect before the World began; who are therefore called,
the Heirs of Promise. Which Promise, had its first Promulgation to Adam, in the
Garden of Paradise; where we have also the first Discovery of the Mystery of
the two Seeds. Now the Covenant of Grace in this Sense, is not the Ground and
Reason of Administering Ordinances to any Person whatsoever: But the Law of
Institution only, is the Ground and Reason of visible Administrations; For the
Administration of Ordinances, belongs not to the substance of the Covenant; but
depends merely upon the Law of Institution, without any other Consideration.
And hence we find, that from the first Promulgation of the Covenant to Adam,
until God made the Covenant of Circumcision with Abraham, there was no
Ordinance to be administered to Infants: Though some Infants as well as grown
Persons, both of Believers and Unbelievers, might be comprehended in the
Covenant: Yet not to be Circumcised; and so not to be Baptized, for want of an
Institution. So the Promise, Acts 2. 39. is said to be to them afar off, in the
present tense, while uncalled: And yet not to be Baptized before calling,
unless you will Baptize Gentiles in professed Gentilism. And so the Jews; some
not yet born, some not called, have the Promise of God made to them. Romans 11.
27. For this is my Covenant unto them, when I shall take away their Sins. And
yet they are not to be Baptized 'til Converted. Nor indeed can the Covenant,
considered in its pute Nature, be a Ministers Rule to Administer Ordinances by,
seeing it is unknown who are in the Covenant, and who are not: But that which
is their Rule must be something that is manifest.

As for the External Administration of the Covenant, as you have already heard,
that has varied in several Ages, according to the Will of the Lawgiver: for
during all that period of time, from Adam to Abraham, there was no Ordinance to
be Administered to Infants. In Abraham's time indeed, Circumcision was
Instituted, which Ordinance belongs peculiarly to the Old Testament
Administration, and was part of Moses's Law, which is now Abrogated and done
away. And this was the first Ordinance that was Administered to Infants; and not
to all Infants, but only to Male Infants, Living in Abraham's Family, if they
did Live to the Eighth Day; otherwise they had no right to this Ordinance,
though many of them doubtless in the Covenant of Grace, and so Saved. So we say
of Infants in the Days of the Gospel; many of them are in the Covenant of
Grace, and so Saved by Virtue of the Free Promise: But yet not to be Baptized,
if they do not Live to the time of Believing and Repenting, the only time
appointed for Baptism: So that the Administration of Ordinances to Infants
depends upon the Law of Institution only, and not upon their being in Covenant.

Fourthly; In this respect therefore it ought to be duly considered, as has
been before Observed; That the Covenant of Grace, or the Gospel Covenant, which
Believers are now under (whereof Christ is the alone and only Mediator) was not
made with Believers and their Seed, but with Abraham and his Seed; that is
Christ: For so the Apostle tells us expressly; That to Abraham and his Seed were
the Promises made; He says not unto Seeds as many, but as of one: And to thy
Seed which is Christ. So that all Gospel Promises run to Christ, the Inheriting
Seed; To Him they are made; In Him do they all center; and from Him alone are
all the Blessings in Promise to be derived unto all His Members.

It Is true; In the Covenant of Circumcision, Genesis 27. 7, 8, 9. (which was a
Legal Bondage Covenant, and therefore now repealed, as shall be afterward
shown) God does indeed therein promise to be a GOD to Abraham and his Fleshly
Seed; and to give them the Land of Canaan for an Inheritance. And their
Obedience to Circumcision is expressly called the Covenant on their Part. Genesis
17. 10. This is my Covenant which ye shall keep between Me and you, and thy
Seed after thee; Every Man-Child among you shall be Circumcised. So Acts 7. 8.
And he gave them the Covenant of Circumcision; and so Abraham begat Isaac, and
Circumcised him the Eighth Day. By which they stood engaged to keep all those
other Additional Ordinances which Moses gave them, when they were about to
enter their Promised Inheritance. Gal. 5, 3. For I testify that whosoever is
Circumcised, he is a Debtor to do the whole Law. But the Covenant of Grace
which God shade with Believing Abraham before his departure out of his own
Country (and therefore long before the Covenant of Circumcision was in being)
runs in another strain. For therein as GOD freely Promises to Bless Abraham
himself; so he does as freely Promise to make him a Blessing: For that in him,
that is, in his Seed, Christ, should all the Families of the Earth be Blessed.
Genesis 12. 2, 3. And this was a Covenant of Grace indeed; a Covenant that was
purely Evangelical; every way Extensive and Absolute, and therefore
unchangeable: For therein God has freely Promised a Blessing unto all sorts of
true Believers, whether Jews or Gentiles; in giving unto them an Eternal
Inheritance. Heb. 9. 15. Incorruptible and Undefiled, that fades not away,
Purchased by the Blood of Jesus, and reserved in Heaven for them; of which the
Earthly Inheritance in the Land of Canaan was a Type. So that as there was a
twofold Covenant made with Abraham, a Covenant of Grace, and a Covenant of
Works: So there is a twofold Seed of Abraham, a Fleshly and a Spiritual, Typed
out by Ishmael and Isaac; and a twofold Inheritance, an Earthly and a
Heavenly: But the Heavenly Inheritance was not given to the Fleshly Seed, but
only in Types offered to them; and confirmed only to the Spiritual Seed,
whether Jews or Gentiles; who in that respect are called the Heirs of Promise;
yet not immediately, or at first hand rate, but through the Mediation of Christ
alone, in whom all the Families of the Earth are Blessed. For as Ishmael the
Child of the Flesh had no right with Isaac* in the outward Typical Promise; so
Isaac himself by virtue of his fleshly descent, had no right nor interest in
the Heavenly Inheritance. Romans 9. 7. any otherwise, than as he came to have an
Interest in Christ. And therefore we find the Apostle expounding the Word of
Promise; shows that the Evangelical Promises made to Abraham, were not made
to any one Fleshly Seed; no not with the mere Fleshly Seed of Believing Abraham
himself; but these Promises did all run to Christ the Inheriting Seed, to whom
they were made; and when Christ was come they all center in Him. Now to Abraham
and his Seed (says the Text) were the Promises made. He says not unto Seeds
as of many, but as of One; and to thy Seed, which is Christ. In whom all the
Promises of the Gospel, are Tea and Amen.

Fifthly: Having thus followed the Promises down from Abraham unto CHRIST; let
us now see to whom they come forth again, and it is not to any ones Fleshly
Seed whatsoever; but from Christ they all Flow forth again to Believers, and
only to Believers; and that by virtue of their union with Christ. To this
purpose the Apostle tells us; That if we be CHRIST's, then are we Abraham's
Seed, and Heirs according to the Promise; There being no way to partake of the
Promise, but by Faith in Christ. Gal. 3. 22. The Scripture has concluded all
under Sin, that the Promise by Faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them
that Believe. So that all the Promises run to Christ, and from Him Flow forth
again only to Believers; not to them and their Natural Offspring, as is
Suggested, further than they are Believers also in their own Persons: For no
otherwise was it with the Fleshly Seed of Believing Abraham himself. Which
being Impartially Considered, is a full Answer to all Arguments drawn from the
Covenant, and the the Promises made to Abraham; and certainly, and unavoidably
cuts off Infants Churchmember ship in the Days of the Gospel (unless you can
find a new Institution for it;) and consequently it leaves no room for Infants
Baptism; unless it can be proved that all the Infants of Believers, are Heirs
of Abraham's Faith, Believing as he did: and that the Promises are theirs, not
by Application or Analogy, but directly and properly; and by their own Personal
Faith: Which the Scriptures do no where Affirm.

And indeed so to Assert, would be not only contradictory to the Scriptures;
which tell us that we are all Children of Wrath by Nature: But to all former
and latter Experience. Then would Grace be a Birth Privilege; and Regeneration
tied to a Natural Generation. Then must all the Posterity of Believers be
Saved; unless that Doctrine be true, that Men may fall from Grace. Then must we
tie up and restrain the Grace of God's Covenant to the Children of Believers
only; and then what Hope for the Posterity of Unbelievers? Contrary to the
Experience of all Ages; whilst Grace was extended to the Gentiles, who were not
the Offspring of Believers; when the Natural Branches the Children of
Believing Abraham were cut off.

Sixthly. Whereas you tell us; That all those that were Faederati, were to be
Signati; that is, all those that were in the Covenant, were to have the Seal
thereof. Genesis 17. 10. And that therefore it naturally follows, that if
Circumcision the Seal of the Gospel Covenant belonged to the Seed of Believers
under the Law; Then does Baptism much more appertain to the Seed of Believers
under the Gospel. We Reply, by denying the Consequence of the Argument: For
though it should be granted that the Covenant of Circumcision, mentioned Genesis
17. 7, 8, 9. is indeed a Gospel Covenant; and that all the Infants of Believers
are therein comprehended with their Parents; Yet it follows not that they are
therefore to have the Seal thereof. For the consequence must be proved from
this Universal; All that are in Covenant must be Sealed: Which is not true. If
it were true, it must be so either by Reason of some necessary Connection
between the Terms, which is none: For it is but a common Accident to a Man that
has a Promise or a Covenant made to him, that he should have a special Sign
for the confirmation thereof; It may be present or absent from the Subject. God
made a Special Promise to Joshua, that he should bring Israel into the Land of
Canaan: To Phineas a Covenant of an Everlasting Priesthood. without any
special Sign or Seal distinct from the Covenant. Or else it must be so by
reason of GOD's Will declared concerning the Covenant of Grace: But that is not
true. The Promise made to Adam, which was the same in substance with the
Covenant of Grace, had no special Sign or Seal annexed to it. Noah and Abel
were within the Covenant of Grace; yet no special Sign appointed them.
Therefore it is not God's Will that all that are in the Covenant must be
Sealed; If they had, it had been W^ll Worship, God not appointing it to them.
And if you say, All that are in Covenant since Abraham's time, should be
Sealed: But neither is that certain; since we find no such thing concerning
Melch^sidek and Lot, that Lived in Abraham's time; nor concerning Job, that its
conceived lived after his time. You will say, but it is true of those that were
in Covenant in Abraham's Family: But neither is that true: For Male Children
before the eighth day, and Women though in Covenant, yet were not to be Sealed.
So that you see it is so far from being universally true, that all that are in
Covenant must be Sealed, that this is all which is true. All the Male Children
of Abraham 's Family, if they were eight days old, must be signed with the Sign
of Circumcision; which will never be able to prove the Consequence of the
Argument; That therefore All the Children of Believers, Males, or Females must
be Baptized, unless there were an Express Command, or Example in the New
Testament, signifying God's mind unto us therein.

The Covenant of Grace was Ratified and Confirmed unto Abraham, a considerable
time before the Covenant of Circumcision was given to him, viz. about twenty
five years before it; and had then no outward Sign or Seal annexed thereunto.
And indeed that which has been of late affirmed; That the Covenant of Grace
always had an Outward Sign or Seal added to it. is so wide a Mistake, that on
the contrary it may be affirmed; That although the Efficacy of its Grace, did
reach Believers in all Ages; yet it was not filled up with Ordinances of
Worship proper and peculiar to it self, until the times of Reformation; nor had
till then any outward Sign or Token, immediately belonging thereunto: For had
it been so, this Sign or Token, as the Covenant it self, had remained without
change, and not vanished away with the other Shadows of the Mosaical Economy.
Mr. Cox in his Discourse of the Covenants, p. 83, 84.

If it be said; That though the sign of Circumcision was Actually applied only
to the Males; yet it must be understood, that the Females were virtually
Circumcised in them, as the Nobler Sex. We answer, That the Conclusion to be
proved, is, that Infants are to be Sealed Actually; not Virtually: For if a
Virtual Sealing, or Baptizing, were all that you would prove we might grant it,
we may say, Infants are virtually baptized in their Parents, and yet it may be
unlawful to Baptize them Actually, as it would have been unlawful to have
Circumcised Women Actually, (had they been capable thereof) notwithstanding
their Virtual Circumcision: For it had been a Will Worship, there being no
Command to do it. And indeed to speak exactly; Women were not Circumcised
Virtually in the Males: For he is said Virtually to have a thing by another, as
by a Proxy or Attorney, that might receive it by himself; yet according to the
Effect of Law, another's receiving it, is as if he had received it: But so the
Males did not receive Circumcision for the Females; For the Females had they
been capable, might not be Circumcised in their own Persons: It had been their
Sin if they had received it, God not appointing it; as it had been a Sin for a
Child to be Circumcised before or after the eighth day, in them that altered or
swerved from the Appointment of God. So that the Conclusion remains yet to be
proved, that all the Infants of Believing Parents are to be Actually Signed, or
Sealed by the Ordinance of Baptism, unto which you give the term of the Gospel
Seal. For as there is no Command for the same in the New Testament; nor any
Example that may give hint unto us, of the mind of God therein: So neither can
it be proved by any just Analogy or Proportion, between that and Circumcision.
Together with which it must be considered, that there are other signs of the
Covenant, besides Baptism: As Circumcision, and the Passover of old, so the
Lord's Supper now. If then we should grant the Conclusion in general, that the
Infants of Believers are to be Signed; yet you would say, they are not to be
Partakers of the Lord's Supper, because it is not appointed for them: So in
like manner, it follows not that they are to be Baptized, unless you can prove
that it is appointed to them. And indeed there is as much reason for the one,
as for the other: For if we must Examine our selves before we be admitted to
the one; wbich you say Infants cannot do: So Faith and Repentance are required
as the Condition of the other. which Infants are as incapable of; and therefore
cannot be duly admitted to either, without some Express, signifying God's Mind
unto us therein. For though it may be good to argue thus; It is God's Mind,
therefore it is to be done; yet it is too much for us to argue, This should be,
and therefore God has appointed it; Inasmuch, as no Reason of ours, in
Positive Worship, such as Baptism is, but God's Will alone, gathered by some
Express Command, or Example in the New Testament, can acquit an Action so
performed from the Guilt of Will Worship.

Seventhly, Whereas you conceive that Circumcision and Baptism are appointed by
God, as common Seals of the New Covenant; this is affirmed without Proof: For
no where does the Scripture give that Character to them; that being the
peculiar Work or Office of the Holy Spirit, as has been already proved. It Is
true, Abraham's Circumcision in his own Person, is by the Apostle Rom 4. 11.
Termed, A Seal of the Righteousness of the Faith which he had yet being
Uncircumcised, that he might be the Father of all them that believe. But so it
cannot be said of Infants that had no Faith; much less could any of them
pretend to that Prerogative that Abraham had. Indeed, from hence to conclude
that Circumcision was appointed by God, as a Seal of the Righteousness of
Faith, or of the Covenant of Grace, to the Generality that were the Subjects
thereof, is groundless: For neither Isaac, nor Jacob, nor any besides, had
before or after their Circision, such a Faith, which Entitled them to such
singular Promises. It cannot be justly affirmed of Isaac, Jacob, David, or any
of the other Patriarchs; That they received the Sign of Circumcision, a Seal of
the Righteousness of the Faith which they had, yet being Uncircumcised, that
they might be the Fathers of all them that believe, as it is of Abraham; This
being a peculiar Honor, that is by the Spirit of God conferred on Abraham
alone, and is indeed Incommunicable to any else, how famous soever for Faith
and Holiness; much less can it be affirmed of the Generality of the Jewish
Infants, that were the ordinary Subjects of Circumcision. We deny not, that the
Circumcision of others than Abraham, was a Token (as the Spirit of God himself
expressly terms it) of the Covenant then made with Abraham: But it does not
therefore follow, that every ones Circumcision was to him a Seal of his Right,
to any of the Promises thereof; as is evident in the Case of Ishmael and many
others, the Servants born and bred in Abraham's Family, and Strangers bought
with Money, who were all to be Circumcised; to whom, nevertheless none of the
Promises in that Covenant were made; as is plain from Genesis 17. 7, 8, 20, 21,
23, 27. Much less was Circumcision a Seal to all that received it, of their
Interest in the Righteousness of that Faith that Abraham had; for then they had
been all saved. It was therefore intended only as the Restipulation of the
Covenant made with Abraham, and his Seed after him, on their Part; or as a Sign
or Token of their Duty to God; not as a Seal of God's Promise to them. Genesis ^7.
9. Thou shall keep my Covenant therefore, thou and thy Seed after thee, in
their Generations. Ver. 10. This is my Covenant (or this is the sign of my
Covenant) which ye shall keep, every Man Child among you shall be Circumcised.
Besides it is evident, that by Circumcision, they were obliged unto a perfect
and universal Obedience to the whole Revealed Will and Law of God. Gal. 5. 3.
For I testify to every Man that is Circumcised, that he is a Debtor to do the
whole Law. And that under the Penalty of the Curse upon the least Transgression
or Disobedience. Gal. 3. 10. Cursed is every one that continues not in all
things, which are written in the Book of the Law to do them, which perfect
Obedience, was yet impossible to be performed. Gal. 3. 11. Romans 3. 19, 20. So
that Circumcision was so far from being a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith,
or of the Gospel Covenant, to the Generality that were under it, that it was
rather a Token of Servitude and Bondage; and such a Yoke, that as the Apostles
tell the Jews; Neither they, nor their Fathers were able to bear it. Acts 15.
10. Gal. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Which yet it had not been, had it been to them, as
well as to Abraham himself, a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith: For that
brings with it true Christian Liberty and Freedom.

Notwithstanding the Promises made in the Covenant of Circumcision, (faith Mr.
Cox in his Discourse of the Covenants, p. 152, 153, 154.) and the Separation of
Israel, to be the peculiar People of God, in pursuance of them; yet that
Covenant did not confine the solemn Worship of God (by Sacrifices or otherwise)
to Abraham's Family: Nor were other Holy Men then living under any Obligation,
to Incorporate themselves thereinto by Circumcision; or at all to take upon
them that Sign, or token of that Covenant that God then made with Abraham;
which yet without doubt they should have done, if it had been a Seal of the
Covenant of Grace: For then by reason of their Interest in that Covenant, both
in point of Duty and Privilege, it had equally belonged unto them, as to the
Seed and Family of Abraham. But from the sacred History, it is evident, that
the command, by virtue of which Circumcision was Administered, extended no
further than to Abraham and his Family. And therefore we have no ground to
conclude, that Lot (though nearly Allied to Abraham) was Circumcised. Seeing
there is nothing in the Command of God, or first Institution of Circumcision
that obliged him thereunto, or interested him therein, and yet there is no
doubt to be made of his Interest in the Covenant of Grace. Neither was Lot the
only Righteous Man then living in the World, besides those of Abraham's Family:
For of the Patriarchs, Heber, Salah, and Shem, were then living; and as they
had their distinct Families and Interests, so there is no question, but the
pure Worship of God was maintained in them, and they promoted the Interest of
true Religion to the utmost of their Power, while they lived. Yea Melchisedeck
was in being about this time, (whether he were Shem before named, or another,
it concerns not us to determine; but this is certain, that it was he) who was
the Priest of the most High God, and King of Salem; and in both these Respects,
the most Eminent Type of Jesus Christ that ever was in the World; a Person
greater than Abraham: For Abraham paid Tithes to him, and was blessed by him.
Now considering that he was both King and Priest, there is no doubt but there
was a Society of Men that were ruled by him, and for whom he Ministered: For a
Priest is ordained for Men in things pertaining to God. And this Society was at
this time, as much a Church of God, as Abraham's Family was, and as truly
interested in the Covenant of Grace, as any therein; yet were they not
concerned as Parties in the Covenant of Circumcision, nor to be signed thereby:
From whence it is manifest, that Circumcision was not applied as a Seal of the
Covenant of Grace; nor did an Interest therein render a man the proper subject
of it.

Again; It is no ways difficult (says he) to conceive, that Circumcision might
have a different Respect, according to the differing Circumstances and Capacity
of its Subject. -- It was to Abraham a Seal of the Righteousness of the Faith
which he had, etc. But this arose from the peculiar and extraordinary
Circumstances and Capacity that he was in: For it is not possible to conceive,
that Circumcision should be a Seal of the Righteousness of the Faith which he
had while Uncircumcised, that he might be the Father of all them that believe
in Uncircumcision, to one that never had Faith, either before or after his
Circumcision, nor ever had, or should have the Relation of a Father to all
Believers, as Abraham had. In which respect, it is equally absurd to say, that
Circumcision was a Seal unto all its Subjects, of the Righteousness of the
Faith which they had while Uncircumcised, as to affirm, that it was the Seal of
a Paternal Relation to all Believers, unto every one that received it: And
therefore both these must necessarily be resolved into the particular
Circumstances of Abraham; the particular Relation he had in the Covenants made
with him, and not into the Nature of Circumcision, considered simply, and in it
self. What Circumcision was directly, and in its immediate use, is one thing;
and what it was as subordinate to a better Covenant and Promise, that had
Precedence to it, is another. And it is easy to conceive, that it was that to
the Father of the Faithful, in its extraordinary Institution, that it could not
be to the Children of the Flesh, or carnal ^^ed, in its ordinary Use. Page 189,
190, 191. 194.

Upon the whole therefore, it clearly appears, That Circumcision was never
appointed by God, as a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, or of the Gospel
Covenant, to the Generality of the Subjects thereof. It was indeed a Token of
the Covenant then made betwixt God and them; but a Seal only to Abraham, and
that in respect of the Righteousness of the Faith, which he had, being yet
Uncircumcised, that he might be the Father of all them that believe; which
cannot be affirmed of any others. And so for Baptism; it is indeed called a
Figure, 1 Pet. 3. 21. But a Sign or Figure proper only for men of
Understanding; not as Circumcision, which was a Sign not improper for Infants,
because it left a signal Impression upon their Flesh, when they came to
understand the Reason of it: But so cannot Baptism be to any Infant. And indeed
if Baptism be as you say it is, a Seal of being already ingrafted into Christ,
and consequently into the Church; then it is a Seal only to Believers, who
alone are capable thereof: Since it is by Faith that men are in Christ, and
Christ in them, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Romans 11. 20, 29. Ephesians. 3. 17, And therefore it
cannot be any Seal at all to Infants that have no Faith; But as it is evident,
that a Profession of Faith is required of all to be Baptized. Mark 16. 16. Act
8. 37. which Infants are incapable of; so it is as evident, that though Baptism
is indeed a Sign or Figure of Regeneration to the Baptized. 1 Pet. 3. 21. yet a
Seal it cannot be, that being the Work which the Holy Scripture assigns unto
the Holy Spirit only. Ephesians. 1. 13. In whom also after ye believed, ye were
Sealed by that Holy Spirit of Promise. And no where is it assigned unto
Baptism, Besides, as the true Seal of the Gospel Covenant is not at all at
Man's dispose. Jo. 3. 8. as Baptism is, if that be it; So it is as certain,
that God never sets his Seal to a Blank: Which yet it must of Necessity follow,
that he does, if Circumcision or Baptism either, were appointed by God as Seals
of the Gospel Covenant; or as Seals of their Interest, in the Righteousness of
Faith, to whom soever they were to be Administered.

It Is true, both serve to represent Spiritual Things and Mysteries, and
therefore may be justly enough termed Signs, Tokens, or Figures: But yet in a
different Respect, as well as also in a different manner: For though
Circumcision might and did signify the Duty of Regeneration, or the Necessity
thereof to Infants, when they came to Years of Understanding: Yet Regeneration
in Actual being before their Circumcision, could not be signified by it (for
then they had been all saved) as it ought to be in the Baptized, at least, in
Profession. Mar. 16. 16. Acts 8. 37. Which is all the Baptizer is to require,
which cannot be expected of Infants: However, by the Secret Operation of God;
the great Work of Regeneration may be wrought in them, from which they are not
excluded by us, though they are from Baptism for want of an Institution. And if
you say you have as much Reason to look upon Infants of Believers to be
Sanctified, as we have to esteem grown Christians to be such; because our
owning of these as such, depends upon their own Testimony only, in a Verbal
Profession, which may be Counterfeit. We Answer, That this is not Cogent;
forasmuch, as we have no Testimony of Infants that they are Regenerate; but
Visible Profession of grown Per, sons, being Free and Serious, is not only in
the Judgment of Charity, bu^ also of Ministerial Prudence, to be taken for a
Sign of Regeneration, though it may be in God's Sight Counterfeit, which
belongs to us to examine.

Eighthly. But then at last you tell us; That though it cannot be made out,
that God has promised to be a God by Regenerating and Justifying every
Believer's Child; which cannot be affirmed of all the Natural Posterity of
Believing Abraham himself, without contradicting Romans 9. 6, 7, 8. Yet, say you,
they are in Covenant in Respect of outward Privileges. But this we also deny:
Nor do the Scriptures any where give any Countenance at all unto such a
conceit. No Scripture in the whole New Testament does affirm it; neither by
their Profession; nor any other way, as a Nation; or by solemn Oath; or by
having Prophets sent unto them; or by any other Revelation of Gods Mind or
Promise; are Infants said to be now at all in Covenant with God, upon this
Account? And if it could be made out that they have an External being in the
Covenant; yet that gives them no Interest in the Covenant of Grace, by God's
Promise to be a God to Abraham's Seed. Genesis 17. 7. And therefore that Text is
in vain alleged, to prove Infants to have an Interest in the Covenant of
Evangelical Blessings, and so of right to be Sealed with the Seal thereof. For
your Argument, if the terms be distinctly opened, is nothing else but this.
Infants of Believers, as their Natural Seed, are all in the Gospel Covenant;
not in the Inward; but the Outward; that is, in the Outward Administration;
that is, Baptism; and therefore to be Baptized. Which is mere trifling; as
proving that they are to be Baptized, because they are to be Baptized; and is
but a mere Petitio Principij or a pitiful begging the Question in dispute.

It has been frequently demanded by us, what plain Scripture can you produce
for the Warrant of Infants Baptism? But for want of a plain Scripture Proof,
you are driven to make Use of Consequental Deductions. And among the rest, you
seem to have your Principal Reliance upon those drawn from Genesis 17. 7. deriving
your Consequence concerning Infants Baptism, from the Covenant of Evangelical
Blessings, which you say was there made with Abraham, and his Seed after him:
And from the Interest, which as you say, the Children of Believers have,
together with themselves in that Covenant; you thence Argue, they are to be
Baptized: Because all that are in the Covenant, ought to have the Seal thereof.
When the invalidity of this Plea is made manifest; you then fly to a Covenant
of outward Privileges, which you say the Children of Believers are concerned
in with themselves: But then we would willingly know, what Scripture is it that
makes mention of this Covenant of outward Privileges? Genesis 17. 7. makes not
mention of it: For that you have often told us is to be understood of the
Covenant of Grace; containing purely, Spiritual and Everlasting Blessings; and
therefore cannot be understood of outward Privileges; or concerning the bare
Administration or Susception of an outward Ordinance, which is the thing driven
at. Where then shall we find this Covenant of outward Privileges mentioned, or
Recorded?

Besides, both Circumcision and Baptism also, according to your former
Reckoning, are but Seals of the Covenant, and not the Covenant it self. All
that are in Covenant (say you) must have the Seal thereof; that is, ought to be
Baptized: Whereas, after this Rate, the Seals and the Covenant it self are
strangely confounded together. The Children of Believers (say you) are in
Covenant, equally with themselves; not in the Inward, but in the Outward part
of it, in respect of External Privileges, that is, Baptism. But then, what
becomes of the Seal, so much contended about? Unless, we must take it for
granted, that the Seals of the Covenant, and the Covenant it self, are the same
thing, and no Distinction at all to be made between them. So that upon the
whole, it clearly appears that your Arguments from the Covenant, however set
forth or managed by you, are no other than a darkning of Counsel, by Words
without Knowledge. And therefore, while you do Labor to fasten such Dismal
Consequences on our Doctrine, who deny the Children of Believers to be taken
into Covenant with themselves, in the sense expounded: We say they are unduly
charged on us, forasmuch, as we do not exclude the Infants of Believers from
the ordinary way of Salvation. For though we say not that they are in Covenant
by their Parents Faith: And though we deny that they have any Right to Church
Privileges, till they are capable of making an Actual Profession of Faith and
Repentance, according to the Gospel Rule; yet we say, they may be by Gods
Election saved; and may be sanctified by the Spirit of God; and Parents may
have ground of Comfort in their Death, as much or more than according to your
Doctrine, which tells them, that their Children are in the Covenant only, in
respect of outward Privileges; the Enjoyment of which, nevertheless, can give
us no undoubted Assurance of their Salvation.

Ninthly. And Lastly (as to this) whereas you tell us that Christian Baptism is
come in the Room, Place, and Use of Jewish Circumcision; So as that the
Institution of that should be our Rule about Baptism. To answer this doubt, let
us consider the great difference between Circumcision and Baptism. Circumcision
was a Legal Ordinance, appointed to the Jewish Males, Reprobate, as well as
Elect, by a positive Command, to distinguish them from the rest of the World,
as a Token of the Covenant, God made with Abraham, and signified, that the
Messiah should come of his Loins, according to the Flesh. But Baptism is an
Evangelical Ordinance, whereby Jew or Gentile, Male or Female; upon a
Profession of Faith and Repentance, is Baptized in Water, in token of
Regeneration; and to signify the Death, Burial, and Resurrection of Christ,
the Messiah already come; and so added to the Visible Church, and admitted to
all the Privileges thereof.

The Consideration of the great difference in their Institution, illustrates
this also: For when Christ instituted Baptism, he says; Go Teach, and Baptize;
and in the Administration, they confessed and were Baptized; not a Word of
Infants. And in the Precept of Circumcision, not a Word of Teaching, or Faith,
but of Infants, the command expressly notes the Time, Age, and Sex. And
therefore, since things become Ordinances to us, by Virtue of a Word of
Institution, and no such Word is to be found, to make out that Baptism succeeds
Circumcision, in its Room, Place, and Use: We think it safe to be sober, and
advance no further than the Scripture guides. And indeed, to make Circumcision
Institutive of Baptism, is no other than to send us to School to the Law, and
that First, Old, Vanishing Covenant, as it is styled. Heb. 8. 13. as if the
Lawgiver in the New Testament had not by a positive Institution established his
Ordinances; nor left us any warrant for our Gospel Duties, without that
Retrogression to Moses, and assimulating them to the Paedagoggy, and similitude
of Types.

Besides, when you tell us that Christian Baptism is come in the Room, Place,
and Use of Jewish Circumcision; so as that the Institution of that should be
our Rule about Baptism. This is not right: For First, then Infant Females
should not be Baptized, as has been already noted. And to say that Females
were Virtually, and Reputatively Circumcised, in the Circumcision of the Males,
is frivolous: For if so, by Analogy, the Females should be only Virtually, and
Reputatively, and not Actually Baptized. And if Infants out of Abraham's Family
were not Circumcised, though the Parent believed in God, as a Proselyte of the
Gate. e. g. Cornelius: Then neither should an Infant of a Believer in Christ,
not in a National, or other Constituted Church, be Baptized. And if
Circumcision were of the Use of Baptism, the Circumcised Infant needed not to
be Baptized. Secondly, it appears from Col. 2. 17. That a Principal Use of
Circumcision, was to signify Christ to come of Abraham; which Baptism not
doing has not a Principal Use of Circumcision. Thirdly. though Baptism
distinguish between Believer and Unbeliever; yet it does not make a Partition
Wall between Nation and Nation, as Circumcision did; which was not to be
imparted to all Believing Males of the Gentiles, as is manifest in the Case of
Cornelius, who though fearing God, was not Circumcised, nor to be Circumcised;
unless, joined as a Member of the Jewish People. Fourthly, Circumcision bound
Men to keep the whole Law of Moses, or else was Unprofitable. Romans 2. 25. Gal.
5. 3. But Baptism Witnesses, that the whole Ceremonial Law of Moses, is now
made void, and only Christ's Law is to be kept. Fifthly, Circumcision was
Administered to Abraham's Natural Seed, without any Profession of Faith,
Repentance, or Regeneration; whereas, Baptism is only to be Administered to the
Spiritual Seed of Abraham; upon an Actual Profession of Faith, Repentance, and
Regeneration. Mark 16. 16. Acts 8. 36, 37.

It is granted, that in some things there is an Analogy betwixt them; both
signifying Heart Circumcision, and an Initiating into the Church: though as the
Church it self is a different Church from that under the Law; so it has
different Subjects and Church Members, and those to be Admitted upon different
Grounds, and to different Ends, and in a different manner: The one to be done
in a private House, and by a private Hand; the other in some public Place, by
the hand of some public Minister, appointed by the Church to administet the
same. But it follows not that because there is some Analogy between Baptism and
Circumcision, therefore one comes in the room, stead, and use of the other:
For by the same reason we may as well conclude that Baptism comes in the room
and stead of the Ark, Manna, Rock, etc. And from such like Arguments drawn from
Analogy, what Jewish Rites may not be Introduced to the Justification of the
Roman Church, in their High Priesthood, and all other their innumerable Rites
and Ceremonies, which without any Institution of Christ, or New Testament
Authority, they have Introduced upon the account of Analogy with Old Testament
Rites and Ceremonies. And therefore if we will follow this way of Reasoning
from Infant Circumcision to Infant Baptism, we must fall back not only to
Popish but Jewish Ceremonies also. Nor is that Plea sufficient to avoid it, to
say we bring not in a new Rite in Baptizing Infants, if we use it not as Christ
appointed. So they might say of Bell Baptism; and the Pharisees of their
washing of Hands, Cups, and Vessels of Brass; yet condemned by Christ, because
not Commanded, but after Men's Traditions taught. Papists say they bring not in
a New Rite in their Mass; yet we charge them with a great Sin in making it a
Propitiatory Sacrifice, and the Priest a Sacrificing Priest, as the Jews. The
Corinthians did not bring in a new Rite; yet when they used it otherwise than
Christ appointed, it was not to Eat the Lord's Supper. 1 Cor. 11. 20. It being
the Apostles Rule, to use it as it was received by him of the Lord. And they
that admitted Infants to the Lord's Supper, or shall do it, may say as much as
you for Infants Baptism; that they do only apply an Instituted Ordinance, by
way of Proportion to such Subjects, though they are not Expressly called to a
Participation thereof.

Object. 12. But it is yet further Objected; That though it is true, when God
made a Promise to Abraham, to be a GOD to him, and to his Seed. The Seed there
mentioned, is applied to Christ. Gal. 3. 16. He says not unto Seeds, as of
many, but as of one; And to thy Seed, which is Christ. Yet this is not to be
understood of Christ Personal, but of Christ Mystical; as in 1 Cor. 12. 12. And
so is to be understood of the Visible Church, of which Infants Born of
Believing Parents are a part.

To this we Reply; That we must not be put off with bare Affirmations; but we
expect Solid Proof from Scripture as to the point in hand; it being evident
that the Apostle, Gal. 3. 16. refers not to Genesis 17. 7. but to Genesis 12. 2. 3.
and Genesis 22. 17, 18. as shall be afterward made manifest. And whereas you say,
that the Promises are to be considered, as made to Christ Mystical; that is, to
the Visible Church; the contrary appears. Gal. 3. 16. where the Apostle
affirms, that Christ was the Seed to whom the Promises were made. And in Verse
19, He says, the Law was added because of Transgressions, 'till the Seed
should come to whom the Promise was made. Where it is Observable, that the Law,
that is the Mosaical Administration, is said to be before the Seed was come,
and was to have its Period then. Now if by the Seed Christ be not to be
understood Personally, but Mystically, for the Visible or Invisible Church
(take which you will) then the Law could not have been before the Seed: For God
had His Church in Abraham's Family 400 Years, at least, before the Law was, of
which Christ was the Head, and they His Mystical Body. And so by this
Interpretation the Seed should have been before the Law; contrary to the
Apostle, who makes the Law to have been before the Seed, and to have its
Period, when the Seed to whom the Promise was made, was come. And now the
Promises running to Christ Personal, GOD makes Him over for a Covenant to the
Elect, and all the Promises in Him. Isa. 42. 6. So that in Christ he is Our
GOD; and in Christ He takes us to be his People. In Christ, and a right to the
Promises; Out of Christ and Strangers to the Covenants of Promise. Ephesians. 2. 12.
So that it is evident, that the Promises were first made to Christ Personal,
and in Him to His Mystical Body the Church, who are united to Him by Faith.

Secondly. As to that Scripture, 1 Cor. 12. 12. For as the Body is One, and
has many Members, and all the Members of that One Body being many, are one
Body: So also is Christ. It rather seems also to be meant of the Invisible
Church of true Believers, than of the visible: For the Apostle* there calls
none the Body of Christ, but such as had received the Gifts of the Spirit. And
such as by one Spirit, as the concurring Cause, had been Baptized into one
Body; yea, such who had received the Spirit to profit withal; such that had a
real Sympathy one with another. Verse 26. If one Member suffers, all the
Members suffer with it. If one Member be Honored, all the Members rejoice with
it. All which cannot in any tolerable Sense be applied to the visible Church,
amongst whom there are many Hypocrites that never received the Spirit; nor by
the Spirit could sympathize one with another. But however it be, most certain
it is that Infants are not called the Body of Christ, if it be meant of the
visible Church. Indeed by Virtue of the Grace of Election, some of them may be
Members of the Mystical Body, the Invisible Church; but not at all Members of
the Visible: Especially from this Chapter; where it is said that if one Member
suffer, all the Members suffer with it, and the Manifestation of the Spirit is
given to every one to profit withal: which cannot be applicable to Infants: For
none in this Chapter are counted the Body of Christ, but such as are useful to
the Body, as an Eye, an Ear, a Hand, a Head, etc. as v. 21. The Eye cannot say
to the Hand, I have no need of thee; nor the Head to the Foot, I have no need
of you. From whence we draw these two Conclusions. First every Member in a
Church stands in need of the help of all the other Members. Secondly, That
every Member in a Church must be useful in his place to the rest of the
Members. But of what use are Infants to the rest of the Members, in respect of
Edification? So that notwithstanding this Objection, It is plain that all the
Promises respecting Spiritual Blessings and the Eternal Inheritance, were first
made to Christ Personal; and in Him they are made over to his Mystical Body the
Church, who are united to Him by Faith. And in this respect therefore, it still
lies upon you to prove that God has made the Natural Birth Privilege, a way
under the Gospel Administration to be Ingraffed into Christ Mystical* So that
upon the whole as to this, you may see to how little purpose the Promise in
Genesis 17. 7. is alleged to Prove the thing in Question, to wit, the Baptism of
Infants now under the Gospel. That Text speaks of a Covenant made with Abraham
and his Seed* It does not say with all Believers and their Seed, or all Church.
Members and their Seed. Neither does it follow by any necessary Consequence,
that because GOD made a Covenant with Abraham and his Seed, therefore He has
made a Covenant with Believers and their Seed. Certain it is, the Apostle was
of another Mind, who when he Expounds the Covenant of Grace, understands it to
be made to Abraham, not as a Natural Father, but as the Father of the Faithful,
both Jews, and Gentiles. Romans 4. 11. 12. He received the Sign of Circumcision
that he might be the Father of all them that Believe, and walk in his Steps. So
Gal. 3. 7. Know ye therefore that they which are of Faith, the same are the
Children of Abraham. And those only are the Seed to whom the Gospel Covenant
was made, and not to the Natural Seed either of Abraham, or any other
Believers. Which has been already made appear, and that beyond any just
Contradiction.

Object. 13. But then it is yet again Objected. That in the Commission Mat. 28.
The Apostles are there commanded to Teach or Disciple all Nations, Baptizing
them; But Infants are Disciples, and therefore to be Baptized.

To this we Answer; That by that very Commission. Mat. 28. The Lord has
plainly given a Caution for the leaving out of Infants in this Administration,
according to ordinary Rule: For in that he directs them to Baptize Disciples,
upon Preaching he does exclude Infants, who are not such Disciples; nor
according to ordinary Providence can be. Infants after an ordinary rate, are
incapable of understanding the Gospel when Preached; and therefore are
incapable of being made Disciples thereby: And there is no other way according
to an ordinary Rule, of being at all made Disciples but by that means. And this
the Apostles could easily understand, as knowing that under the term Disciple,
in common Speech, and in the whole New Testament, those only are meant, who
being taught, Professed the Doctrine Preached by such a one: As John's
Disciples; Christ's Disciples; the Disciples of the Pharisees; and the
Disciples of the Perverters. Acts 20. 30. And accordingly they Administered
Baptism. And in that Christ appoints these to be Baptized he Excludes others:
For the appointment of Christ is most certainly the Rule according to which we
are to Administer Holy things; and they that do otherwise follow their own
Inventions, and are guilty of Will Worship. If you say that Infants are
Disciples Seminally, in and by their Parents; as if Believers could beget
Believers or Disciples of Christ by natural Generation; this has been already
at large disproved: The Christian Church being not made up of Persons by mere
humane Birth, but Spiritual Regeneration. And to say that Infants are Born
Disciples by a Relation to the Covenant, and so may have the Seal set on rhem,
without any precedent Teaching, is but an unproved Dictate; as if a Title to
Baptism were by a Relation to the Covenant, and Baptism were in its Nature a
Seal of the Covenant, which the Scripture no where Affirms; nor is there any
Rule for the Baptizing of Persons because of Relation to the Covenant.

But it is further Urged to this purpose; that Infants are called Disciples by
the Apostle. Acts 15. 10. Now therefore why tempt ye God to put a Yoke upon the
Neck of the Disciples? Which being spoken of Circumcision, must needs (say you)
refer to Infants, as the Disciples there spoken of, as well as others. To this
we Answer, That there is no necessity nor color of giving to Infants the Name
of Disciples from that Text: For though it is true that they are called
Disciples, upon whose Necks the false Brethren would have put the Yoke of
Circumcision; yet this proves not Infants to be certainly meant by Disciples;
since adult Believers of the Gentiles also were required by the Jews to be
Circumcised, as Timothy. Acts 13. 20. And again, though it is true that they
would have had Infants, as well as the converted Gentiles to be Circumcised;
yet the putting the Yoke of Circumcision, is not Actual Circumcision, in their
Flesh: For that the Jews were able to bear for many Ages, and that both before,
and since also to this day: But the Yoke of Circumcision is the Necessity of it
on Men's Consciences, and therewith the whole Law of Moses. ver. 5. and that as
Necessary to Salvation. ver. 1. And therefore Peter having said ver. 10. Why
tempt ye God to put a Yoke upon the Necks of the Disciples. Adds ver. 11. But
we believe, that through the Grace of the Lord Jesus, we shall be saved even as
they. Plainly implying that the Yoke he meant, was the necessity of
Circumcision, and keeping Moses his Law to Salvation. Now this Yoke was not put
upon Infants, but upon Brethren, taught the necessity of it. So that upon the
whole, to insist upon a Command by virtual Consequence from hence for the
Baptizing the Infants of Believers according to ordinary Rule, is so far from
being right and genuine, that on the contrary this Text, Mat. 28. 19. clearly
proves Infants are not by ordinary Rule to be Baptized; because Disciples of
all Nations, and no other are Appointed thereunto* Whence it follows that the
Baptism of Infants is beside the Institution and Rule of Christ; and therefore
no other than Will Worship and a Humane Invention.

Obj. 14. But the Infants of Believers, even while they are Infants, are
capable of being made Partakers of the Inward Grace of Baptism as well as grown
Men: And therefore they ought to receive the outward Sign of Baptism.

Reply. The Question between us is; Whether the Infants of Believers,
universally or indifferently, are to be admitted to the Ordinance of Baptism,
according to ordinary Rule? Now it cannot be supposed that the Infants of
Believers, indifferently or universally, have actually the thing signified by
Baptism; that is, the Holy Ghost, Union with Christ, Adoption, Forgiveness of
Sins, Regeneration, and Eternal Life: For then they are all Sanctified, and all
Believers. And if this could be proved, there would be no Question about
Padobaptism. Those Texts, Acts 8. 37. Acts 10. 47. Acts 11. 17. would
undeniably prove it. And there is no Antipaedobaptist but will grant, that all
those concerning whom there is any tolerable Evidence given that they are
Regenerated Persons, United to Christ, whose Sins are forgiven, and that have
received the Holy Ghost; are to be Baptized. Now to affirm that all Infants of
Believers, either Actually or Imputatively, are Sanctified, Regenerated,
Justified, is quite contrary to Romans 9. 6. etc. as also to daily Experience. To
Baptize them all therefore is most certainly a Preposterous and Irregular
Practice: The outward Sign according to your own Reckoning, of right belonging
to none, but such as have the Inward Grace. And who they are among them that
have, or have not this Inward Grace, is not determinable, according to ordinary
Rule, 'till discovered by an answerable Profession when coming to Years of
Understanding. And then indeed when such a Profession is made, we are bound
according to a Judgment of Charity to reckon them as such as are made partakers
of the Inward Grace, whether so in realty or no. And according to this Rule
only are we to proceed in our admission unto Baptism.

Obj. 15. But does not our Savior tell us, that unto such belongs the
Kingdom of Heaven? If Children therefore are capable of the greater, then they
are capable of the lesser. If capable of a Membership in the Kingdom, then of
the Sign and Cognizance thereof: But the First is true; Ergo, the Latter.

To this We Answer, First, That that which you are to prove is, that all the
Infants of Believers, or the Infants of Believers, in as much as they are the
Infants of Believers, are Actually partakers of the Inward Grace of Baptism,
and consequently such to whom appertains the Heavenly Kingdom. Now neither does
the Apostle's Speech, 1 Cor. 7. 14. prove it; as has been already showed: Nor
does this Text, Mat. 19. 14. prove it. And as neither of these prove it; So
Rom: 9, 6, 7, 8, 9. Positively disproves it. For first it is doubtful, whether
those were Infants or no, of whom Christ here speaks: There being several
Learned Men, as Piscator and others, that do maintain that the Speech of
Christ, Mat. 19. 14. is not of Infants; but of Children that were capable of
Instruction: Which they gather from this that Christ called them Luke 18. 16.
And elsewhere He says, Whosoever shall offend one of these little Ones that
Believe in Me. Mat. 18. 6. Mark 9. 42. Which after an ordinary rate of Speech
cannot be intended of Infants. And whereas it is said in Mark. He took them up
in His Arms. The Word so Translated; is used Mark 9. 36. for the Embracing of
those that were of some growth, whom He placed in the midst, and of whose
Scandalizing He there warns. Nor does the Greek Word, used Luke 18. 15.
Translated in English Infants, prove it: For the Greek Word there Translated
Infants, as Piscator himself tells us, signifies a Child capable of Teaching.
As when it is said Timothy knew the Sacred Scriptures from a Child: that is,
ever since he was a Boy, not an infant: It being the same Greek Word that is
used in both places.

Secondly Though it should be granted that those were Infants; yet there is no
Certainty, only Conjecture, that they were Believers Infants; which yet ought
to be proved if you say any thing from hence to the purpose. For though Christ
was then in the Coasts of Judea, yet it might as well be, that the Children
were brought by others, as Parents, and that without Faith in Christ, as the
Messiah, upon the Fame of his Miracles and the conceit that ^e was a Prophet.
And so they might bring Children to him to be Blessed, as Jacob and Esau by
Isaac; and Joseph's Children by Jacob.

Thirdly. Let it be granted they were the Infants of Believers, of whom our
Savior here speaks, that of such is the Kingdom of God. It may be (as
Piscator also observes) referred not to their present state, as if for the
present they were in the Kingdom of God, that is Believers and Justified; but
that they were Elect Persons, and so in time of them should be the Kingdom of
God. Now that which gives right to Baptism is the present Estate of a Person.

Fourthly. Though it should be granted that the little Children Christ here
speaks of, are indeed young Sucking Infants, that they are also the Infants
of Believers: and that unto them also belongs the Kingdom of Heaven; yet this
is no sufficient Ground or Warrant for us therefore to Administer Baptism to
Infants; It being only the ground laid down in the Institution that can justly
warrant the same. That a Profession of Faith and Repentance is a sufficient
ground is undeniably to be proved from the Scriptures: But because some of our
Infants are, or may be in a state of Salvation: or because, for ought as we
know, unto all of them belongs the Kingdom of Heaven; that therefore they
must all be Baptized, whether capable of making an Answerable Profession or no:
Neither does the present Scripture prove it, which speaks nothing at all of
Baptism; nor does any other that we can meet with, give any Warrant, or
Countenance at all unto such a Practice.

Obj. 16. But the Gospel took place just as the Old Administration did, by
bringing in whole Families together: When Abraham was taken in, his whole
Family was taken in. So in this New Administration, usually if the Master of
the House turned Christian, the whole Family came in and were Baptized with
him. The whole Household of Cornelius, the first Converted Gentile. Acts 11. 14.
The Household of Stephanus. The Household of Lydia. The Household of the Jailer.

Reply. Whereas you say the Gospel took place just as the Old Administration,
by bringing in whole Families together; By the Old Administration you mean
Circumcision: But we do not find the Gospel, or Baptism took place just in the
manner that Circumcision did. For Circumcision was but in one Family, singled
out from all the Families of the Earth, of the Males only; whether in the
Covenant of Grace or no; Children or Servants, Elder or Younger; by the Master
of the Family, or others in his stead: But in Baptism it is clean otherwise.
And as to the bringing in o^ whole Families together, it was but contingently
so, not always so, nor constantly so, according to any Promise or Prophecy. And
when it did so happen, we find not any ^nfant Baptized; nor any Intimation of
Baptizing Households in Conform^^y to the Administration of Circumc^^ion, but
rather the contrary; Express notice being given of the Faith and Repentance of
those Admitted unto Baptism, in the several Households recorded to have been
Baptized; (whereas all were to be Circumcised that were of Abraham's Family,
both Children, Servants, Slaves, and all, whether making a Profession of Faith
and Repentance or no.) And this may appear by taking a view of the several
Examples of Baptizing, recorded in the New Testament.

Concerning John the Baptist, it is said Mat. 3. 5. There went out to him all
Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the Region about Jordan, and were Baptized of
him in Jordan, Confessing their Sins. In which the practice of Baptizing was
not by taking in a Family, but by admitting all that would become Disciples,
over all the Countries. After the Ascension of Christ, the first Example of
Baptizing is that recorded Acts 2. 44. And there it is said, they that gladly
received the Word were Baptized. And those were they of whom he had said, V.
39. The Promise is to you and to your Children. And there were added unto them
about 3000 Souls. But no mention of any Infants: neither indeed is there any
probability that any Infants were at all Comprehended in that Number; in as
much as it is afterward told us, Ver. 42. That they continued steadfastly in the
Apostles Doctrine and Fellowship, and in Breaking of Bread, and in Prayers.
Which cannot with any shadow of pretense be applied to Sucking Infants. The
next Example is that of the Samaritans; of whom it is said, Acts 8. 12. That
when they ^elieved, Philip Preaching the things Concerning the Kingdom of God,
and the Name of Jesus Christ, they were Baptized both Men and Women. Where
Children, if any had been Baptized, might very aptly have been Inserted: But we
find none mentioned to have been Baptized, but those that Believed and Received
the Word of God, both Men and Women, not Children. Concerning Cornelius we are
told that he was a Devout Man; One that feared God with all his House. Acts 10.
2. And Ver. 44. we are told; While Peter yet spoke these Words, the Holy Ghost
fell on all them which heard the Word, and they spoke with Tongues, and
magnified God; which cannot be affirmed of Infants. And accordingly there being
convincing Evidence that they that had thus heard the Word, had received the
Holy Ghost; he commanded them to be Baptized in the Name of the Lord.
Concetning the Household of Stephanus; which is said to be Baptized, 2 Cor. 1.
16. they are said to have addicted themselves to the Ministry of the Saints. To
which most aptly may be adjoined the House of Crispus; concerning whom it is
said. Acts 18. 8. And Crispus the chief Ruler of the Synagogue, Believed on the
Lord with all his House; And many of the Corinthians hearing, Believed and were
Baptized. Where under the term Household those only are meant that Believed. And
those that among the Corinthians were Baptized, are said first to hear and
Believe. The next mentioned, is the Household of Lydia, of whom it was said that
She was Baptized and her Household. Acts 16. 15. But this must be understood by
other places, which when they express the Baptizing of the Household, they
express also the Believing or Receiving of the Word by the whole Household; and
by the frequent use of the Word, which is to put the House for the People of
Growth in it. The last mentioned is the Household of the Jailer, Acts 16. 33,
34. of whom it is said that he was Baptized, he and all his; and when he had
brought them into his House, he sat Meat before them, and Rejoiced, Believing
in God with all his House.

Upon the whole then it does not appear that either one Infant was Baptized, or
that the Gospel always took place as the Old Administration did, by bringing in
whole Families together; yea the contrary appears, out of the 1 Pet. 3. 1. As
also from 1 Cor. 7. 13, 16. That the Husband was Converted sometimes without
the Wife; and the Wife sometimes without the Husband. So sometimes in the House
of Infidel Masters, were Converted Servants. 1 Timothy 6. 1, 2. And on the
contrary, Phil. 11, 12, etc. And our Lord Jesus foretold it should be so in
the Preaching of the Gospel. Mat. 10. 35. 36. To affirm therefore that there
were Infants in any of those forementioned Households, or if there were that
they were Baptized, is more than does well become us to assert, since the
Scripture makes no mention of them in either respect: And consequently much to
blame are they that build their Practice upon so infirm a Bottom.

Obj. 17. But then it is again Objected; That as there is no Express Command or
Example in the Scripture concerning the Baptism of Infants; so neither is there
any concerning the Baptism of Persons at Age, whose Parents were Christians,
and who have been Educated from their Childhood in the Christian Religion; the
Scripture giving no account of the Baptism of any in the Apostles Days, but
such as were Converted from Judaism or Paganism to Christianity. And if a just
Consequence may be admitted for the proof of the one, Why not for the other
also? You are wont to reject all Scripture Consequences in respect of Infants
Baptism; and yet here you must of necessity admit of the same: So that this
Argument therefore returns upon your selves.

To this we Reply; First that though it should be granted that there is no
express Example in the Scripture of the Baptism of Persons at Age, whose
Parents were Christians, yet the Precept concerning Baptism is as express for
such, as for any others. Mat. 28. 19. Go Teach all Nations; Baptizing them,
etc. Mark 16. 15, 16. Go Preach the Gospel to every Creature. He that Believes
and is Baptized shall be Saved. Where none are excluded that are capable of
being Taught or Discipled into the true Faith or Profession of Christianity,
let their Parentage be what it will.

Secondly, It is sufficient unto us, that as the Commission is express, so
there are Examples enough in the Scripture concerning the Baptism of Believers.
So that let a Person be but a Believer, and we have no Reason to look into his
Pedigree; nor have we any Rule that so directs us, in order to his Admission to
Baptism. And as we have no Rule nor Reason to accept of a Person that believes,
the rather because he had Christian Parents; so neither to reject him upon that
ground. Could the like Command or Examples be produced from the Scripture
concerning Infants Baptism, as can easily be produced concerning the Baptism of
Believers (for under that Notion only are we bound to take Cognizance of those
Baptized by us) the present Controversy would suddenly be concluded betwixt
us. And therefore;

Thirdly, This cuts not off our Pretensions, to something more than a bare
consequential Deduction for the Justification of our Practice; whilst
Consequences only, and those far fetched, and streined enough, are the best
bottom that Infants Baptism is built upon: Which Consequences of yours, are a
most insufficient ground for the Justification thereof: For though it is true,
that in respect of all sorts of moral Duties, or other concernments of
Christianity, Consequences are allowable enough, and we are sufficiently
warranted in our Practice therein, and that not only from the Practice of our
Savior himself, who took this Method for the Proof of the Resurrection; but
from several other such like Instances in the Scripture. And indeed without
them, neither can the Word be Preached, not the Duties of Christianity
enforced, as they ought upon the Conscience; yet this is an infallible Maxim, a
Rule beyond all just Contradiction, and which has accordingly been urged by
multitudes of Protestant Divines, by way of Opposition to the Papal Usurpation;
That in respect of all Positive or Instituted Worship, such as Baptism is, that
has no other Rule nor Reason, than the mere Will of the Lawgiver; there must
be something in the Scripture, either by way of Precept or Example, that alone
can justly warrant our Practice therein. The Reason is obvious, because Baptism
(being a part of Instituted Worship, not found in Natures Garden) has of it
self no virtue, but what it receives from the Institutor: It being a right
Note, That Moral Laws are good, and therefore commanded: But Positive Worship
is commanded, and therefore good. And accordingly, though Moral Duties are
easily deducible from their proper Premises; yet we cannot possibly arrive unto
any certain Knowledge of our Duty in reference to Positive Worship, without
some express signification of God's mind unto us therein. True it is, that in
some Cases, if an express Precept be wanting, we may justly enough recurr to
the Example of the Apostles, as a sufficient Authority for our Practice. As for
Instance, in the Case of the Observation of the Lord's day; concerning which
though we have no express Precept to warrant our Practice therein, we are yet
justifiable enough upon that Account, in that we have the frequent Examples of
the Apostles, recorded in the Scripture to that purpose; whose steps we are bid
to follow. But when Precept and President do both fail us, as is most evidently
the case with us in respect of Infants Baptism, and which has been accordingly
ingeniously owned, by some of the chiefest of the Paedobaptists themselves: We
do certainly step aside into a wrong Path, in our Practices of that kind. And
justly enough therefore, may our common Adversaries the Papists, twit us in the
Teeth with the Guilt of a Self condemned Practice, while we blame that in them,
which yet we our selves do allow in other Cases. And how can we call upon them,
to produce something o^ other by way of Precept or President from the
Scripture, for the justification of their Ceremonies, without the one or the
other of which, we justly condemn them as unlawful, when we our selves are
found highly guilty of the same Transgression, and that in a greater degree in
other Respects.

Object. 18. But it is yet further Objected; That Infants by God's express
Command, were to be Circumcised under the former Administration; and all God's
Commands about His Institutions then, (according to the Rules of Analogy or
Proportion) are equally binding unto us, as well as to the Jews. As in the case
of the Christian Sabbath, unto which the Fourth Commandment binds us, as it did
the Jews to the former. And thus it is in reference to Infants Baptism; in
respect of which, though there is no express Command to that purpose, recorded
in the New Testament; yet we cannot but conclude, that God's Command unto the
Jews to Circumcise their Infants, carries with it the force, at least, of a
virtual Command unto us to Baptize ours.

To this we reply; That certain it is, that that which concerns the Worship of
God, which has not an express Institution in the New Testament, is now to be
rejected by us; which is to be understood, as we have said before, in respect
of Positive Worship, consisting in outward Rites; such as Circumcision,
Baptism, and the Lord's Supper are, which have nothing Natural or Moral in
them; but are merely Ceremonial. For as for that which is Natural, or Moral in
God's Worship, we allow that an Institution or Command in the Old Testament, is
Obligatory to Christians under the New. And such do we conceive the Sabbath to
be, as being of the Law of Nature: For outward Worship being due to God, Days
are due to God to that end; and therefore even in Paradise appointed from the
Creation; and in all Nations, in all Ages observed, enough to prove so much to
be of the Law of Nature. And therefore the Fourth Commandment is justly put
among the Morals; which proves, that at least a seventh Portion of time is to
be dedicated more immediately to the Service of God. Now Circumcision has
nothing Moral in it; it is merely Positive. Neither was it so from the
beginning; nor observed by all Nations, in all Ages; nor is it in the
Decalogue. And therefore the Observation of the Lord's Day may stand, though
Circumcision fall, and though there be no other Ordinance come in the room of
it, that bears Analogy or Proportion with it.

Secondly, When we require express Institution in the New Testament, in respect
of the Matters of God's Worship now to be practiced by us; We do not mean, that
in all Positive Worship, there must always be of necessity a positive Command
in so many Words, in form of a Precept: But we conceive, that the Example of
the Apostles, which has not a mere temporary Reason, is enough to prove that
Institution from God, to which that Practice does relate. And in this therefore
as we said before, in Answer to the foregoing Objection; we reckon it a
sufficient Warrant for the Justification of our Practice, in the Observation of
the Lord's Day, that such was the Practice of the Apostles, according to those
plain Testimonies thereof, recorded in the Holy Scripture, though it be not
expressly commanded. Now if the one half of this Evidence could be brought for
the Baptism of Infants, we should make no question, but readily subscribe unto
it, But Infants Baptism not consisting with the Order of Christ in the
Institution; being contrary to the Practice of John the Baptist, and the
Apostles; there being no Footsteps of it at all in the Scripture; nor till
about 200 years after Christ's Incarnation; we dare not assent unto the
Practice of it, upon a supposed Analogy, or Proportion between that and
Circumcision.

And evident it is, that it is a most dangerous Principle upon which they go,
that so argue; to wit, that in mere positive things, such as Circumcision and
Baptism are, we may frame an Addition to God's Worship from Analogy, or
Resemblance conceived by us, between two Ordinances, whereof one is quite taken
away, without any Institution, gathered by Precept, or Apostolical Example: For
if we may do it in one thing, why not in another? Where shall we stop? Certain
it is, that this very Principle has brought in all the Popish Ceremonies into
the Romish Church. That which Christ and his Apostles have taken from the Jews,
and appointed unto us, we are to receive as they have appointed. But if any
others shall take upon them to appoint to Men's Consciences, any Rite, in whole
or in part, on their own conceived Reason, from Analogy with the Jewish
Ceremonies; It is an high Presumption in such, against Christ, and against the
Apostles Command to yield to it. Col. 2. 20. Though it has a show of Wisdom.
verse 23. And the Apostles Example binds us to oppose it. Gal. 2. 3, 4, 5.

Object. 19. But if the Baptism of Believers, be the only Baptism which Christ
has appointed: How comes it to pass, that so many learned and pious Men,
should for so long a Season, and throughout so many Generations cleave to
Infants Baptism, whilst so few, in Comparison do embrace the contrary Practice?

For Answer hereunto: First, It is to be duly noted, that as the Scripture has
clearly foretold us of a Defection, or an Apostasy from the Primitive Purity
and Simplicity of the Gospel, in respect both of Doctrine and Discipline, which
was to happen, when the Man of Sin was to be Revealed, and the Mystery of
Iniquity was to be discovered in the World; even that Lawless one, who should
sit in the Temple of God, as God; Opposing and Exalting himself above all that
is called God, or that is Worshipped: And as Paul does also forewarn the Elders
of the Church at Ephesus, not only, that grievous Wolves should enter in among
them after his Departure, not sparing the Flock. But also, that of their own
selves should Men arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away Disciples after
them: Which should lessen our Wonder in this Respect. So it is no less
observable, that as the Apostasy came in gradually, the Mystery of Iniquity
prevailing step by step; so does the Wisdom of the Lord seem to order the
Recovery thereof. And therefore so it is, that in these last Ages, when the
Reformation first began to be set on foot in the World, the Doctrinal part of
the Gospel was first notably cleared up, whilst yet there remained a very great
Corruption in point of Discipline, or in respect of the Primitive Purity of
Gospel Worship: As in the Case of Luther, and many others of the first
Reformers, who notwithstanding their zealous Pleading for the Doctrine of free
Justification, by the Blood of Christ, in Opposition to Popish Merits, etc. yet
held fast Images in Churches, Consubstantiation, Bowing to the high Altar, the
Surplice in Preaching, the Cross in Baptism; and many other things which the
After Reformers could not but see them, to be clearly defective in. So that the
light of God's People comes not up to its proper Acme all at once, but by
degrees. And suitably has the Reformation advanced, and the Truths and
Ordinances of Christ been cleared up, and recovered from the Encroachments, and
Corruptions of the Man of Sin: One Age recovering one part; and another,
another; making good that Word, Prove. 4. 18. The Path of the just is as the
shining Light, that shines more and more unto the perfect Day; which holds
good in reference to the general Dispensations of God's Providence toward his
People, as well as in particular Cases.

Secondly; We must follow no Man's Example therefore, no not the Apostles
themselves, further than it can be made out unto us, that they were followers
of Christ. 1 Cor. 11. 1. And certain it is, that the Examples of the best Men
living, will be no sufficient Justification to us in the matters of Divine
Worship, when contradicting an express Word. Jehoshaphat and Asa, were both
good King's of Israel, and great Reformers; yet in many things they did
prevaricate, and transgressed the Commandments of the Lord; and particularly in
their not removing the High Places; and for which they are both taxed by the
Holy Spirit, 1 Kings 15. 14. and Chap. 22. 43. And indeed, as the High Places
then ought to have been removed; so the same ought to have been done by our
first Reformers, in respect of Infants Baptism, and other Ceremonies of the
Romish Church: Which other Ceremonies they retained in hope, it is true, of
gaining over the Papists, to a Compliance with the then Established Discipline;
though it succeeded far otherwise than was expected: For the retaining of those
Ceremonies, did but so much the more harden the Papal Party in their other
Devices. We must follow no man's Example therefore, against the Word of God,
upon an undue Presumption, that any of the Sons of Men, how Pious or Learned
soever, are infallible, either in point of Doctrine or Practice. Humanum est
errare, must not be forgotten.

Thirdly. To lay the stress of your Argument, upon the Unlikelyhood, that so
great a Number of God's People, in so many Ages, should be left in the dark, in
Reference to such a Gospel Ordinance as Baptism is; As it proceeds from the
want of a due Consideration of that Apostasy of the Church from its Primitive
Purity, in respect both of Doctrine and Worship, which the Scripture do so
clearly foretell us concerning: So the Language of it sounds no other than this;
That we cannot miss of doing right and well, if we follow the Pious Examples of
those that are gone before us; not considering that as they were Men, and Men
of like Infirmities with our selves: So that it no way follows, that because
there is a beginning Reformation, in respect of the forementioned Apostasy, we
must go no further. True it is, that we are to give no Entertainment unto any
New Light or Doctrine in these Respects, that has not been already declared
unto us in the Holy Scriptures: But if upon a due search it can be made appear
unto us from the Word of God, that we have hitherto gone astray in a point of
such Importance to the Worship and Service of God, as Baptism is: As we ought
not to shut our Eyes against the Light so shining upon us; so it will not
excuse our Continuance in such a Path of Error, that we have the Company of so
many Wise, Learned, and Holy Men, that are therein Fellow Transgressors with
us.

Fourthly. We have not been without the Testimony of many Learned, Pious, and
Holy Men, who have born Witness unto the Truth we are now pleading for, and
that in many former Ages, as well as in this. For it is well known that Infants
Baptism was very early opposed, if not so soon as it was born; for no Antiquity
mentions it to have had any peaceable being in the World any long time before
it was opposed: And if it be said that it was not opposed at the beginning,
as soon as it came into the World; it may be so: For Christ says, Whilst the
Servants slept the Evil One Sowed Tares. And surely it was a sleepy Time
amongst Christians when it came in; but when they began to awake they opposed
it. Besides which,

Fifthly. We have the Witness of some of your own Party, whose Tongues and Pens
God has (at least) so overruled, that they have born a Famous Testimony for
our Practice.

First. Dr. Tailor says; This indeed is true Baptism, when it is both in the
Symbol and the Mystery. Whatsoever is less than this, is but the Symbol only,
and a mere Ceremony; an Opus Operatum; a dead Letter; an empty Shadow; an
Instrument without an Agent to manage it. Lib. of Proph p. 242.

Secondly. Baptism is never propounded, mentioned, or enjoined, as a means of
Remission of Sins, or of Eternal Life; but something of Duty, Choice, and
Sanctity, is joined with it, in order to the Production of the end so
mentioned. p. 243.

Thirdly. They that Baptize Children, make Baptism to be wholly an Outward
Duty; a Work of the Law; a Carnal Ordinance: It makes us adhere to the Letter,
without regard to the Spirit; and to Relinquish the Mysteriousness, the
Substance, the Spirituality of the Gospel. Which Argument is of so much the
more Consideration; because under the Spiritual Covenant of the Gospel of
Grace; if the Mystery goes not before the Symbol* (which it does when the
Symboles are Cognations of Grace, as the Sacraments are;) yet it always
accompanies it; but never follows in Order of Time, and is clear in the
perpetual Analogy of Holy Scripture.

Fourthly, That the words mentioned in St. Peter's Sermon, Act. 2. (which are
the only Records of the Promises) are interpreted upon a weak mistake. The
Promise belongs to you and your Children: Therefore Infants are actually
Receptive of it in that Capacity. That is the Argument: But the Reason of it is
not yet discovered; nor ever will: For (to you and your Children) is to you and
your Posterity; to you and your Children, when they are of the same Capacity,
in which you are, receptive of the Promise. But he that whenever the Word
Children is Expressed, understands Infants, must needs believe that in all Israel
there were no Men; but all were Infants: And if that had been true, it had been
the greater wonder that they should overcome the Anakims, and beat the King of
Moab, and March so far, and Discourse so well, for they were all called the
Children of Israel. p. 233.

Fifthly. Whereas it is Argued from the Commission. Mark 16. 6. He that
Believes and is Baptized shall be Saved. Infants are Believers, and therefore
according to the Commission they are to be Baptized. Whether Infants (says he)
have Faith or no, is a Question to be disputed by Persons that Care not how
much they say, and how little they prove. First, Personal and Actual Faith they
have none: For they have no Acts of Understanding: And besides, how can any Man
know that they have, since he never saw any sign of it, neither was he told so
by any that could tell? Secondly, Some say they have Imputative; but then so
let the Sacrament be to; that is, if they have the Parents Faith, or the
Churches, then so let Baptism be imputed also by Derivation from them; And as
in their Mothers Womb, and while they hung on their Mothers Breasts, they live
upon their Mothers Nourishment: So they may upon the Baptism of their Parents,
or their Mother the Church: For since Faith is necessary to Baptism (and they
themselves confess it by striving to find out new Kinds of Faith to dawb the
matter up;) such as the Faith, such must be the Sacrament; for there is no
Proportion, between an Actual Sacrament, and an Imputative Faith; this being an
immediate and necessary Order to that. And whatsoever can be said to take off
from the necessity of Actual Faith; all that and much more may be said to
excuse from the Actual Susception of Baptism. The first of these Devices, was
that of Luther, and his Scholars; the second of Calvin, and his. And yet there
is a Third Device, which the Church of Rome Teaches, and that is. that Infants
have Habitual Faith, but who told them so? How can they prove it? What
Revelation or Reason teaches any such thing? Are they by this Habit so much as
disposed to an Actual Belief, without a Miracle? Can an Infant, sent into a
Mohammedan Province be more confident for Christianity, when he comes to be a
Man, than if he had not been Baptized? Are there any Acts precedent,
concomitant, or consequent to this pretended Habit? This strange Invention is
absolutely without Art, without Scripture, Reason, or Authority; but the Men
are to be excused unless there were a better. p. 240.

To which, (says he,) This Consideration may be added; that if Baptism be
necessary to the Salvation of Infants (as the Fathers of Old, and the Church of
Rome and England since) upon whom is the Imposition laid? To whom is the
Command given? To the Parents or the Children? Not to the Parents, for then God
has put the Salvation of Innocent Babes into the Power of others, and Infants
may be damned for their Fathers Carelessness, or Malice. It follows that it is
not necessary at all to be done to them, to whom it cannot be prescribed as a
Law, and in whose behalf it cannot be reasonably entrusted to others with the
Apendant Necessity: And if it be not necessary, it is certain it is not
Reasonable; and most certain it is no where in terms prescribed; and therefore
it is presumed that Baptism ought to be understood and administered, according
as other Precepts are, with Reference to the Capacity of the Subject, and the
Reasonableness of the thing.

And again, p. 242. If any Man runs for Succor to that exploded Cresphugeton,
that Infants have Faith, or any other inspired Habit, of I know not what or
how; we desire no more Advantage in the World, than that they are constrained
to answer without Revelation against Reason, common Sense, and all the
Experience in the World.

Sixthly. But Tradition (says he) by all means must supply the place of
Scripture; and there is pretended a Tradition Apostolical, that Infants were
Baptized. But at this (says he) we are not much moved; for we who rely upon
the written Word of God, as suffcient to establish all true Religion, do not
value the Allegation of Tradition. And however the World goes, none of the
Resormed Churches can pretend this Argument for this Opinion: Because they who
reject Tradition, when it is against them, must not pretend it in the least for
them. But if we will allow the Topic to be good; yet how will it be verified?
For so far as can yet appear, it relies wholly upon the Testimony of Origin;
for from him Austin had it. Now a Tradition Apostolical, if it be not consigned
with a fuller Testimony than of one Person, whom all other Ages have condemned
of other Errors; and whose Works, says ^rasmus, are so spurious, that he that
reads them, is uncertain, whether he read Origin, or Ruffinus; therefore will
obtain so little Reputation amongst those, who know that things have upon
greater Authority, been pretended to be received from the Apostles, but falsely;
that it will be a great Argument, that he is Ridiculous, and Weak, that shall
be determined by so weak Probation in matters of so great Concernment. But
besides that, the Tradition cannot be proved to be Apostolical; we have very
good Evidence from Antiquity, that it was the Opinion of the Primitive Church,
that Infants ought not to be Baptized; which (says he) is clear in the Canon
of Neocaesarea; which he mentions at large in the Original Greek; determining
that none ought to be Baptized, without giving an Account of their Faith, and
desiring the same.

And therefore whoever will pertinaciously persist in this Opinion of the
Paedobaptists, and Practice it accordingly, they pollute the Blood of the
Everlasting Covenant: They Dishonor and make a Pageantry of the Sacrament:
they ineffectually represent a Sepulture into the Death of Christ, and please
themselvet in a Sign without effect, making Baptism like the Fig Tree in the
Gospel, full of Leaves, but no Fruit; and they invocate the Holy Ghost in vain,
doing as if one should call upon him to illuminate a Stone of a Tree Thus far
Dr. Tailor. p. 244.

Mr. Baxter says, If there can be no Example given in the Scripture of any one
that was Baptized, without the Profession of a Saving Faith. nor any ^recept
for so doing; then must we not Baptize any without it: But the Antecedent is
true; therefore so is the consequent. 2. Disp against Mr Blake. 16. Arg. p. 149,

2dly. Christ has instituted no Baptism, but what is to be a sign of present
Regeneration: But to Men that understand not a Justifying Faith it cannot be
Administered as a sign of present Regeneration; therefore he has Instituted no
Baptism to be Administered to such. 10th. Arg. p 117, 118.

3dly. If it be the appointed Use of all Christian Baptism to solemnize our
Marriage with Christ, or to Seal and Confirm our Union with him: Then must we
Baptize none that profess not justifying Faith: But the Antecedent and
Consequent are evident. Gal. 3. 27, 28, 29. p. 98.

The Lord Brooks says; That the Analogy which Baptism now has with
Circumcision in the Old Law, is a fine Rational Argument to Illustrate a Point
well proved before: But I somewhat doubt whether it be Proof enough for that
which Some would prove by it; Since (besides the vast difference in the
Ordinance) the persons to be Circumcised are stated by a Positive Law so
Express, that is leaves no place for Scruple: But it is far otherwise In
Baptism; Where all the Designation of Persons fit to be Partakers, for ought I
know are such as Believe: For this is the Qualification, which with Exactest
Search, I find the Scripture Repuires in persons to be baptized. And this it
seems to require in all such Persons. Now how Infants can be properly said to
Believe, I am not yet fully resolved.

Dr. Barlow Bishop of Lincoln, has these Words, in a Letter of his in Print. I
do believe and know (says he) that there is neither Precept, nor Example in
Scripture for Paedobaptism; nor any just Evidence of it for ahove 200 Years
after Christ. That Tertullian condemns it as an Unwarrantable Custom. And
Nazianzen a good while after him dislikes it too. Sure I am, that in the
Primitive Times they were Catecheumeni; then Illumina^i, or Baptizati; And that
not only Pagans, and Children of Pagans, converted; bu^ Children of Christian
Parents. The Truth is, I do believe, Paedobaptism (how, or by whom, I knnow
no^) came into the World in the second Century. And in the Third and Fourth
began to be practiced, though not generally, and desended as Lawful, from that
Text grossly Mis-understood. Jo. ^. 3. Upon the like gross Mistake of Jo. 6. 53.
They did for many Centuries, both in the Greek and Latin Church, communicate
Infants, and give them the Lord's Supper. And I do confess they might do both
as well as either. But although they Baptized some Infants, and thought it
Lawful so to do; yet Austin was the First that ever said it was Necessary.

I have read what my Learned and worthy Friends Dr. Hammond, Mr. Baxter, and
others say in Defense of it; And I confess, I wonder not a little, that Men of
such great Parts should say so much to so little purpose: For I have not as yet
seen any thing like an Arguument for it. Thus far Dr. Barlow.

Obj. 20. But the Apostle tells us; That neither Circumcision avails any
thing, nor Uncircumcision, but a New Creature: It is our main Business
therefore to press after the Power of Godlyness: And we are afraid that while
there is so much stress laid upon the Circumstantials of Religion, it tends to
the losing the Substance. Besides having been already Baptized in our Infancy,
what necessity is there for the Repetition thereof? It being an approved Maxim,
that that which ought not to be done, being done, ought not to be undone.

We Answer, First, whereas you tell us, that neither Circumcision avails any
thing, nor Un*circumcision, but a new Creature. Certain it is, that once
Circumcision was something, when the Lord would have killed Moses because of
the Circumcision. Exodus 4. 24, 26. And when the Lord said, That whosoever was
not Circumcised should be cut off from his People. Genesis 17. 14. True it is,
that now under the Gospel it is nothing, because Abolished. Gal. 5. 2. If you
be Circumcised Christ shall profit you nothing: But shall we therefore say that
Baptism is nothing? Baptism is the Counsel of God. Luke 7. 29. And is that
nothing? Baptism is a Command of the Lord Jesus. Mat. 28. 19. And is his
Command nothing? And therefore;

Secondly; We cannot be justly affirmed to have placed more stress on the
Ordinance insisted on, than the Scripture it self charge on it. In which
respect it ought to be considered, what our Savior himself speaks, when he was
to be Baptized by John, after the manner we are now pleading for. Mat. 3. 15.
Suffer it to be so now: For thus it becomes to fulfill all Righteousness. And
what is that Righteousness or Holiness which God now requires of us; but our
answerable Conformity to the revealed Will of God; and that both in respect of
the Duties of the first, as well as the Second Table? Upon which account we
ought further to consider, what a special charge our Lord Jesus left with his
Apostles upon his Departure hence; That they should teach the Nations to
observe all things, whatsoever he had commanded them. And this of Believers
Baptism amongst the rest. Mat. 28. 19, 20. Mark 16. 16. And elsewhere Paul
commends the Corinthians, for that they had kept the Ordinances as they were
delivered unto them, 1 Cor. 11. 2. It is therefore certainly an undue
Reflection, when you suppose, that we place too much stress upon an Ordinance
of Christ; while we plead for the Purity of its Practice, according to the
Primitive Institution. It was our Saviors passionate Expression to his
Disciples. John 14. 15. If ye love me, keep my Commandments. And John 15. 14.
Ye are my Friends. if ye do whatsoever I Command you. We cannot therefore
express our Friendship to Christ as we ought, if we are negligent on this
Account. And certain it is, that as we cannot express our Love to Christ
aright, if we do not whatsoever he has commanded us: So if we do it not as he
has commanded us; for if God were so strict as we all know he was upon this
Account, under the former Administration; we cannot rationally expect to be
Indulged in a known Deviation. in respect of any part of that Worship which he
has now Prescribed unto us. Holiness and Righteousness, respecting our Duty
both to God and Man, is indeed indispensibly required of us; and it cannot be
denied, but that the Baptism of Believers we are now pleading for, is a main
part thereof; it being that Homage or Worship which we do more immediately
perform, and offer up unto the great God: So that we place no more stress
thereon, than the matter requires; we dare not indeed lay that stress upon it;
as some of our Adversaries in this point have done, who have made it absolutely
necessary to Salvation: From a gross Misunderstanding of that Text. John 3. 5.
Except a Man be born of Water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the
Kingdom of God; but though an Ignorant, or Unwilling neglect thereof, will not
unavoidably shut us out from God's presence; yet since Christ has commanded
it, and has promised his presence to his People in the due performance of it,
it cannot be denied, but that we are infinitely obliged to be found in an
answerable Practice. And therefore;

Thirdly; Whereas you tell us, that having been already Baptized in your
Infancy, you reckon there is no necessity lying on you, to be again Baptized;
We Answer, that it is no way safe for any to rest Contented with that Pretended
Baptism they received in their Infancy, It being a mere Nullity in respect of
the New Testament Ordinance of Baptism. And the Reason is plain, because there
was that wanting in it, which is Absolutely Essential thereunto. For when you
Baptize Infants, or were your selves baptized in that Capacity, by sprinkling a
little Water only on the Face, there was a manifest failure, First in respect
of the right Subject; and Secondly in respect of the right form or manner of
the Administration of that Ordinance.

First, In respect of the right Subject, which must be qualified according to
the Institution; that is, the Person to be Baptized, ought to be a Believer; or
at least one that makes an External Profession of Faith in Christ, as has been
already proved from Mark 16. 16. Acts 8. 37, etc. Now unless you can
demonstrate that at the time when Baptism was Administered to you in your Infant
state, you were then Actual Believers; or at least that you did then make some
sensible Profession thereof, you were not according to Christ's Rule, the right
or proper Subjects of such an Ordinance.

Secondly; In respect of the External Mode, or Form of its Administration;
which if we consult the Scripture Rule, is not to be performed by sprinkling or
pouring a little Water upon the Face only; but by dipping the whole Person
under Water, and raising him up again, to Figure out unto us, our Communion
with Christ, in His Death, Burial, and Resurrection. And that the Manner and
Ceremony of Baptism ought to be by dipping or plunging the whole Body under
Water; and not by sprinkling or pouring a little Water only on the Face or Head
(as has been commonly used, since the Subjects have been changed from Men to
Babes;) is thus made good.

First from the proper and genuine Signification of the Word, so well agreeing
with the ends and use of Baptism, the Ceremony with the Substance, and the Sign
with the thing signified. The Word we call Baptism, and the Latins Baptismus,
is no other than the Greek Word (...), and in plain English, is to dip, plunge,
or cover all over. Which we find witnessed unto by the following Authors; Men
of Learning and Piety, though differing from us in our present Practice.

Stephens and Scapula, two as great Masters of the Greek Tongue, as we have any
(and both Defenders of Infants Baptism) do tell us in their Lexicons, That
(...) from (...), signifies Mergo, Immergo, obruo; item tingo, quod fit
immergendo, inficere, imbuere. viz. To dip, plunge, overwhelm, put under, cover
over, to Die in Color, which is done by Plunging. They tell us also it
signifies abluo, lavo.

Leigh in his Critica Sacra, says, Its native and proper Signification, is to
dip into Water; or to plunge under Water.

Salmatius, in his Book de Prim. Papae. p. 193. says, That is not Baptism they
give to Children, but Rantism.

Mr. Dan. Rogers, in his Treatise of Sacraments. Part 1. C. 5. P. 70. Says,
the Greeks wanted not other Words to express any other Act besides Dipping, if
the Institution could bear it, What Resemblance of the Burial, or Resurrection
of Christ is in Sprinkling? All Antiquity and Scripture, says he, confirm that
way. To Dip therefore is exceeding Material to the Ordinance; which was the
usuage of Old, without Exception of Countries, hot or cold.

Dr. Tailor in his Rule of Cons. L. 3. C. 4. If you would attend to the proper
signification of the Word; Baptism signifies Plunging in Water, or Dipping,
with Washing.

Mr. Joseph Mede, in his Diatribe on Tit. 3. 2. Says that there was no such
thing as Sprinkling, or Rantism, used in Baptism in the Apostles Days, nor in
many Ages after them.

Chamier. ^an. Gathol. Tom. 4. l. 5. c. 2. Sermon. 6. The Ancient Use of Baptism
was to dip the whole Body into the Element, which is the Force of (...):
Therefore did John Baptize in a River; which is nevertheless changed into
Aspersion, though uncertain when and from whence that Custom was taken.

Dr. Martin Luther, in his Book de Baptismo, Tom. 1. p. 71. 72. Speaking of the
signification of the Word. Baptismus Graecum est, Latin potest verti mersio,
cum Immergimus aliquid in Aqua ut totum tegatur Aqua, and quamvis ille mos
aboleverit, apud pleresque debeant tamen prorsus immergi, and statim retrahi
and sane si Spectes quid Baptismus significet, idem requiri videbis. That is,
Baptism is a Greek Word, and may be Interpreted an Overwhelming, when we
plunge any thing into the Water, that it may be covered all over. And although
that Custom is now out of use with many, yet they ought truly to be dipped, and
presently lifted up again. And certainly if you consider the nature of the
thing, you will see that to be necessary.

Secondly. It is very considerable how Emphatically this Sense and
Signification of the Word is confirmed unto us, by the several Metaphors used
by the Holy Spirit in Scripture, in allusion hereto. viz. when Persons are
Implunged into great Afflictions, they are said to be Baptized therein. Mark
10. 38. And so for Persons that were endowed with great measures of the Spirit,
they are said ^^ be Baptized therewith. Acts 1. 5. The Children of Israel being
encompassed with the Cloud over their Head, and the divided Sea on both sides,
were said to be Baptized in the Cloud, and in the Sea. 1 Cor. 10. And Baptized
Persons are said to be Dead and Buried, in allusion to putting Men into the
Earth, and covering them therewith. None of which can be figured by the
sprinkling of a little Water upon the Face.

Thirdly. It appears to be so from the Practice and Usage we find hereof in
Scripture; and the Opinion of the Learned upon it.

First in the Story of Christ's Baptism, we read Mat. 3. 5. That Jesus came
from Galilee to Jordan unto John to be Baptized of him. And ver. 16. When he
was Baptized, he went up straitway out of the Water. The Learned Cajetan upon
the place says; Christ ascended out of the Water; therefore Christ was
Baptized by John, not by sprinkling, or by pouring Water upon him; but by
Immersion, that is by dipping or plunging in the Water.

A Second Scripture considerable is that of John. 3. 23. And John was Baptizing
in Aenon near Salim: And the Reason why he pitched upon this place is given;
because there was much Water there. Piscator upon the place, tells us: This
(says he) is mentioned to signify the Ceremony of Baptism, which John used in
Dipping or Plunging the whole Body of a Man standing in the River; Whence he
says, Christ being Baptized by John in Jordan, is said to ascend out of the
Water.

A Third Scripture worthy our notice is, Acts 8. 36. 38. As they went on their
way, they came unto a certain Water, and the Enuch said; See here is Water, and
they went down both into the Water, both Philip and the Enuch, and he Baptized
him. And when they were come up out of the Water, etc. Upon which place Calvin
says; We see what Fashion the Ancients had to Administer Baptism; for they
Plunged the whole Body into the Water. The use is now (says he) that the
Minister casts a little Water only upon the Body, or upon the Head.

A Fourth Scripture we shall mention, is Romans 6. 4. Buried with Him in Baptism:
Where the Apostle elegantly alludes to the Ceremony of Baptizing into Death,
and Resurrection with Christ. Cajean* upon the place says; Thus we are Buried
with Him by Baptism into Death; by our Burying he declares our Death from the
Ceremony of Baptism; because he who is Baptized is put under the Water, and by
this carries a Similitude of him that is buried, who is put under the Earth.
Now because none are buried but dead Men; from this very thing that we are
buried in Baptism, we are Assimulated to Christ buried, or when he was buried.
Keckerman Syst. Theol. l. 3. c. 8. Says that Immersion, not Aspersion, was the
first Institution of Baptism, as it does plainly appear from Romans 6. 3. The
Assemblies Annotations upon the place do say, That in this Phrase the Apostle
seems to allude to the Ancient manner of Baptizing, which was to dip the
Party Baptized, and as it were to bury them under Water for a while, and then
to raise them up again out of it, to represent the Burial of the Old Man, and
our Resurrection to newness of Life. The like says Piscator and Diodate upon
the place.

Dr. Cave also a great Searcher into Antiquity, in his late Book called
Primitive Christianity says, p. 320. That the Party Baptized was wholly
Immerged, or put under Water, which was the almost constant, and universal
Custom of those times; whereby they did most notably, and significantly express
the great end and effect of Baptism, etc.

And most remarkable is the Testimony that Mr. Baxter himself gives to this
Truth. As to the manner (says he) It is commonly confessed by us to the
Anabaptists, as our Commentators declare; That in the Apostles times, the
Baptized were dipped over Head in Water; though we have thought it lawful to
dis-use the manner of dipping, and to use less Water. In his Third Argument
against Mr. Blake.

All which Arguments, from the Genuine Sense of the Word Nature of the
Ordinance, usage of the Ancients, were excellently Inculcated by the Learned
Dr. Tillotson, in a Sermon Preached at the Lecture in Michael's Cornhill,
London. April 15, 1673. From Romans 6. 4. Therefore we are Buried with Him by
Baptism into Death, etc. Proving from thence that Dipping or Plunging was the
proper Ceremony and Rite in the Ordinance. And how naturally Arguments did
arise from that Sign in Baptism, to enforce Holiness and Mortification, the
Thing Signified thereby.

Therefore to alter this Rite from Dipping to Sprinkling, spoils quite the
Symbol, and makes it another thing. And you may as well take a Wafer Cake, or
a whole Loaf to represent Christ's broken Body, as sprinkling a little Water to
represent or figure out, his and our Death, Burial, and Resurrection by. And
how comes it to pass that many are so exactly curious, about that other
Ordinance of the Supper, so as to make the gesture of Kneeling a ground of
Separation; and yet to be so Negligent and Inconsiderate in this? And if it be
Evil in Papists not to break Bread, nor to Eat, but to lift up, show, and
Swallow down whole the Host; when Christ did break Bread, and bade eat it; then
it necessarily follows that it is as Evil when He bids Baptize, not to do it,
but to Rantize; and instead of Baptizing into the Name of Christ, Dead and
Risen, to Water him that has no Understanding thereof: So that when the
Minister says, I Baptize thee, to an Infant, and does no more, he speaks
that which is not true, and deceives those that take it at his Word for
Christian Baptism.

So that thus then we have distinctly and plainly proved you to be defective
both in respect of the Internal, and External Constituent parts of this great
Ordinance; that is both in Matter and Form; both which are Essentially
requisite to the true Constitution or Being of it: by which it is manifest,
that Infants Baptism is a mere Nullity, and that which Christ will not own. And
if it be said, that the right Words of Baptism were used, it being done in the
Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. We Answer, that so there was also in
Baptizing of Bells, and Churches; which yet in your own Judgment is so far from
making it a right Ordinance, the true Subject being wanting, that it is no less
than a great Profanation thereof, and a miserable taking the Name of God in
vain. And therefore certainly Jesus Christ one Day will discover that he takes
it not kindly at the Hands of his Professed Friends, that of their own Heads,
and without his Warrant, upon a Presumptuous Supposition of unwritten
Indulgence, having taken it upon them to alter the Subject, as well as the
manner of the Administration of an Ordinance so Sacred and Venerable as Baptism
is.

As for the Cavils of unseemliness, and hazarding of Health to the weak, in the
way of our present Practice; as they are the Fruits of Carnal Wisdom and
Unbelief; so it is no other than to reproach the Wisdom of Christ that so
Ordained it; telling us (however the World may call it undecent) yet that thus
it becomes us, as it did himself, to fulfill all Righteousness. And as they
that have or shall see the Decency of the Practice, will find Cause
sufficiently to Vindicate it from the Reproach of Unseemliness, and be able to
convince Gainsayers of their Unchristian Slauders in that Respect: So as for
the hazarding of Health to the Weak; the constant, and known Experience of
Thousands, does amply refute it as a groundless Suggestion.

THE THIRD PART.
Containing some Animadversions on Mr. Sidenham 's Treatise of Baptism; wherein
that of Infants is further Disproved. Together with some further Reflections on
Mr. Allen 's forementioned Discourse to the same Purpose. Whereunto is Annexed
an Answer at large, unto Mr. Baxter 's chief Argument for the Church Membership
of Infants, from the Nature of the Covenant made with Israel, in the Land of
Moab, Deuteronomy. 29. where Children are Represented as Fellow-Covenanters with their
Parents; which (says he) was a Covenant of Grace, or Gospel Covenant; And
therefore neither it, nor the Church Membership of Infants which was built
thereon, Repealed.

SECT. I.
WE shall begin with Mr. Sidenham's Treatise. And First, Whereas Mr. Sidenham
pretending to Answer that Argument of ours. That there is no express Command,
nor any positive Example in all the New Testament, concerning the Baptism of
Infants. For the Refutation thereof, He tells us, That this Argument is built
on this false Principle; That no direct Consequences from Scripture are
Mandatory, and so obliging and of Divine Authority. Whereas we affirm no such
thing, but only say; That in all Positive or Instituted Worship, such as
Baptism is, which has no other Rule nor Reason, than the mere will of the
Lawgiver, there must be either an express Command, or an express Example to
enforce it. In all other Respects we justly allow such proper Consequences as
are deducible from the Scriptures, for the enforcing of Duty, or for the
Comfort of God's People: For therefore is Preaching, Expounding, and Searching
the Scripture appointed unto us. But as it would have been a Sin for Abraham,
upon bare Consequences only, and without an express Warrant, to have
Circumcised his Children: So it would be no less to us, without the same Divine
Warrant, in respect of Baptism. And therefore Mr. Sidenham does not well to
say; That we may as well argue, That because Abraham was Circumcised when 99
Years old; Therefore old Persons are to be Circumcised, and none else: As
because grown Persons. were Baptized, therefore not Infants. Whereas he knew,
Abraham had an express Command, as for the Circumcision of himself, so for his
Infants also: Which is that which we justly affirm to be wanting under the
Gospel, in respect of Baptism.

SECT. II.
1. BUT then Mr. Sidenham does also tell us; That it is to be considered, that
there is nothing in all the New Testament against the Baptizing of Infants; no
hint from any express Word dropped from Christ, or his Apostles, nor any Phrase,
which does forbid such an Act. p. 1. And this Argument, both he and others do
lay very much stress upon. But then Mr. Sidenham should have considered; That
it is the Opinion of diverse able and godly Divines: That what is not commanded
in the Worship of God, is forbidden: And that every Affirmative command of
Christ, includes a Negative. For (says Tertullian) This is a certain Rule; if
it be said it is lawful, because the Scripture does not forbid it; It may
equally be Retorted; It is therefore not lawful, because the Scripture does not
command it. And herein therefore consisted the Sin of Nadab and Abihu, Lev. 10.
who were destroyed for offering strange Fire, which God had not Commanded. They
might have said, Lord it is true, Thou have not commanded this strange Fire: But
as thou have not Commanded it; so neither have thou Forbidden it. And by the
same Reason might Abraham have Circumcised his Children on the seventh day, as
well as on the eighth; because God had not forbidden it. For though God had
commanded it to be done on the eighth day; yet he had no where expressly
forbidden the seventh. But since the eighth day was expressly appointed, and not
the seventh, though the seventh was no where expressly forbidden; therefore
Abraham was bound to the former, and not to the latter; and it would have been
his Sin to have varied from the Rule prescribed him. In like manner we say; The
Baptism of Believers is expressly commanded; That of Infants is not commanded;
and therefore though it be not forbidden, yet since it is not commanded, it
would be our Sin to practice it. And so in the Passover: Whereas God commanded
a Lamb, a Male of the first year to be eaten; they might as well have made use
of an Ewe, or a Ram of the second or third Year, because not forbidden; no
express Word of God had forbidden it. So when David and the People of Israel
had made a new Cart for the Carriage of the Ark, which was to have been born on
the Priests Shoulders only; and when God smote Vzzah for holding the Ark, they
might as well have Pleaded, that neither of these was expressly forbidden: But
yet nevertheless, For this Cause the Lord made a Breach upon them, for that
they did not seek him after the due order that he had expressly appointed, 1 Chronicles. 15. 13.

2. We find no where in all the Scriptures; That ever any express Word dropped
from Christ or his Apostles, to the Prohibiting or Forbidding of Crucifixes,
Beads, Altars, Praying to Saints, Pictures in Churches, Pilgrimages. Which
things are still in use among Papists; but disowned by Protestants, because not
commanded, though not expressly forbidden. The like may be said concerning
Bowing at the Name of Jesus; the Cross in Baptism; Surplices in Preaching;
Kneeling at the Sacrament; set Forms of Prayer. In respect of which it is no
proper Argument; that therefore these things are lawful to be used in the
Divine Service, because not forbidden; For as they are not forbidden, so
neither are they commanded: Which is the very Argument made use of by the
Generality of Dissenters, for their Justification, in Opposition to Prelatical
Encroachments. And therefore thou art Inexcusable O Man! For wherein thou
Judge another, thou Condemnest thy self, Romans 2. 1. There is no express Word
of God against the Communicating of Infants in the Lord's Supper; And yet you
your selves do not therefore count it lawful to admit them to that Ordinance,
without an express Word to that purpose. And lastly, Bells are not expressly
forbidden to be Baptized; and yet we do not reckon that a sufficient Argument
for such a Practice. And whereas it is Objected as to this; That Bells are not
Subjectum Capax: A fit or capable Subject for such an Ordinance, we would then
ask, wherein lies their Incapacity? Cannot a Minister sprinkle a little Water
upon a Bell, and use the Words of the Institution in as solemn a manner as he
does when he Baptizes a Child? Or are they incapable for want of an
Institution? We say the same of Infants. And if you say; they are not capable
of the uses and ends of Baptism, as Men are; We Answer, If God had pleased, He
could have made them by an Institution, capable of some sacred Usefulness; yea,
capable of Relative Holiness, as well as Aaron's Bell: Or the Bells mentioned,
Zech. 14. 20. upon which it was written; Holiness to the Lord. But it is well
known, there are those in the World, who think themselves as wise as others,
that judge Bells capable Subjects of Baptism, and have done so diverse Ages.

3. Thus you see what Absurdities follow this Position, That those things are
lawful in God's Worship, which are not forbidden by any express Word, dropped
from Christ or his Apostles. But surely God is more jealous of his Honor, and
tender of his Worship, than to leave it to Our Pleasure. And that God has in
all Ages testified his dislike, yea, Abhorrence of Will Worship, and that for
this very Reason, because he has not Commanded it, is too evident to be
denied. For this cause God threatens Judgments upon his People of Old. Ezekiel.
43. 8. They have set their Thresholds by my Threshold, and their Posts by my
Post; wherefore I have Consumed them in mine Anger. Wherein we cannot but
observe, that God discovers his severe displeasure against them, not for
neglecting any part of his Worship that he had Commanded them: But for their
Presumption in adding something thereto, which he had not Commanded them.

4. And indeed Will Worship must needs be a great Sin, when the same Person who
is to perform the Obedience, shall dare to appoint the Laws; Implying a
peremptory Purpose of no further Observance, than may consist with the
Allowance of his own Judgment: Whereas true Obedience must be grounded on the
Majesty of that Power that Commands; not on the Judgment of the Subject, or
Benefit of the Precept proposed. Divine Laws, such as are the Positive
Institutions concerning God's Worship, require Obedience not so much from the
Quality of the things commanded, as from the Authority of him that commands
them. We are all Servants of God; and Servants are but living Instruments,
whose Property is to be governed by the Will of those in whose Pessession they
are. Will Worship and Superstition, well they may flatter God; they cannot
please him. He that requires us to deny our selves in his Service, does therein
teach us, that his Commands stand rather in fear than in need of us; In fear of
our Boldness, lest we abuse them; not in need of our Judgment to Polish or
Alter them. The Conquest of an Enemy without the Command of the General, cost a
Roman Gentleman his Life, though his own Father were the Judge. So the
over-wise Industry of the Architect, in bringing not the same, but as he
thought, a fitter piece of Timber than he was commanded to the Roman Consul,
was rewarded with nothing but a Bundle of Rods. So jealous and displeased are
even men themselves, to have their Laws undervalued by the private Judgments of
those who rather Interpret than Obey them. Much more Impious then will it be
for us, to mix Humane Inventions, and Appointments of our own, with the
Institutions of God, and to Impose them as Divine Duties, with a necessity of
Obedience; whilst by that means, we take Christ's Divine Prerogative out of his
Hands, and make our selves joint Authors of his Ordinances, or rather the
Destroyers of them: For to practice an Ordinance otherwise than Christ has
Instituted, is not to honor Christ's Appointments; but an Idol of our own
making. Now this the Apostles durst not do. They tell us, that they declared
the Counsel of God, but nothing else. And Paul tells the Corinthians, he
delivered nothing unto them, but what he had received from the Lord, 1 Cor. 11.
23. And sure he did not receive Insants Baptism from the Lord: For he never
declares it to them.

5. This therefore should be a Boundary to all Christ's Ministers, that they
deliver nothing to the People, but what they have recieved from the Lord. That
Faith that was once delivered to the Saints, must be Preached and contended
for, but nothing else. And if Christ's Ministers have not received Infants
Baptism from the Lord; and if they cannot prove that it was once delivered to
the Saints, it is not to be Preached. As for all humane Mixtures in God's
Worship, they are useful only for these two purposes, either to slacken and
abate something that is Excessive, or to supply something that is Deficient.
And so all Heterogenious Mixtures do plainly intimate, either a Vitiousness to
be Corrected, or a Defect to be Supplied. Now it were a great Impiety to charge
either of these upon the pure and perfect Word of God; and by Consequence to
use Deceit, by Adulterating of it, either by such Glosses, as diminish and take
away the force of it; or by the Addition of Humane Traditions, as may argue any
defect. So that to stamp any thing of a Humane Original, with a Divine
Character, and obtrude it upon the Consciences of Men; to take any dead Child
of ours, as the Harlot did, and lay it in the Bosom of the Scripture, and
Father it upon God; to build any Structure of ours in the Road to Heaven, and
to stop up the Way; is one of the greatest Presumptions that the Pride of Man
can aspire unto. To Erect a Throne in the Consciences of his Fellow Creatures,
and to counterfeit the great Seal of Heaven, for the countenancing of his
Forgeries, is a Sin most severely provided against by God, with special
Prohibition and Threatenings. See Deuteronomy. 12. 32. What thing soever I Command you,
observe to do it; Thou shall not add thereunto, nor diminish from it. Deuteronomy. 18.
20. The Prophet that shall speak a Word in my Name that I have not Commanded,
even that Prophet shall die. Prove. 30. 6. Add not unto his Words, lest he
Reprove thee, and thou be found a Liar.

6. And yet further to demonstrate, That Will Worship is a Sin of no small
Magnitude, consider the following Particulars.

First. It clearly proceeds as the Fruit of Pride. Men Love to have something
of their own in God's Worship. They are not content with what the Infinite Wise
God commands them; but will Presumptiously be adding something of their own
thereto. The Second Commandment shows that Man is prone to be meddling and
making something in Worship, till he marres all. Israel provoked God with their
Inventions. Psalm. 106. 29.

Secondly. Will Worship is a Sin greatly displeasing to God: For God is not
pleased with any thing in Worship which is not his own: Nay the contrary is
that which he has signified to be greatly provoking to him. In this Respect,
it is not the Work of Men's Hands, nor their Heads that can be at all Acceptable
unto God. That which pleases God must come from God. what he Appoints he
Approves, and nothing else.

Thirdly. Will Worship, and Mixtures of Men's Inventions with Gods Pure
Ordinances, are the great Canons that batter Cities, and the Gunpowder that
blows them up. Those bring the Lord of Hosts to War against them. It was the
Calves that wounded Israel, and laid their Cities waste. H^sea 10. 5. The
Inhabitants of Samaria shall fear because of the Calves of Bethaven. It Is
highly probable, Jeroboam might plead that he kept still to the Articles of
Faith, and Fundamentals of Religion, worshipping with Reverence the God of his
Fathers: Making Alterations in things merely Ceremonial, whereof no Express Law
forbidding; and being variable as time, place, and person gave occasion. But
however, he might mince the Matter, as others do in like Circumstances; yet God
being a Jealous God, would not admit such Innovation, and Varying from his pure
Worship, but Rejects it. And in particular, he is Rebuked, For Offering upon
the Altar which he had made in Bethel the 15th. day of the 8th. month; even in
the Month which he had devised of his own Heart. 1 Kings 12. 33. So Isa. 24. 5,
6. Because they have transgressed the Laws, and changed the Ordinance,
therefore has the Curse devoured the Earth, and they that dwell therein are
desolate; therefore the Inhabitants of the Earth are burned and few Men left.

Fourthly. Will Worship Grieves God. Ezekiel. 6. 9. I am broken with their Whorish
Heart. Their Superstitious and Corrupt Mixtures did not simply displease God;
but Oppressed, Afflicted, and Broke his Heart. Great Injuries enter deep, and
eat up the Spirits of any they are done unto. And what greater wrong can be
done unto God, than to Invent and Impose that he never commanded in the Matters
of his Worship? Yea it draws away the Heart of Men from God, and therefore they
are said to go a Whoring from God by their Inventons.

Fifthly. Will Worship is a Work of Darkness, Ezekiel. 8. 12. See what the
Ancients of the House of Israel are doing in the dark.

Sixthly. Will Worship is that which God will not Honor with his presence.
Neither Christ nor the Angels will be present at it. Teach them (says Christ)
to Observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you, and lo I am with you
always. If we step out of Christ's way, and go a whoring after our own Devices;
neither can we groundedly expect the blessing of Christ's Preserce.

Seventhly, and Lastly. Will Worship, such as Infants Baptism is, having no
Institution in the Word of God; is not only Evil in its self, but stands
aggravated with this Circumstance, that it makes void the Commandment of God:
For Will Worship does usually oppose, or justle out some part of God's true
Worship; as Infants Baptism does that of Believers. And so Christ told the
Pharisees, upon another like Occasion; That they made void the Commandments of
God by their Tradition.

SECT. III.
1. WHereas Mr. Sidenham affirms; that the Covenant made with Abraham, Genesis 17.
7, 8, 9. was a pure Gospel Covenant, to which the Seal of Circumcision was
annexed. From hence he draws this Inference. That if that Covenant were a pure
Gospel Covenant, reaching Gentile Believers, and their Children, as well as
Abraham and his; then we cannot be denied the External Sign and Seal of the
same Covenant: For (says he) though the Outward Signs may be changed; yet
there is no Change of the Privileges, if the Covenant Remain entire. p. 9, 10.

2. We Answer; First, There is no Evidence in all the New Testament of any Seal
which God intended should be annexed unto the Gospel Covenant, but that of the
Holy Spirit only. Much less are we left at Liberty to put what Mark, Sign, or
Cognizance, we please, upon our Infant Seed; under the Notion of an Ordinance
of Christ, or as a Gospel Seal, without his Special Direction and Appointment.

3. Secondly. It cannot be denied, but that Circumcision which was at first the
Sign of the Covenant made with Abraham, and which was afterward annexed to the
Covenant made at Sinai, is now Abolished. And it is as plain, that the
Covenant, both the one and the other, which Circumcision was Annexed unto; was
a Bondage Covenant: For so the Apostle assures us Gal. 4. 24. So likewise Gal.
5. 1, 2, 3. Stand fast therefore in the Liberty. wherewith Christ has made us
free, and be not entangled again with the Yoke of Bondage. Behold, I Paul say
unto you, that if ye be Circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing: For I
testify again to every Man that is Circumcised, that he is a debtour to do the
whole Law. Now Circumcision being Abolished, and the Covenants also, whereunto
it was Annexed, Heb. 8. 7. 13. there can be no just Inference drawn from the
manner of God's dealing with them, to conclude that thus it must be now; it
being an undue Supposition to conceive that the Proposition between Abraham and
his Fleshly Seed, in the time when Circumcision was in date, should be the same
to Abraham in the Spirit, which is Christ, and the Carnal Seed of every
Believer, in that Season, when Circumcision is out of date.

Thirdly. Though it is Evident, that the Church of the Jews and Gentiles, in
Respect of the Inward and Spititual part of either, are both the same, without
any Variation, as is also the Covenant of Grace, on which both are founded; yet
it does not therefore follow, that there is no Variation or Change in Respect
of External Administrations: It being Evident, that the External Privileges
the Jews once boasted of are now Repealed; their former Pretentions to
Church-Ordinances upon the Account of their Birth-Priviledge, being now broken
down. Else, why does John the Baptist tell them as he does. Mat. 3. 8, 9. Think
not to say within your selves, we have Abraham to our Father. They had Abraham
to their Father, as much now as before: But now it was too late for them to use
that Plea any longer: And there was good Reason why. For now (says he) the Axe
is laid at the Root of the Trees: Every Tree therefore that brings not forth
good Fruit must be hewn down. Now the Axe is laid, etc. It seems then that the
Axe was not laid at the Root of the Trees till now: But now the Axe must do its
Work of that Kind; and so must the Gospel Fan also, at an other-guess Rate than
formerly they had Experienced; inasmuch, as Jesus Christ was now Resolved
thoroughly to purge his Floor, and to gather the Wheat, only into his Garner the
Church. So that from hence it plainly appears, that though the Church for the
inward Substance of it, is still the same that ever it was; yet as the Signs
are changed, so there is as manifest a Change, in Respect of the External
Privileges, belonging to the one and the other of them.

SECT. IV.
1. MR. Sidenham does indeed tell us; That the forementioned Scripture, Mat. 3.
7, 8, 9. Concerns only the Adult, or Men at Age; the Scribes and Pharisees, who
were degenerated from Abraham 's Faith, a Generation of Vipers: And therefore
rejected by John when they Desired to be Baptized of him. So that (says he)
John did not Refuse them because Abraham was their Father; or upon that Account
that Abraham's Seed had no Right to the Promise; But only as pretending Abraham
to be their Father, when they walked contrary to the Principles of Abraham's
Faith.

2. For the clearing of which, there are 3 Questions to be demanded.

First. Why does Mr. Sidenham say, that John did not Refuse them, because
Abraham was their Father? Who ever affirmed, that John refused them, because
Abraham was their Father? But as John did not Refuse them on that Score; so it
is as evident, that neither would he now Receive them on that bottom. It cannot
be denied, but that at the command of God, this was the ground of their
Admission before, because Abraham was their Father; and this they still
insisted on: But now (says he) Think not to say within your selves, we have
Abraham to our Father, etc. whereby he plainly lets them know, that that Plea
would no longer avail them on that Account.

Secondly, Why does Mr. Sidenham say, that John did not refuse them, upon that
Account that Abraham's Seed had no right to the Promise? We know of none that
so affirm: But this we say; That as their Interest in the Promise, was not the
Adequate, formal, or proper Reason of the Circumcising of them; (for Ishmael
and others were to be Circumcised, to whom none of the Promises in Abraham's
Covenant did belong: as is plain from Genesis 17. 21, 23. whereby it is evident,
that the true Reason why any were Circumcised, was the Command, not Interest in
the Promise) The like we say in respect of Baptism.

Thirdly, Why does Mr. Sidenham say, That John refused them, because they only
pretended Abraham to be their Father? For were they not Abraham's Natural
Offspring now, as much as ever? And was not that the ground of their Admission
formerly? We do not say, they were Abraham's Offspring in a Spiritual sense,
so as to walk in the steps of their Father Ahraham: For that was not the Ground
of their Admission formerly; but the ground of their Admission then, was merely
by virtue of the Command of God, as they were Abraham's Natural Seed. The
Question between us therefore, is only this; Whether because Abraham's Natural
Offspring, barely as such, were by the Express Command of God, admitted to
Circumcision; Therefore without the like Command; so must ours to Baptism?

3. It Is true Mr. Sidenham tells us; That John rejected the Scribes and
Pharisees from Baptism: Because they only pretended Abraham to be their Father;
when they walked contrary to the steps of Abraham 's Faith. But then why were
not such as these rejected before? For certain it is, none were rejected from
Circumcision, how vile, or profane soever. There was then no Faith nor
Repentance, nor Fruits meet for Repentance, at all required of any to be
admitted into the Jewish Church; whether they were Children, or Men at Age; It
was enough in that respect, barely to be of Abraham's Seed, or Family; though
only as Servants born in his House, or Strangers bought with Money; without any
other Consideration. But now not so. Now says John, You must bring forth
Fruits meet for Repentance, if you expect to be Baptized with the Baptism of
Repentance. For to this purpose he bespeaks them. Verse 10. And now also,
(says he) is the Axe laid unto the Root of the Trees; therefore every Tree
that brings not forth good Fruit, is hewn down. Plainly intimating, that
their Birth Privilege was now to be pulled up by the Roots; And God would no
longer take it as he had in Times past; since now nothing short of their Actual
Faithfulness in the Paths of Righteousness would serve the turn. A clear
Argument that the External Administration of the Covenant, or the Grounds of
Admission to the Privilege of External Church Membership, are now quite
altered, to what they were in Abraham's Time.

4. And indeed, for this very Reason is it, that the Natural Posterity of
Abraham, are to this day rejected and Excluded from any Participation of
Gospel Church Ordinanees; as it is apparent they have been for many
Generations; whereby it is evident, that the Birth-Priviledge, they formerly so
much insisted on, and gloried in, is now at an end, and the Date thereof
expired. And certain it is, that not only are those at Age rejected, but their
Children also upon the same Ground; viz. for want of that Actual Faith and
Fruitfulness, which the Gospel now requires. For otherwise it cannot be denied,
but that both Parents and Children also, have as fair a Title to Abraham their
Father, as any of their Progenitors ever had: But we see this Birth Privilege
of theirs, though it stood them instead, as to their Admission into the Legal
Church, their Unbelief and Vnfruitfulness notwithstanding; yet it avails them
not under this more pure and Refined Administration of the Gospel: But both
Parents and Children also, are now broken off, and have no right upon the
former Terms only, of standing any longer as Members of the Visible Church.

. 5. And clear it is, that even you your selves would be apt enough to reject
an Infant begotten of Jewish Parents from Christian Baptism, until capable of
making an Actual Profession of the Christian Faith. And for the same reason you
ought as well to refuse those born of Christian Parents, 'till capable of
making the same Profession: Because in respect of Parentage or Natural Descent,
the Jewish Infants have as much to plead as ours, and it may be more; since
they are descended from Believing Abraham; who is called the Father of the
Faithful, or the Father of all them that Believe: Which is more than any
besides can pretend unto.

SECT. V.
. 1. AS for Mr. Sidenham's Argument for Infants Baptism from Mat. 19. 13. 14.
We deny not, but do believe that Jesus Christ has a most compassionate regard
to Children and little Infants; and it is our duty therefore to bring them to
him, by Prayer and Supplication for them. But yet notwithstanding this, we dare
not bring them to such a Gospel Ordinance as Baptism is, unless Christ had
expressly Appointed, and called them to it; or signified his Pleasure that this
Way they should have come unto him. Mr. Sidenham tells indeed, That the Reason
why the Disciples forbad and rebuked those that brought those Children unto
Christ. could not be out of any Cruelty to Infants, or that they had no Bowels
for them, or Affections to them. But (says he) It must be from some such
Principle which those of a contrary Judgment take up; That they were not
capable, and were first to be Taught; That only grown Men, and Professors of
Faith, were fit for Ordinances: And therefore they rebuked or chod them, and
forbade them to do so any more: As if they had said; What have we to do with
Children as to outward Ordinances? They are not capable; they cannot Profess
their Faith; and we must have Persons able to hold Forth Christ's Gospel, which
must be the visible Subjects of Christ's Kingdom.

2. But then Mr. Sidenham contradicts himself, and spoils all again afterward;
when he tells us, That whereas Christ took up those Infants in his Arms, and
laid his Hands upon them; it cannot be understood, but in one of these 3
Senses; either First, in order to the Cure of Diseases by a Miraculous Power.
Secondly, for Consecration of any to any Divine Work and Service; or Thirdly,
for Confirmation after Baptism. And to this purpose (says he) may we apply
Christ's Act to these Infants, to confirm the Promise solemnly after Baptism.
For (says he) It was most generally used after Baptism; and presupposes
baptism to Precede. And (says he) Let any that differ from us, show any where
in the Gospel, when Christ laid his Hands upon any Person, in this latter
Sense, Unbaptized. Wherein he does expressly take it for granted, or at least he
does strongly suppose, that these Infants had been already Baptized; and that
this Act of Christ, was for their Confirmation after Baptism. Now if those
Infants had been already Baptized, it must have been Administered to them,
either by Christ himself, or his Disciples; Not by Christ himself, who as Mr.
Sidenham grants, Baptized no^e. And if they had been already Baptized by the
Disciples, (which must be by virtue of some Special Order, or Commission from
Christ) Then how does this agree with what Mr. Sidenham had said before? When
he tells us, p. 91. That the reason why the Disciples forbad and rebuked those
that brought these Children unto Christ, must needs be from some such Principle
which those of a contrary Judgment take up; that they were not capable, and
were first to be Taught; that only grown Men, and Professors of Faith were fit
for Ordinances. For if they had been already Baptized upon Christ's special
Order to that purpose to them; (which must be supposed if they had been
Baptized at all) there had been then no room for such Scruples as these;
Neither is it any way likely, that they would have at all Rebuked those that
brought them; but rather have encouraged them so to do, and have been helpful
themselves to have Introduced them into Christ's Presence, in order to the
obtaining his Benediction on them, after the Administration of so Solemn an
Ordinance.

. 3. So that this does clearly demonstrate to us, That at least, these little
Children were not then Baptized; nor indeed can this Scripture be intended at
all as a Rule unto us to that purpose: where nothing of Baptism is at all
mentioned, or can at all rationally be Supposed to have been Practiced, either
by Christ or his Disciples upon this Occasion. That they had not been Baptized
by Christ himself, is evident from the very Letter of the Text; He Himself
Baptizing not: And that they had not been Baptized by the Disciples is also as
plain: for otherwise they had not expressed the unwillingness they did that
such should be brought unto Christ for their Confirmation after Baptism; which
as we see Mr. Sidenham does so ungroundedly suppose had been already
Administered unto them. Let us then bring our Infants to Christ in the way that
himself has appointed: But let us not of our own Heads Administer such an
Ordinance as Baptism to them, without his special Warrant; lest we incur the
guilt of Will Worship; and lest he say unto us at leao, as he did unto the Jews
upon another Account; Who has required these things at your Hands?

But whereas Mr. Sidenham tells us, p. 99. That as for grown visible
Professors, they are but probable Members themselves; and yet must we with
scorn, poor probable Disciples our selves, deny a little Water to Infants.

. 4. To this we Answer; We do not with scorn deny a little Water to Infants, or
with scorn reject them from Christian Baptism; but it is the mere Conscience of
our Duty and Allegiance to Christ, that makes us refrain without his special
Warrant so to do; as being afraid of Profaning so Sacred an Institution as
Baptism is, by misapplying it to a wrong Subject. And whereas Mr. Sidenham
calls grown, visible Professors, but probable Members; We acknowledge that it is
at best but a Judgment of Probability or Charity, that we can at all pretend
unto in our admission of any such to Baptism: But then it cannot be denied, but
that we are upon the surer ground when according to Christ's Rule we admit only
grown visible Professors thereto, who besides that Birth Privilege which you
so much insist upon (which they may equally pretend unto as well as I^fa^ts)
are capable of making also a verbal Profession of their Love to Christ, with an
answerable Conversation; So that it cannot be denied but that we have a greater
ground of hope that unto such belongs the Kingdom of God, who have this
double Advantage, than we can have in respect of Infants, who have only a
pretended Birth Privilege to be insisting on; and concerning whom there is no
Word of God that gives the least Warrant for their admission to Baptism upon
that Account: For however some of them may belong to the Election of Grace; and
though our Savior does assure us, that of such is the Kingdom of God; yet this
is no sufficient ground to Administer Baptism to them, 'till capable of making
an answerable Profession, as the Gospel directs. And therefore we do not refuse
to Baptize them from a Principle of Scorn, as Mr. Sidenham suggesteth, but
because we dare not take the Holy and Dreadful Name of God in vain, as it uses
to be by those who presume to sprinkle Water upon the Face of an Infant, in the
Name of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, without his special Direction or
Appointment, in that respect. For as we have seen that the present Scripture
does not prove it; So neither does any other that we can meet with, give any
Warrant or Countenance at all unto such a Practice.

SECT. VI.
. 1. MR. Sidenham Arguing from the Institution. Mat. 28. 19. tells us, p. 128,
129, 130. That if that place be the Prime Institution of Baptizing (from which
place, we Exclude Infants, where Christ uses such universal and Comprehensive
Expressions) We shall desire (says he) but to deal with them on their ground,
and the same Text will Serve to prove our Positions, more demonstratively than
theirs. And this Text (says he) shows that Christ gave Commission to the
Apostles and Ministers to Preach and Baptize, but in what order to do it; or
what should be required, or the qualification of the Subject, as absolutely
Necessary, is not at all discovered in this Scripture. They must look for
another Text to Exclude Infants, besides this; Ele give up their Confidence.
Either (says he) this place is the full and Exact Rule, or Institution of
Baptizing or it is not: If they say it is; then it would discribe the Persons
and the manner; The matter and the form of Baptizing, and that in the usual
Phrase with other Scriptures: But here is only a General Commission to two
great Acts, viz. To Preach, Teach and Baptize. And we may say in the same
place; That whoever are outwardly Taught, or do but hear the Gospel (though
they walk never so contrary) must be Baptized: For the Commission is, Teach and
Baptize. Nothing of the Parties Entertainment of it is mentioned in this 28
Mat. nor of the qualification of the Subject, with any distinguishing
Character. If they say, This does not hold forth all the Institutions in every
particular (as they must grant) then we may compare other Scriptures with this,
to make out the full Institution; as these (...) Infants are mentioned so much
Gracious Consideration^, as has been formerly expressed.

. To this we Reply; That notwithstanding all the Confidence which Mr. Sidenham
here expresses; both the Qualification of the Subjects of Baptism, as also the
manner or form of Baptizing, are sufficiently set forth unto us in the present
Institution: For;

First, If we enquire after the Subject; It is plain by this Commission that
none are to be Baptized, but such as are Taught, so as to be Discipled into the
true Faith and Profession of Christianity. Go Teach all Nations, Baptizing
them, etc. Infants being incapable of being thus Taught, or Disciped; they are
therefore Excluded: But all others that so hear the Gospel, as to understand
it, Believe it, and be Discipled by it, are according to this Commission to be
Baptized. But whereas Mr. Sidenham tells us, That whosoever are outwardly
Taught, or do but hear the Gospel (though they walk never so contrary) must be
Baptized, inasmuch as in the Commission. Mat. 28. nothing of the Parties
entertainment of it is there mentioned. With what shadow of Truth could Mr.
Sidenham utter such a Sentence? When he could not but know; that as according
to that very Institution, Mat. 28. Such as are Discipled by the Preaching of
the Gospel are there appointed to be Baptized. Go Teach all Nations, etc. That
is, as your selves have acknowledged, Disciple all Nations, Baptizing them. So
in that parallel place. Mark. 16. 16. (which is but a rehearsal of the same
Commission by another of the Holy Pen Men) our Savior there tells us; He that
Believes and is Baptized shall be Saved. Plainly showing, that those that are
to be Baptized must be such, as so hear the Gospel, as to give a Believing
entertainment to it. He had said before, Go Preach the Gospel to every
Greature, And then it immediately follows, He that Believes and is Baptized
shall be Saved. And if here be not a plain notice given of the qualification of
such as are to be admitted to Baptism; Let such Judge whose Eyes are open.

Secondly; if we enquire after the manner or form of Baptizing, the very Word
it self is plainly significant of Christ's Mind and Meaning therein. Go Teach
all Nations, Baptizing them; that is, let them be dipped or plunged under Water;
which is the native Sense and signification of the Greek Word, which we
Translate Baptize, as has been already proved. So that whatever Mr. Sidenham
tells us; the Commission which Christ gave to his Apostles concerning Baptism
does afford sufficient Direction, both in respect of the qualification of the
Subject, as also in reference to the manner of the Administration thereof.

. 3. As for the rest of the Arguments made use of by Mr. Sidenham for the
support of Infants Baptism, from the Nature of the Covenant made with Abraham,
from Acts 2. 39. From Col. 2. 11, 12. From the Analogy between Circumcision and
Infants Baptism; From the Baptizing, of the several Households mentioned in the
New Testament: As also concerning the Signification and Use of the Word,
Baptism. Enough has been already said in the first and second Parts of this
Discourse for the Refutation of them, which needs not here to be repeated. Only
there are two Arguments in Mr. Allen's Treatise before mentioned, which were
then omitted; but must now be Answered.

SECT. VII.
. 1. THE first has Referrence to those several Titles of a Holy and peculiar
People, which are frequently in the Scripture given to the whole Body of the
Jewish Nation, Church and People; from whence he infers, that there is no such
difference as we affirm there is, between the Old and the New Testament
Churches. For (says he) If those terms are frequently given in the Epistles to
Church Members now, the same Epethites are frequently given to the Members of
the Jewish Church. And therefore there is no such Difference as is Imagined in
the Constitution of either of them, they being both alike Spiritual.

. 2. To this we Answer; First, If there be no difference between the Old and
New Testament Churches, in respect of the Constitution of either of them; but
that there was the same Purity, Holiness, and Spirituality, in the one, as in
the other; Then what needed, or wherein consisted that Reformation, which the
Apostle tells us was to take place in the Gospel day. Heb. 9. 8, 9, 10. The
Holy Ghost this signifying, that the way into the Holiest of all was not yet
made manifest, while as the first Tabernacle was yet standing; which was a
Figure for the time then present: In which were offered both Gifts and
Sacrifices that could not make him that did the Service perfect; as pertaining
to the Conscience; which stood only in Meats and Drinks, and diverse Washings,
and Carnal Ordinances, Imposed on them until the time of Reformation. Plainly
Intimating that there were many things faulty among them, and many things
defective also, which were to be Reformed, Rectified, and Supplied, when the
Daylight of the Gospel was to break upon them. And upon this account, not only
does the Spirit of God find fault with the Covenant it self which they were
then under, which therefore was now to be done away, and a new One to take
place. Heb. 8. 7, 8, 13. But for this Reason also was the Seed to be changed.
The Carnal Seed being rejected, and only the Spiritual Seed of Abraham admitted
as Members of the Gopsel Church. A plain notice of which Change is given by
John the Baptist, the Harbinger of the Gospel Dispensation. Mat. 3. 7, 8, 9,
10. Think not (says he) to say within your selves, we have Abraham to our
Father; For I say unto you, that GOD is able even of these Stones to raise up
Children unto Abraham. And now also the Axe is laid unto the Root of the Trees;
therefore every Tree that brings not forth good Fruit, is hewn down. Plainly
requiring a personal and actual Fruitfulness in all the Members of this new
Church state; which is exclusive not only of all those that are such as the
Pharisees and Sadduces were, whom he was now speaking to, who were a Generation
of Vipers, and were actually debauched in their Conversations; but of all such
also, as were either neglective, or are incapable (as is the Case of Infants)
of actual Fruitfulness in the Paths of Righteousness.

. 3. So that when you tell us that the Legal and Gospel Church are alike
Spiritual: We say not; For it is plain there was no such Inquisition concerning
the good or bad qualities, the Fruitfulness, or Unfruitfulness of the Members
of the former Church, in (...) to Admission thereinto. It was enough barely to
be of Abraham's Seed or Family to be so esteemed: But now says John, the Axe
is laid unto the Root of the Trees; And they must all be hewn down under the
Gospel, that have nothing else to pretend unto but that of a Godly Parentage;
which plainly excludes Infants, as well as all other unfruitful Branches from
the Gospel Church. And to this same purpose is it that he does further assure
them: ver. 12. That Jesus Christ was now resolved with the Gospel Fan to Purge
thoroghly the Floor of the Gospel Church; and to gather the Wheat into His
Garner. Under the Law, and before also, even in Abrahmam's time, the Chaff and
the Wheat remained together unsevered; but now the Fan must go to Work. We read
of no such Fanning Work in the former Church state. And to what purpose is it
else that Christ told the Woman of Samaria, as he does. Jo. 4. 23. The Hour
comes, and now is, when the true Worshippers shall Worship the Father in
Spirit and in Truth: For the Father seeks such to Worship Him? Which plainly
shows that God expects now greater Purity, Exactness, and Spirituality, in
such as were to approach His Presence in the Celebration of Gospel Worship. And
indeed of this the whole fifth of Mat. is a sufficient and convincing Proof,
giving clear evidence concerning the refinedness and spirituality of the Gospel
Administration above and beyond that of the Law. For then (says our Savior)
it was thus and thus; but I am come to tell you a New Doctrine, and do call you
up to greater Purity and Strictness.

4. Secondly, We Answer, That that Holiness which was ascribed unto the whole
Body of the Jewish Nation, was a Typical, Ceremonial Holiness; and was no other
than was ascribed to the whole Land, City, Temple, Altar, and diverse other
things, and is therefore now Abolished For if all things under the Law were but
a Figure and Shadow of good things to come, then such was the Holiness of the
Jewish Nation and People also. Now this the Apostle in the 9th and 10th
Chapters to the Hebrews, proves at large, showing that all things under the
Law; all the Privileges of the Old Covenant, with all the Perquisites,
Dependancies, and Appurtenances thereunto belonging; are called by such Names,
as make them evidently appear to be Typical. As First, they are called a
Figure. Heb. 9. 9. Which was a Figure for the time then present. So verse 24.
For Christ is not Entered into the Holy Place made with Hands, which are the
Figures of the true. Secondly, They are called a Pattern. Heb. 9. 23. It was
necessary that the Pattern of things in the Heavens, etc. Thirdly, They are
called a Shadow. Heb. 10. 1. For the Law having a Shadow of good things to
come, and not the very Image of the things, etc. Now the Holiness of the Jewish
Nation being an Appurtenance belonging to the Law, or the Old Covenant. It was
but a Figure, Pattern, or Shadow of all good things to come, and was therefore
Typical, and is now Abolished. And if we will know what the Holiness of the
Jewish Nation did serve, to Typifie or Represent unto us; It is evident, that
as it Typified the Holiness of Christ himself; So of all Abraham's Spiritual
Seed, who are made Holy by Believing in Christ.

5. The Time of Reformation therefore, spoken of in the forementioned
Scripture. Heb. 9. 8, 9, 10. being come; wherein those Imperfect Gifts and
Sacrifices, with all those Carnal Ordinances which were for a Season Imposed on
the Jewish Nation, were to be done away; and the Gospel Church taking place in
the Room thereof: It cannot rationally be supposed, but the one does far exceed
the other, at least, in Purity and Inward Glory: For by how much Christ has
now obtained a more excellent Ministry than that of Moses; and by how much also
he is the Mediator of a better Covenant, Which is Established upon better
Promises; as the Apostle affirms. Heb. 8. 6. By so much of necessity must the
gospel Church exceed in luster, beauty, Refinedness and Spirituality, the
former Administration.

SECT. VIII.
THE Second Argument in Mr. Allen's Book, remaining to be Answered, is this;
That all Persons, and so little Children, that were of the Legal Church, must
needs, in one Respect or other, have been Persons of a Religious, or Spiritual
Consideration. And this considered (says he) I know not upon what better to
place the Visible Church Membership of Infants; or to Attribute it to, than
God's Electing* and Calling them to his People, and their Parents Dedicating
and Devoting them to God, and his Service. And the Scripture uses to reckon
little Children, as having begun to do this or that, when they are but placed
in Circumstances, that will bring them to it Actually in the Issue. And thus
the Children of the Kohathites, of a Month Old, were numbered with their
Fathers, as with them keeping the charge of the Sanctuary, when they were but
in a way of being trained up to it. And for the same Reason, little Children
were said to enter into Covenant with God when their Parents did so. Deuteronomy. 29.
11, 12

2. To this we Answer; First, By granting that it was in a Religious
Consideration, that Children were then Admitted Members of the Legal Church:
But yet it does not therefore follow, that they are to be admitted Members of
the Gospel Church; for the Reasons before rendered: The Terms of Admission into
that, being far more strict and Spiritual, than were those under the Law.

Secondly, Whereas he tells us, That the Reason of their Admission into the
Legal Church; was God's Electing, and Calling them to that Privilege. This we
also grant: But then we also say, that though the Call and Election of God, in
Reference to the Inward Substance of the Covenant of Grace, or to an Invisible
Membership in the Invisible Church, is Invariable; It does not follow, that the
Gifts and Callings of God in Reference to External Membership, are therefore
also Invariable or Irrevokable; (as is afterward by Mr. Allen Asserted; and
unto which we have already in the Second Part of this Discourse given a
sufficient Answer.) For we find by undeniable Evidence; that those External
Gifts and Privileges that the Natural Posterity of Abraham were once Invested
with, are now Rescinded, Repealed, and Repented of; and it cannot be affirmed,
that in any Religious Capacity whatsoever, they are now at all owned by God, as
his Church and People, as once they were, neither Parents nor Children: But for
the most part remain broken off, and Unchurched to this Day. And if you say,
That they and their Children being broken off, We and our Children are
Ingraffed in their Room; This is that which remains to be proved; and indeed
the contrary is manifest, as has been already with abundant Evidence
Demonstrated, in the foregoing Parts of this Discourse; since the Axe of the
Gospel is now laid unto the Root of the Trees; and every Tree that brings not
forth good Fruit, is hewn down, in respect of any further Church Privilege,
which before was Indulged unto them: which clearly cuts off the pretense of
Children unto any such Privilege under the Gospel, as well as all other
Unfruitful Branches.

Thirdly, Whereas he tells us of their Parents Dedicating and Devoting them to
God, and his Service; And that the Children of the Roathites of a Month Old,
were numbered with their Fathers, as keeping the charge of the Sanctuary: And
that for the same Reason, little Children were said to enter into Covenant with
God, when their Parents did so. Deuteronomy. 29. 11, 12. To this we Answer; That it is
indeed a very Pious and Commendable thing, for Parents to Dedicate and Devote
their Children to God, and his Service; and to this Purpose, to train them up,
as soon as they are capable in the Nurture and Admonition of the Lord. But it
does not therefore follow, that they can justly be Reputed Church Members now,
till Converted, and wrought upon by the Preaching of the Gospel unto them,
whatever they were under the Law, as has been before demonstrated.

3. And though the Kohathites of a Month Old were numbered with their Fathers,
as keeping the charge of the Sanctuary; Evident it is, that this was the proper
Work of the Kohathites, by God's special Direction in their several
Generations; and as they became to grow up to the Competency of Years, an
Actual discharge of that Duty was required of them; This being an External
Service, which by God's special Direction, was peculiarly Incumbent on all that
were of that Lineage: But what signifies this, to prove the Church Membership
of Infants under the Gospel?

4. And as little signifies that which follows, when he tells us, That for the
same Reason, little Children were said to enter into Covenant with God, when
their Parents did so, Deuteronomy. 29. 11, 12. For though it is true, thus it was under
the Law; yet this proves not the Point in dispute: For as we have already said;
That Covenant which God made with his People when he took them by the Hand to
lead them out of the Land of Egypt, because of the Faultiness of it, is now
Abolished. That Covenant, says God, they brake, they continued not it, and I
regarded them not. So that though Infants were Visible Members of the Legal
Church; yet that was by a Positive Law, and that which is now Abolished. Show
us the like now, or you say nothing.

SECT. IX.
MR. Baxter indeed tells us in his Book, called, Plain Scripture Proof of
Infants Church Membership and Baptism, p. 57, 58. That the Covenant mentioned
in the forecited Text, Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 11, 12. Where Children are Represented as
Fellow-Covenanters with their Parents, was a Covenant of Grace, or a
Gospel Covenant; and that therefore, neither it, nor the Church Membership of
Infants, (which, says he, was built thereon, or inseparably Conjunct) is
repealed. For thus runs his Argument. [My 12th Argument (says he) is from the
forementioned Text, in Deuteronomy. 29. 10, 11, 12. where all the Jews with all their
little ones, were entered into Covenant with God: From whence I argue thus; if
the Covenant which those Infants who were then Church Members, were entered into
with God, was a Covenant of Grace (or a Gospel Covenant,) then it is not
Repealed, (and consequently their Churchs*Membership is not Repealed, as being
built on the Covenant, or inseparably Conjunct.) But the said Covenant which
the Infants who were then Church Members did pass into, was a Covenant of
Grace, (as distinct from the Law which is Repealed.) Where by the way, it may
be observed, that though Mr. Baxter affirms the Covenant mentioned Deuteronomy. 29. to
be a Covenant of Grace, or a Gospel Covenant, yet he does here seem plainly to
grant, that the Law, or Sinai Covenant, was no other than a Covenant of Works,
and accordingly now Repealed. Wherein Mr. Baxter is undoubtedly in the right;
though he therein directly c^^t^adicteth Mr. Roberts his Notion, who affirms
the Law or Sinai Covenant it self, to be a Covenant of Faith in Christ Jesus
The unsoundness whereof, we shall have Occasion to discover in the following
parts of this Discourse. Therefore neither it, nor their Church Membership is
Repealed.]

So that if we can substantially prove, that the Covenant mentioned Deuteronomy. 29.
10, 11, 12. was not a Covenant of Grace, nor a Gospel-(...); but a legal
Covenant, and that which is now Repealed; from hence it will unavoidably
follow, and that according to Mr. Baxter's own Concession, that the
Church Membership of Infants (which as himself affirms, was built thereon, or
inseparably Conjunct) is also Repealed with it.

3. Now that the Covenant there mentioned (though there was Grace in it, as
there was in all the Covenants that God ever made with Men) is not a Covenant
of Grace, properly so called, whereof Christ is the Mediator; nor a Gospel,
but a Legal Covenant; is Evident; forasmuch as it is no other than a
Repetition, or Renewal of the Covenant made with that People in Horeb, or at
Mount Sinai; when God took them by the Hand to lead them out of Egypt; which
was first mentioned, Exodus 19. and that in the very Words and Terms as it is
there Expressed: That Covenant being now again solemnly Repeated, and afresh
Transacted between God and them, in Deuteronomy. 29. as is manifest by comparing Exodus
19. 4, 5. with Deuteronomy. 29. from the 1st to the 13th Verse. As also, the 24th and
25th verses of that Chapter. And accordingly, whereas in the first verse of
this 29th of Deuteronomy. We are there told, These are the Words of the Covenant,
which the Lord commanded Moses to make with the Children of Israel, in the Land
of Moab, beside the Covenant which he made with them in Horeb. Mr. Pool in his
Annotations upon this Text, paraphraseth the words thus: These are the Terms or
Conditions, upon which God has made, that is, renewed Covenant with you. The
Covenant (says he) was but one in Substance, but various in the time and
manner of its Administration: And indeed as it is Evident that it is the same
Covenant for Substance, that was first made with them in Horeb: So it is as
Evident from the words themselves in this forecited text. Deuteronomy- 29. 1. That it
was not a Covenant of Grace; properly so caled; but a Covenant of Works, or a
Legal Covenant, which God renewed with the Israelites, in the Land of Moab;
since Moses was the Mediator of it; In which respect, we are there expressly
told, that these are the words of the Covenant which the Lord commanded Moses
to make with the Children of Israel beside the Covenant he made with them in
Horeb. Whereas the Covenant of Grace, properly so called, has no other
Mediator than Christ himself. 1 Timothy 2, 5. Who is therefore said to have
Obtained a more Excellent Ministry, viz. than that of Moses; by how much also
he is the Mediator of a better Covenant, which is established upon better
Promises. Heb. 8. 6. Besides, we are expressly told. Jo. 1. 17. That the Law was
given by Moses; but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ. From whence; it
plainly follows, that the Covenant insisted on, was not a Covenant of Grace,
properly so called, not only for as much as Moses was the Mediator of it; But
also forasmuch as the grace and truth which came by Jesus Christ, is here so
plainly Contradistinguished, or opposed thereunto.

4. But that this Covenant, which by the Mediation of Moses was thus Solemnly
renewed and afresh transacted between God and them, in the land of Moab; was
plainly a Covenant of Works, or a Legal Covenant; will be yet further
undeniable, by comparing Exodus 1^, 5. with Deuteronomy. 29. 9. and both with Lev. 18.
and Romans 10. 5. For as in Exodus 19 (Where that Covenant is first mentioned
which God made with Israel, by the Mediation of Moses, in Horeb, or at Mount
Sinai; which the Apostle speaks of Heb. 8. when God took them by the hand to
lead them out of Egypt) He there tells them ver. 5. Now therefore if you will
obey my voice indeed, and keep my Covenant, then ye shall be a peculiar
treasure unto me, above all People: for all the Earth is mine. So in like
mannner, upon the same terms, and by the hand of the same Mediator, is the same
Covenant afterward renewed with them. Deuteronomy. 29. 9. Keep therefore (says God
there unto them) the words of this Covenant, and do them, that you may prosper
in all that you do. Now that both these were but two several Repetitions of the
same Covenant of Works, the Apostle plainly shows. Romans 10. 4. 5. Christ (says
he there) is the end of the Law for Righteousness to every one that believes:
For Moses describes the Righteousness of the Law, that the man which does
these things shall live by them, which he cites from Lev. 18. 5. Where the
Lord tells them, you shall therefore keep my Statutes and Judgments, which if a
man do he shall live in them. The same with Exodus 19. 5. and Deuteronomy. 29. 9. And
the same Apostle also assures us. Gal. 3. 10. that as many as are of the Works
of the Law, are under the Curse; for it is written (says he) Cursed is every
one that continues not in all things that are in the Book of the Law, to do
them.

5. Now it having been thus proved that the Covenants Mentioned in both these
forenamed Scriptures, were made by the hands of the same Mediator Moses; And
that they were both also of one and the same tenor, requiring perfect Obedience
as the Condition of Obtaining the Promised Mercy; And forasmuch as St. Paul
does so plainly assure us, that this was no other than a Covenant of Works, and
that which he Contradistinguisheth or opposes to the Righteousness of Faith,
or the Gospel Covenant, which he afterward speaks of ver. 6, 7, 8, 9. of the
same 10th to the Romans. From hence it plainly follows, That the formentioned
Covenants, both that in Deuteronomy. 29. as well as that in Exodus 19. (which were but
two several Repetitions of the same Covenant of Works;) are now Repealed, and
done away in Christ: For so he does plainly assure us. Heb. 8. 8, 9, 13. where
he tells us; That if that first Covenant had been faultless, then no place
should have been sought for the second: For finding Fault with them, he says,
Behold the days come says the Lord, when I will make a New Covenant with the
House of Israel, and the House of Judah; not according to the Covenant that I
made with their Fathers, in the Day when I took them by the Hand, to lead them
out of the Land of Egypt, because they continued not in my Covenant, and I
regarded them not. And verse 13: In that he says, a New Covenant he has made
the first Old. Now that which decays (says he) and waxes old is ready to
vanish away. From whence it is plain that the old Covenant he there speaks of,
which God made with his People when he took them by the hand to lead them out
of the land of Egypt, mentioned Exodus 19. 5. and Deuteronomy 29. 9. for the faultyness
thereof is now Abollished: For there is verily (says he) Heb. 7. 18. a
disannulling of the Commandment going before, for the Weakness and
unprofitableness thereof. Upon which Account a New Covenant was to take place,
which was to be Established upon better Promises.

6. And therefore though it is true, in Deuteronomy. 30. 6. (which Mr. Baxter urges,
and alleges to prove, that the Covenant mentioned Chapter 29. is a
Gospel Covenant) The Lord then promises that he will Circumcise their Heart,
and the Heart of their Seed, to love the Lord their God with all their Heart,
and with all their Soul, that they might live. Which are plainly Gospel
Promises, yet it is evident, that that is a distinct Covenant from that
mentioned Chapter 29. the one being Conditional, the other Absolute: And it is
as evident, that the Promises therein contained, were not to be fulfilled, till
after the Lord had turned their threatened Captivity, for their Breach of the
Covenant he now made with them; and till after he had returned and gathered
them from all the Nations, and from the outmost Parts of Heaven, whether they
should be scattered; and from whence the Lord there promises to gather, and to
fetch them, as it is plainly Expressed in the 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5th Verses of
that Chapter, compared with the 24th and 25th Verses of the 29th Chapter, which
was never yet fulfilled.

7. But says Mr. Baxter [Did God Promise Spiritual Grace to the Jews after the
Captivity and not before? Was not the Promise made to them that then were? Were
not they Captivated often in the time of the Judges, and so might at least be
made good then? If God would do as much for them before they forsook him, and
broke the Covenant by Rebellion, as he would do afterward when they Repented;
then he would Circumcise their Hearts before as well as after: But the former
is true, therefore the latter. Besides, some Divines say that the Promise.
Deuteronomy. 30. 6. is Conditional: And if it be on Condition of Obedience, than it
was made to more than the Elect; and if it were not performed to any but the
Elect; no wonder, when it was a Conditional Promise, and the rest performed not
the Condition, which God will Cause the Elect to perform.]

8. To this we Reply; That as it is evident that the Promises mentioned Deuteronomy.
30. 6. are Absolute, and therefore Essentially different from those mentioned
chapter 29. which were Conditional; so they are as clearly to be understood in
Reference to a time to come; and cannot without palpable streining be applied
unto the time then present; nor indeed unto any time since, unto this very day.
For thus run the Words, Deuteronomy. 30. 1. And it shall come to pass, when all these
things are come upon thee, the Blessing and the Curse, which I have set before
thee, and thou shall call them to mind among all the Nations whither the Lord
thy God has driven thee? ver. 2. And shall return unto the Lord thy God, and
shall obey his voice according to all that I command thee this day, thou and
thy Children, with all thine Heart, and with all thy Soul. ver. 3. That then
the Lord thy God will turn thy Captivity, and have Compassion upon thee, and
will return and gather thee from all the Nations whether the Lord thy God has
scattered thee, ver. 4. If any of thine be driven out unto the outmost parts of
Heaven; from thence will the Lord thy God gather thee, and from thence will he
fetch thee. ver. 5. And the Lord thy God will bring thee into the Land which
thy Fathers possessed, and thou shall possess it, and he will do thee good, and
multiply thee above thy Fathers. ver. 6. And the Lord thy God will Circumcise
thine Heart, and the Heart of thy Seed, to Love the Lord thy God with all thine
Heart, and with all thy Soul, that thou may Live. ver. 7. And the Lord thy
God will put all these Curses upon thine Enemies, and on them that hate thee.
ver 8. And thou shall return, and obey the voice of the Lord, and do all his
Commandments which I command thee this day. ver. 9. And the Lord thy God will
make thee plenteous in every work of thine Hand, in the fruit of thy Body, and
in the fruit of thy Cattle, and in the fruit of thy Land for good: For the Lord
will again rejoice over thee for good, as he rejoiced over thy Fathers. ver.
10. Because thou shall obey the voice of the Lord thy God in keeping his
Commandments, and his Ordinances, which are written in the Book of this Law,
when thou shall return unto the Lord thy God, with all thine Heart, and with
all thy Soul. For thus run the Words of this 10th. verse. according to the Old
Translation, though they are rendered otherwise in the New.

9. Wherein, First, we cannot but observe the Absoluteness of these Gospel
Promises; since that which was the very Condition of the Le^^l Covenant; Do
this and live; And if ye be willing and obedient ye shall cut the good of the
Land, is here made a main branch of the promised Blessing. ver. 6. The Lord thy
God will Circumcise thine Heart, and the Heart of thy Seed, to Love the Lord
thy God, with all thine Heart, and with all thy Soul, that thou may Live. And
therefore when Moses tells them. ver. 1, 2. That when all these things were
come upon them, the Blessing and the Curse which he had already set before
them, and they should call them to Mind among all the Nations, whither the Lord
their God had driven them; and they should return unto the Lord and obey his
voice, with all their Heart, and with all their Soul, that then the Lord would
return their Captivity. We are by no means to understand these Words as the
Condition, upon the Account of which their Captivity should be returned: For
then indeed it ha^^ been all one with the Covenant of Works mentioned, Exodus
19. 5. Deuteronomy. 29. 9. or that mentioned Genesis 2. 16, 17. And had been failable, as
that was: But these Words are plainly spoken by way of Prediction, rather, of
what should be; that at the same time when they should thus obey God's voice,
their Captivity should be returned: But how? Is it left to an uncertainty. If
ye will obey my voice then shall your Captivity be returned? No; for God
undertakes even this also for them, to work up their Hearts to an answerable
frame of Obedience, suitable to the Mercy to be bestowed on them. And therefore
to prevent their Jealousy concerning any further forfeiture of the promised
Blessing on their part, he is pleased to give them a full Assurance thereof by
an absolute Promise. ver. 6. The Lord thy God will Circumcise thy Heart, and
the Heart of thy Seed, to Love the Lord thy God with all thine Heart, and
withal thy Soul, that thou may Live. And so also, ver. 8. Thou shall return,
and obey the voice of the Lord, and do all his Commandments which I command
thee this day.

10. Mr. Baxter indeed suggesteth, that the Promises mentioned ver. 6. are
Conditional, and therefore made to more than to the Elect. And if (says he)
they were not performed to more than the Elect, no wonder ^hen they were
Conditional: But that they are Absolute and not Conditional is plain; since no
Condition can be Assigned of performing those Promises, but that of the good
Pleasure of God's own Will; it being only brought forth as the Sovereign Effect
of his own Purpose and Grace* and of that alone: For to say that God promises
to Circumcise their Hearts, on Condition of their Obedience, is to put the
Effect before the Cause: For therefore God promises that they shall be
Obedient, because he will Circumcise their Heart. (Neither indeed is there any
true Gospel Obedience, but what flows from that Principle:) And what Condition
can there be of that, but that of the good pleasure of God's own Goodness and
Grace? Let the Heart once be Circumcised, so as that God's People be made a
willing People in the day of his Power, and then their Obedience naturally and
necessarily follows; till that be done, nothing is done; when that is done, all
is done. And this is that which God here promises, viz. To Circumcise their
Heart, and the Heart of their Seed. to Love and Serve the Lord their God, with
all their Heart, and with all their Soul. Which therefore must needs be
Absolute, since no Condition can be assigned, whereby God should be obliged to
the performance thereof, but that of his own Purpose and Grace. Which being
Obvious in the Words.

11. We must in the next place take notice of the Time appointed for the
fulfilling of these Gospel Promises unto them. And that was not the time then
present, as Mr. Baxter would have it: For (says Moses, Deuteronomy 29. 4.) The Lord
has not given you an Heart to perceive and Eyes to see, and Ears to hear, unto
this day. Nor in the time of the Judges, or the Prophets that followed after;
nor indeed any time that is as yet past: But as Moses here tells them; when all
these things should have come upon them, the Blessing and the Curse which he
had before spoken of; which must of necessity refer to the latter times, or the
last Age of the World, when the Lord should turn their Captivity; return and
gather them from all the Nations whether they should be scattered. And so it is
plainly expressed, Deuteronomy. 4. 30. When thou art in Tribulation; and all these
things are come upon thee, even in the latter days, etc. For it is plain that
Moses aims not at this or that particular Captivity, either in the time of the
Judges, before or after, among the Philistines, Egyptians, or Babylonians;
since that had been of little Advantage to deliver them from one Captivity, to
let them fall into another, and there let them stick for ever: But the Words of
the Promise are of a most Comprehensive Latitude, viz. If they be driven among
all the Nations. ver. 1. Or any of them be driven to the outmost parts of
Heaven. ver. 4. The Lord will gather them from all Nations. ver. 3. And will
fetch them from the outmost parts of Heaven. ver. 4. And it is plain, that as
the Promise is of a great Latitude; so of a great Length also. For this
gathering them is promised after the Babilonian Captivity. Jer. 29 1. Jer. 31.
10. Nay after Christ was come in the Flesh, it is delivered as a Prophecy. Jo.
11. 51. That Christ should gather together into one the Children of God that
were scattered abroad; as a thing to be fullfilled in after times.

12. And in this Respect therefore is it that the Prophet Jer. Chapter 31. 31, 32,
33. Reciting the same Gospel Covenant spoken of in the forementioned 30 Deuteronomy.
Expressly Represents it as a thing future, or as yet then to come, as it had
been before so represented, Deuteronomy. 30. Behold the day^s come, (says the Lord)
that I will make a New Covenant with the House of Israel, and the House of
Judah, not according to the Covenant that I made with their Fathers in the day
that I took them by the hand to bring them out of Egypt (which my Covenant they
brake, although I was an Husband unto them.) But this shall be the Covenant
that I will make with the House of Israel after those days, says the Lord, I
will put my Law in their inward parts, and write it in their Hearts, and will
be their God, and they shall be my People. And they shall teach no more every
Man his Neighbor, and every Man his Brother, saying, Know the Lord; for they
shall all know me from the least of them to the greatest of them, says the
Lord: For I will forgive their Iniquity, and I will remember their Sins no
more. Where we have the same Promises for Substance with those mentioned Deuteronomy.
30. 6. And to the same purpose the Apostle also Represents it as a thing
future, even after the Resurrection and Ascension of Christ. Romans 11. 25, 26,
27. I would not Brethren that ye should be Ignorant of this Mystery, that
Blindness in part is happened unto Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles be
come in, and so all Israel shall be saved. As it is written; there shall come
out of Zion the Deliverer, and shall turn away Ungodliness from Jacob. For this
is my Covenant unto them, when I shall take away their Sins; wherein, as we may
observe that the Covenant he here speaks of, is of the same Nature with the
Promises mentioned Deuteronomy. 30. 6. as also with those before mentioned, Jer. 31.
So we cannot but take notice both there and here, of the Futurity of their
Accomplishment; It being not to be fulfilled until the Fullness of the Gentiles
be come in. And so all Israel shall be saved.

13. And it is in vain to say that these Promises have already had their Partial
and Gradual Accomplishment: For therein God promises not only to Circumcise
their Heart, but the Heart of their Seed also, to Love the Lord their God with
all their Heart, and with all their Soul. Which as it must of necessity
comprehend the whole Body of that Nation, Young and Old, of all Sorts, Ages,
and Degrees, from the least unto the greatest, none exempted: So it does as
plainly express a time and state of Perfection; which no particular Person,
much less a whole Generation of God's People, in this World; they and their
Offspring also, could ever yet truly or justly pretend unto. To insist
therefore upon a Partial or Gradual Accomplishment of those Glorious Promises;
and thence to conclude, that they might be made good or fulfilled in Moses his
time; or as Mr. Baxter says, in the time of the Judges, or the Prophets that
followed after; would be no other than to darken Counsel by Words without
Knowledge. For as Moses does expressly assure us that those Glorious Promises
were not fulfilled in his time, Deuteronomy. 29. 4. The Lord (says he) has not given
you an Heart to perceive, and Eyes to see, and Ears to hear unto this day; and
as the Prophet Jer. is so far from owning any Accomplishment of them in his
time, that he does plainly acquaint us, that the Covenant was not so much as
struck up, or as yet Actually made betwixt God and them: But as he tells us;
Behold the days come, says the Lord, that I will do it; So the Apostle Paul
is as far from owning any Accomplishment of them in his Time: For until this
day (says he) remains the same vail untaken away, 2 Cor. 3.

14. So that as it is clear, that the Mercies promised, Deuteronomy. 30. 6. were not
fulfilled in Moses's, nor in Jeremy's, nor in the Apostle's Time; So there is
no Experience or History that gives us any account that they were ever since
fulfilled. And therefore neither indeed can we groundedly expect the
Accomplishment of them till the second coming of the Deliverer, before spoken
of, when that Prediction of the Apostle Romans 11. 26. shall be fulfilled. And so
all Israel shall be saved. And no wonder, for this will be no other than the
time of the New Heavens, and the New Earth, mentioned Isa. 65. 17, 18. For
Behold I create new Heavens, and a New Earth, and the former shall not be
remembered: But be you glad and rejoice for ever in that which I Create; for
behold I create Jerusalem a Rejoicing, and her People a Joy; And the voice of
weeping shall be no more heard in her, nor the voice of crying. And ver. 23.
they shall not Labor in vain, nor bring forth for Trouble; for they are the
Seed of the blessed of the Lord, and their Offspring with them. With many
other glorious Promises there Recorded, which are no way Applicable to the
present state of things in the Heavens and Earth that now are. And indeed the
whole 60th. chap. of Isaiah is taken up with Promises of this kind: And among
the rest, we are told. ver. 21. Thy People also shall be all Righteous, they
shall inherit the Land for ever, the Branch of my Planting, that I may be
glorified. So Chap. 61. 9. Their Seed also shall be known among the Gentiles,
and their Offspring among the People. All that see them shall acknowledge them
that they are the Seed which the Lord has blessed. All of them most plainly
Promises that were never yet fulfilled, and therefore remain as yet to be
Accomplished.

15. And indeed hitherto are to be Referred the several Passages that lie
dispersed up and down the Scriptures, concerning the Blessedness of the Seed of
the Righteous: For though no doubt, God has a Gracious Respect unto many that
are the Natural Descendants of Believers now; and we may probably hope that the
Grace of Election is for the most part continued in their Race; yet as God has
made no such Covenant with us, That he will be a God unto us, and to all our
Natural Off spring, during the present Administration of things, in the Heavens
and the Earth that now are. So whatever Blessedness of that kind, God has
designed for his People, we have no Scripture ground to expect the
Accomplishment thereof, nor the Jews neither, till the time of the New Heavens,
and the New Earth before spoken off; wherein (as Peter tells us) Righteousness
shall dwell. For then indeed, the People or Subjects of that state shall be all
Righteous, the Branch of Gods planting that he may be glorified, both they and
their Offspring also. And therefore then, and not till then may we expect the
fulfilling of those Gospel Promises before mentioned, concerning the
Circumcising of the Heart, both of them and their Seed also, to Love the Lord
their God, with all their Heart, and with all their Soul: Which bespeaks no
other than a time and state of Perfection; when they shall have no need any
more to Teach every Man his Neighbor, nor every Man his Brother (as now we
must, and therefore not to be understood of the present state of things)
Saying, Know the Lord; for they shall all know him from the least unto the
greatest of them.

. 16. From all which, it clearly appears, that the Promises mentioned, Deuteronomy.
30. 6. are of a vastly different Nature, from what they have been generally
imagined to be. And indeed are so far from being a part of the Legal Covenant
at Mount Sinai; or of that Covenant which the Israelites with their little
ones, were entered into, Deuteronomy. 29. That they remain as yet to be fulfilled. They
might be Fulfilled, says Mr. Baxter in the time of the Judges. But why then
were they so often Captivated in the time of the Judges, as well as afterward by
the Philistiues, Ammonites, etc? And why were the Ten Tribes after carried away
Captive by Salmanazer, King of Assyria, So as that they have never since been
heard of in the World, that we can understand? And why were the two Tribes
afterward also carried away Captive by the Babylonians, and since Dispersed by
the Roman and Turkish Powers; and so still remain in a State of Dispersion; as
also in a State of Impenitency and Opposition to the Gospel unto this day? A
few indeed were Converted by John the Baptist, and Christ, in the day of his
first Appearance: But the Generality of the Jews were in Blindness after that,
in Paul's time, Romans 11. and still so remain. And what was the Conversion of a
few to the Fulfilling of the All of these Promises to the All of the Jews. But
as sure as God is True, and his Word most Faithful, there must be a time, when
the forementioned Promises shall be Accomplished: When as the Fullness of the
Gentiles shall come in, and be brought under the Obedience of Christ: So the
Jews also must be Called, and the Fullness of them; by that Deliverer whom God
has promised shall yet come out of Zion, to turn away Ungodliness from Jacob.
For this is my Covenant unto them, says God, when I shall take away their Sins.

. 17. And therefore, though Mr. Baxter says true, when he tells us, p. 58.
That Deuteronomy. 3^. is a Gospel Covenant; since the Apostle, Romans 10. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.
shows it in Express Words: (For says he) when the Apostle had showed, that the
Righteousness of the Law lies in Perfect Obedience. He that does these
things, shall live by them. He then shows the Difference thus. But the
Righteousness which is of Faith, speaks on this wise: Say not in thine Heart,
who shall Ascend up to Heaven, to bring down Christ from Above, etc. But what
says it? The Word is nigh thee; even in thy Mouth, and in thy Heart; that is,
the Word of Faith which we Preach. Now these words of Faith (says he) the
Apoststle Cites out of this very Covenant, Deuteronomy. 30. 11, 12, 13, 14. But then
it does not therefore follow, that the Covenant mentioned, Deuteronomy. 30. and that,
Chap. 29. is one and the same Covenant. Mr. Baxter indeed takes it for granted
that they are one and the same: And therefore to prove that that mentioned in
the 29th. Chapter is a Covenant of Grace, or a Gopel Covenant; he Alleges
these words in the 6th. ver. of the 30th. Chapter, for the Confirmation
thereof; and hereon Bottoms his Argument; [That because the Jews with their
little Ones, were entered into Covenant with God, in the 29th. Chapter, and
consequently were all Church Members; and forasmuch as the Covenant which the
Infants who were then Church Members did pass into, was a Covenant of Grace, or
a Gospel Covenant, (as distinct from the Law, which is Repealed;) therefore
neither it, nor their Church Membership is Repealed.

18. It cannot be denied but this is a Principal Argument which Mr. Baxter
urges for the support of his New Doctrine of the Church membership of Infants,
and consequently their Baptism under the Gospel: But how unjustly Urged, and
how little it signifies to the Proof of what he intends it for, may by this
time be easily Discerned; since by what has been said, it plainly appears,
that the forementioned Scriptures in Deuteronomy, which he Bottoms it on, are
by him greatly Abused and Misrepresented, contrary to the plain Scope of the
Spirit of God in them: The Covenant mentioned in the 29th. Chapter, and that in
the 30th. being not one and the same, as he would have it, but two Distinct and
Essentially differrent Covenants The one being a Covenant of Works as has been
plainly proved, from Romans 10. 5. which had Moses for the Mediator of it, Deuteronomy.
29. 1. For the Faultiness whereof it is now Abolished, Heb. 8. 13. The other, a
Covenant of Grace, Romans 10. 6, 7, 8. Deuteronomy. 30. 11, 12, 13, 14. which has
Christ alone for the Mediator of it, Heb. 8. 6, 7, 8, 9. And shall therefore
never be Abolished, Psalm. 89. 34, 35, 36. The one being plainly of a Legal
Stamp; the other Evangelical. The one Conditional; the other Absolute. The one
having its Existence but for a time, upon an Occasional Temporary Principle;
the other suited to answer a Principle, Existing from Everlasting, to
Everlasting. The one being appointed only for the time then present, till the
Incarnation of Christ; the other respecting a time that is as yet to come. From
all which it plainly follows, that the Covenant spoken of Deuteronomy. 30. 6. is
Essentinlly different from that which the Jews with their Little Ones, were
then entered into Chap. 29. as being Established upon better Promises. So that
there can be no just Inferrence drawn; that because Infants were Fellow
Covenanters with their Parents under the Legal Administration, that thus it is
now under the Gospel: For since it is Evident that the Law or Covenant it self
is changed; (as the Apostle Expressly affirms it is, Heb. 7. 12.) It does as
plainly follow, that the Seed is changed: The Gospel Covenant that Believers
are now under, requiring other manner of Subjects than the Legal did; as has
been already proved in the foregoing parts of this Discourse.

. 19. It Is true. in the time of the New Heavens and the New Earth, before
spoken of, God has promised not only to Circumcise the Heart of his People,
but of their Seed also, to love the Lord their God with all their Heart, and
with all their Soul. That they shall teach no more every Man his Neighbor, and
every Man his Brother, saying, know the Lord: For they shall all know him, from
the least of them, to the greatest of them. That they shall be all Righteous,
they and their Offspring, also the Branch of God's Planting, that he may be
Glorified. But that will be such a time and state of Perfection, as we cannot
now pretend unto. And therefore as the State and Condition of God's People now,
is vastly different from what it was with them under the Law; so it is no less
vastly different from that State of Blessedness, which both they and their
Offspring also shall be Advanced unto, at the time before mentioned. So that
what ever Privilege the Offspring of God's People shall then be Invested with;
It has been already proved, that God has now appointed, that such only as are
Capable of making a Profession of Faith and Repentance, are to be accounted as
Visible Members of the Gospel Church, according to the present Frame and
Constitution thereof.

. 20. To conclude the present Point: Since it has been now so plainly proved;
That the Covenant which the Infants who were then Church Members, did pass
into, was not a Covenant of Grace, properly so called, whereof Christ is
Mediator; nor a Gospel, but a Legal Covenant, or a Covenant of Works, and that
which is now Repealed. From hence it unavoidably follows, (and that according
to Mr. Baxter's own Grant) that the Church Membership of Infants* which was
built upon it, or, as he says, Inseparably Conjunct, is also Repealed with it.
And since the main Pillar for the support of this new Doctrine, of the
Church Membership of Infants under the Gospel, fails as it does, it of
necessity follows, that all the other Arguments which Mr. Baxter has mustered
up to the same purpose, to the number of no less than 26. and those again
Multiplied and Sub-divided into a great many more, are all of them wholly
Insignificant also: Since no other consideration whatsoever can sufficiently
demonstrate the continuance of it under the Gospel, unless it could have been
proved, that in its (...) Institution, it had a Gospel Covenant for the
Foundation the^ But the Contrary having been so plainly proved, it follows with
an equal necessity, (and that according to Mr. Baxter's own Concession) that
there is no shadow of pretense left to assert the Church Membership of Infants
under the Gospel Administration that now is. And if the Arguments for their
Church Membership do all of them fail, as we cannot but see they do: From hence
it also plainly follows, that the Practice of Infants Baptism, which is Built
thereon, must of necessity fall to the Ground, as having no Scripture
Foundation left it for the Support thereof. And consequently it is as Evident,
that Mr. Baxter's Book, called, Plain Scripture Proof of Infants
Church Membership and Baptism; carries with it nothing else but an empty Title.
Vox and praeterea nihil.

SECT. X.
FRom what has been already said, it appears, that Mr. Baxter and others, have
much to Answer for, that (...) are guilty of such gross Mis-applications of the
word of Truth, for the uphold ing of Infants Baptism, (besides the unrighteous
charges of Murder and Adultery, which he and they have so strongly Labored to
fasten upon those of a contrary Practice from themselves in respect of Baptism)
as is Evident in reference to the foregoing Argument; and as has been already
also manifested, in respect of his and their Corrupt Glosses upon Acts 15. 10.
concerning the Disc^plesh^p of Infants. Now therefore, why tempt ye God to put
a Yoke upon the Neck of the Disciples; which neither we nor our Fathers were
able to bear? As if Infants were intended by the Disciples there mentioned;
when not only in that Chapter, but in the whole New Testament besides, those
only are meant by Disciples, who being taught, professed the Doctrine Preached
by such a one; As John's Disciples, Christ's Disciples; the Disciples of the
Pharisees, and the Disciples of the Perverters. And accordingly Baptism was
Administered unto such as were made the Disciples of Christ by Instruction, and
unto none other pursuant of the Commission, Mat. 28. 19, 20. as has been
sufficiently opened and Explained in the foregoing parts of this Discourse. And
no less Blameworthy is he and they, in respect of their Corrupt Interpretations
of those Scriptures, Luke 9. 47, 48. Mat. 18. 5. and Mark 9. 41. which speak of
the Receiving little Children ^^ Christ's Name, etc. As if all those Scriptures
were intended of Young Sucking Infants; whereas, they are plainly spoken of
such little Children only, as were capable of Believing in Christ; which tender
Sucking Infants, after an ordinary rate, are utterly incapable of. And
therefore when Mat. 18. 2. we are told that Jesus called a little Child, and
set him in the midst of them; and tells them, ver. 5. Who so shall Receive one
such little Child in my Name, Receives me. It is Expressly Added ver. 6. Who
so shall offend one of these little ones that believes in me, etc. Whereby we
may easily perceive what kind of little Children Christ would have us Receive
in his Name, or under the Notion of his Disciples; not Infants, that are
incapable of Faith, or of Disc^plesh^p by Instruction, without which it is
impossible (after an ordinary rate) to be a Disciple, according to the true and
proper acceptance of the Word. But such little Children as did actually
Believe in Christ. And who can deny but that such are Christ's Disciples,
Church Members, and the proper Subjects of Baptism? And the very same
Expression with that in Mat. 18. 6. we meet with, Mark 9. 42. Whosoever shall
offend one of these little ones that Believe in me, etc. Upon the very same
occasion, ver. 37. the like Abuse has been put upon those Words 1. Cor. 7. 14.
Else were your Children unclean, but now are they Holy. As has been already
also Manifested in the foregoing parts of this Discourse; which needs not here
to be repeated.

. 2. As for Mr. Baxter's Argument for the Church Membership of Infants under
the Gospel, from Rev. 11. 15. where we are told, that upon the Sounding of the
Seventh Angel, there were great Voices in Heaven, saying the Kingdoms of this
World are become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ. Which (says he)
Includes Infants as well as others that were to be the Members of Christ's
Church, or Kingdom. To this we shall only give this brief Reply; That this
Scripture has a plain reference to the time of the New Heavens, and the New
Earth, which we have before spoken of; wherein all the Kingdoms of the World
shall become the Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ; and all the Dominions
of the Earth shall actually Serve and Obey him: For then indeed God has
promised, that his People shall be all Righteous, they and their Offspring
also, the Branch of his Planting, that he may be Glorified, Isa. 60. 21. which
cannot be applied unto the present Administration of things in the Heavens and
Earth that now are; wherein we cannot say, that one of a Hundred, much less
that the whole Race of Believers are subject unto the Scepter of Christ, and
consequently far from the true Gospel Characters of Church Membership in the
Gospel Church.

3. As for Mr Allen's other Instance concerning the Covenant of the Rechabites;
wherein the Infants as well as those of Age were Included: It is altogether as
Insignificant in our present Case, as the former concerning the Kohathites; or
his other Instance concerning those little Children who were said to enter into
Covenant with God when their Parents did so, Deuteronomy 29. 11, 12, which has been
already Discussed. For does it follow that be-because the Children of the
Rechahites were Engaged in a severe Ceremonial Covenant, together with their
Parents, that therefore the Children of Believers are comprehended with
themselves in the Covenant of Grace? This would be indeed to make Christianity
to be Hereditary: But certain it is, that Grace does not now run in a Blood,
what ever it shall do; neither is the Grace of God now Tied or Entailed unto
any Lineage of Men whtsoever. Though if it could be proved that all the
Children of Believers were really and absolutely Included in the same Covenant
of Grace with their Parents; yet it follows not therefore that Baptism belongs
unto them, till capable of making an Actual Profession of their Faith in
Christ, as has been already proved. For it cannot justly be denied but that
the Administration of Ordinances depends merely upon the Law of Institution,
and has varied in several Ages. From Adam to Abraham there was no Ordinance to
be Administered to Infants. In Abraham's time indeed Circumcision was
Instituted; which belongs peculiarly to the old Testament Administration, and
was part of Moses his Law, which is now Abolished, and done away. This was the
first Ordinance that was Administered to Infants, and not to all Infants, but
only to Male Infants, living in Abraham's Family, if they did Live to the
Eighth day; otherwise they had no Right to it; though many of them doubtless in
the Covenant of Grace, and so Saved: For want of an Institution the like may be
said of Infants now; many of whom are in the Covenant of Grace, and so Saved by
virtue of the Free-Promise; yet not to be Baptized, if they do not live to the
time of Repenting, and Believing, the only time appointed for Baptism. For none
ever had a Right to the Administrations of the Covenant, any otherwise than by
virtue of a Positive Law. Now if the Natural Branches the Seed of Abraham, had
no Privilege to be Circumcised, though in Covenant with their Father, but by
virtue of a Divine Law, Expressly requiring the same; neither can we expect that
our Infants should have any Right to Baptism, without the same Divine Warrant.

THE FOURTH PART.
Wherein the Baptism of Infants is further Disproved: By way of Answer to the
Arguments made use of by Dr. Burthogge and others, for the Support of that
Practice. Wherein the Covenant made with Israel at Mount Sinai, Exodus 20. As
also the Covenant of Circumcision made with Abraham, Genesis 17. 7, 8, 9. (Whereon
so much Stress is laid for the Support of Infants Baptism) are plainly proved
to be no other than two several Editions of the Covenant of Works. And
consequently that no just Argument can thence be deduced for the Justification
of that Practice.

Together with a clear and distinct Explanation of the true Nature and
Difference betwixt the Two Covenants, that of Works, and that of Grace.

SECT. I.
WE should here have put a Period to the present Discourse, but that there
remains yet something further of great Importance, which requires a Solemn
Discussion, and Determination, according to the Light that shall be afforded
unto us from the Holy Scriptures: And that is; Whereas Dr. Burthogge in his
late Printed Discourse upon the Subject of Infants Baptism; Asserts (as many
others have done before him) that the Covenant made with Abraham and his Seed,
Genesis 17. 7, 8, 9. is the Covenant of Grace; or that Original Grant and Great
Charter, by which Believing Gentiles always did and do claim Heaven and Earth,
and all the Promises they have Title to. From whence he infers, that they are
to keep God's Covenant in the Gospel Sign of it, that is Baptism; and that both
by wearing of it themselves, and also by putting it on all theirs; as Abraham
was commanded to do, in respect of Circumcision. And forasmuch as the Mistakes
which the Generality of the World has for some season Labored under, in
reference to the true Nature of the Covenant made with Abraham, in the
forecited Text, have been the very Ground and Foundation of most of the
Arguments, which have of late (at least) been insisted on in order to the
Justification of Infants Baptism: We shall therefore the more Solemnly apply
our selves toward a Substantial Discovery, or Detection threof; additional unto
what has been already offered in that respect, in the foregoing parts of this
Discourse. And if it can be Substantially proved that the Covenant made with
Abraham, Genesis 17. 7, 8, 9. was not a Covenant of Grace, nor a Gospel, but a
Legal Covenant, or a Covenant of Works; and consequently that the Gentiles are
not concerned therein: From hence it will unavoidably follow, that all the
Arguments thence deduced, for the support of the forementioned Practice,
howsoever they may be formed, or framed, do of themselves fall to the Ground.

2. In the first place then; though we do acknowledge, that God did indeed make
a Covenant of Grace with Believing Abraham: Which is the Great Charter, by
which Believing Gentiles always did, and do claim both Heaven and Earth, and
all the Promises they have Title to; yet that the Covenant of Circumcision,
(for so it is called by Stephen, Acts. 7. 8.) which God made with Abraham, Genesis
17. 7. 8, 9, 10. (though there was Grace in it, as there was in all the
Covenants that God ever made with Men, as has been before noted) is not a
Covenant of Grace properly so called; nor a Gospel Covenant, whereof Christ is
the Mediator: And consequently that the Gentiles are not concerned therein, is
thus proved.

If that Covenant was as much a Covenant of Works, as the Covenant of Mount
Sinai, mentioned Exodus 19. 4, 5. and Edod. 20. and the Covenant mentioned Deuteronomy.
29. 9, 10, 11. Nay, as much as the Covenant made with Adam before his Fall,
Genesis 2. 16. 17. where God tells him; Of the Tree of the knowledge of good and
evil, thou shall not Eat: For in the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall
surely Die. All which Were but several Editions of the same Covenant of Works;
then it is not a Gospel Covenant, nor a Covenant of Grace, properly so called;
whereof Christ is the Mediator.

But it was as much a Covenant of Works as either of the Co-Covenants before
mentioned were; therefore it is not a Covenant of Grace, nor a Gospel Covenant,
properly so called, whereof Christ alone is Mediator.

. 3. That the Covenant last mentioned, Genesis 2. 16, 17. was a Covenant of Works:
We suppose none will (or can at least Rationally) deny: Forasmuch as Life was
Implicitly promised unto our First Parent upon his Obedience, and Death was
Explicitly threatened, or denounced upon him, in case of his Disobedience. And
upon these terms he was to Stand or Fall; which was plainly and undeniably a
Covenant of Works, whereof Christ was not the Mediator. That the Covenant
mentioned Exodus 19. 4, 5. and Chapter 20. which God made with the Israelites at
Mount Sinai, was of the same Stamp; the Scriptures are every where full in the
Proof thereof. And as clear it is, that the Covenant mentioned Deuteronomy. 29. 9, 10,
11. is but a Repetition of that made Exodus 19. etc. As has been already
proved. In respect of both which, it is Evident; that as Blessings were therein
pronounced, and promised to the Obedient, upon Condition of their Obedience: So
a Curse was pronounced upon the Disobedient. And thus Paul tells us, Romans 10.
5. Moses describes the Righteousness of the Law; that the Man which does
these things shall live by them. Which is a plain description of a Covenant of
Works; which he Cites from Lev.. 18. 5. You shall therefore keep my Statutes
and Judgments; which if a Man do, he shall live in them. And accordingly the
Apostle does also tell us, Gal. 3. 10. That as many as are of the Works of the
Law, are under the Curse: For it is Written, (says he, (Cursed is every one
that continues not in all things that are contained in the Book of the Law, to
do them. And so likewise ver. 11, 12. That no man is Justified by the Law in
the fight of God, is evident; for the Just shall Live by Faith. And the Law is
not of Faith, but the Man that does them. shall live in them. Those therefore
that tell us that the Law is a Covenant of Faith, do plainly contradict the
Apostle, who Expressly tells us, that the Law is not of Faith; but the man that
does them, shall live in them. And therefore plainly and undeniably a Covenant
of Works. Thus it was with Adam in Paradise, when God gave him the Command
before mentioned, Gen, 2. 16. and denounced the Sentence of Death upon him, in
case of Disobedience: upon the Account of which, it is generally Acknowledged,
that he was then under a Covenant of Works. It is Evident therefore, that the
Covenant mentioned Exodus 19. and Chap. 20. and that mentioned Deuteronomy. 29. were
but two several Repetitions of the same Covenant of Works made with our First
Parent; and are frequently therefore in the Scripture Represented unto us under
the Denomination of the First, or Old Covenant, Heb. 8. 7. 13. Chapter 9. 15. 18.
there being therein a clear and a plain Manifestation of the Law written in the
Heart of Man at the First.

. 4. Now, that the Covenant of Circumcision made with Abraham and his Seed,
Genesis 17. 7, 8, 9, 10. is of the same stamp or tenor with the three
forementioned Covenants, in Genesis Exodus and Deuteronomy. is also as Evident: For
though it is true, God there promises to be a God to Abraham, and to his Seed;
yet still it was upon Condition of Obedience, with an answerable threatening in
case of Disobedience: As it was with Adam before the Fall. In the day that thou
Eatest thereof, thou shall surely Die. And as it was with them in the
Wilderness; Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are
Written in the Book of the Law to do them. So here ver. 9. Thou shall keep my
Covenant therefore, thou and thy Seed after thee, in their Generations. ver.
10. This is my Covenant which ye shall keep between me and you, and thy Seed
after thee; every Man-Child among you shall be Circumcised. And ver. 14. The
Uncircumcised Man-child, whose Flesh of his Foreskin is not Circumcised, that
Soul shall be cut off from his People: He has broken my Covenant. The same
terms with the former. Besides, it is Evident that Circumcision indispensibly
Obliged all that were under it to a Perfect and Universal Obedience to the
whole Revealed Will and Law of God, Gal. 5. 3. For I testify to every man that
is Circumcised, that he is a Debtor to do the whole Law. If it was so in Paul's
time, it was so in Moses's time: And then it cannot be justly denied, but it
was so in Abraham's also, according to what of the Law, Mind, or Will of God,
was then Revealed unto them. So that in this Covenant which God made with
Abraham, Genesis 17. 7, 8, 9, 10. 14. As Blessings are pronounced upon the
Obedient upon Condition of their Obedience; so as great a Curse is pronounced
upon the Disobedient. And as we have already said is therefore of the same
tenor with the Three forementioned Covenants, in Genesis, Exodus, and
Deuteronomy. For did God tell our First Parent in the Garden of Eden,
concerning the Forbidden Fruit. In the day that thou Eatest thereof thou shall
surely Die? (and so in the rest) we have the like Threatening here. He that is
Uncircumcised, that Soul shall be Cut off from his People: He has broken my
Covenant. And if that, were a Covenant of Works, why not this?

^. And therefore though it is true God promised to Establish his Covenant
betwixt himself and Abraham, and his Seed after him in their Generations* for
an Everlasting Covenant, to be a God unto him, and to his Seed after him, ver.
7, etc. Yet still it was provided they kept his Covenant, and fulfilled the
Condition thereof on their parts, ver. 9. 10. Else they were to be Cut off. And
indeed the same Promises, for the Substance of them, were made unto the same
People at Mount Sinai; and upon the same Condition, Exodus 19. 4. 5. You have
seen (says God there) what I did unto the Egyptians, and how I bear you on
Eagles Wings, and brought you unto my self. Now therefore, if ye will Obey my
Voice indeed, and keep my Covenant. then ye shall be a peculiar Treasure unto
me, above all People, for all the Earth is mine. ve. 6. And ye shall be unto me
a Kingdom of Priests, and an Holy Nation. And if this was a Covenant of Works,
as the Apostle does plainly Affirm it is, Romans 10. 5. from Lev. 18. 5. Why not
that made with Abraham also, since the terms are the same, as well as the
Promises are the same? The like account the Scripture gives us of the Covenant
mentioned Deuteronomy. 29. You have seen (says Moses there) ver. 2, 3. all that the
Lord did before your Eyes in the Land of Egypt, unto Pharaoh, and all his
Servants; the great Temptations which thine Eyes have seen, and those great
Miracles, ver. 4. Yet the Lord has not given you an Heart to perceive, and
Eyes to see, and Ears to hear, unto this day. ver. 5. 6. And I have led you
forty years in the Wilderness; your clothes are not waxen old upon you, -- That
ye might know, that I am the Lord your God, ver. 9. Keep therefore the words of
this Covenant, and do them, that ye may prosper in all that ye do. The same
Language with that Exodus, 19. 5. and Lev. 18. 5. compared with Romans 10. 5. So
that we cannot but plainly see, that all those forementioned Covenants, are of
one and the same Nature; what the one is, the others are the same. And
therefore if the Covenant made with our First Parent before the Fall, and that
made with Israel, at Mount Sinai, were neither of them a Covenant of Grace, nor
a Gospel Covenant; whereof Christ is the alone and only Mediator: For the same
Reason, neither was that mentioned Deuteronomy. 29. nor that Genesis 17. 7, 8, 9. as
being all of the same tenor, and the Promises in them all of a like Nature.

6. The whole entire Nature, (says Dr. Owen) of the Covenant of Works,
consisted in this; That upon our Personal Obedience, according unto the Law and
Rule of it, we should be Accepted with God, and Rewarded with him. Herein the
Essence of it did consist. And what ever Covenant proceeds on these terms, or
has the Nature of them in it; however it may be varied with Additions or
Alterations, is the same Covenant stiil, and not another. As in the Renovation
of the Promise, wherein the Essence of the Covenant of Grace was contained, God
did often times make other Additions unto it, as unto Abraham and David; yet was
it still the same Covenant, for the Substance of it, and not another: So
whatever Variations may be made in, or Additions unto the Dispensation of the
First Covenant, so long as this Rule is retained, Do this and Live; it is still
the same Covenant for the Substance and Essence of it. Dr. Owen in his late
Discourse Entitled, The Doctrine of Justification, by Imputed Righteousness.
p. 397.

SECT. II.
BUt forasmuch as Mr. Roberts, Mr. Sedgwick and many other Divines who have
Written upon the Covenants, do affirm, that the Covenant at Mount Sinai was a
Covenant of Faith; or, which is all one, a Covenant of Grace: At least that it
was Subserviently the Covenant of Grace: Or a Covenant of Grace for the
Substance of it, though propounded in a more dark way, and in a manner fitting
for the State of that People, and that present time and Condition of the
Church. And for as much as it will unavoidably follow that if that was a
Covenant of Grace: So also was that made with Abraham, Genesis 17. 7, 8, 9. We
shall therefore the more Intently apply our selves toward the Discovery of
their great Mistakes in this Respect; it being of so vast an Importance to the
Church of God, to be set at rights herein; on which (as all will grant) So much
of the Superstructure of the Christian Faith and Practice depends. For this
purpose therefore (Additional unto what has been already said (we shall only
premise two Arguments, proving that the Covenant at Mount Sinai mentioned,
Exodus 19. and Exodus 20. was no other than a Covenant of Works. And then proceed
to Answer those Scripture Objections which are usually urged by way of
Opposition hereunto.

. 2. In the first place then; that the Covenant at Mount Sinai before mentioned
was no other then a Covenant of Works: We thus prove.

First, that Covenant that is not of Faith, cannot be a Covenant of Faith, but
of Works: But the Apostle does Expressly affirm, that the Law is not of Faith,
Gal. 3. 11, 12. Which is most plainly to be understood of Mount Sinai Covenant;
therefore that Covenant cannot be a Covenant of Faith, but of Works.

Secondly, that Covenant which is now Repealed, could not be a Covenant of
Grace, but of Works. But the Apostle does plainly Affirm, that the Covenant
which God made with his People at Mount Sinai, when he took them by the Hand to
lead them out of the Land of Egypt for the faultiness thereof, is now Repealed,
Heb. 7. 18. Chap. 8. 7. 13. 2. Cor. 3. 7. 11. Col. 2. 14. Therefore it could
not be a Covenant of Grace, but of Works. The Covenant of Grace being every way
Immutable and perfect, and therefore unrepealable, and Eternal, 2. Sam. 23. 5.
Isa. 55. 3. Heb. 7. 21, 22, 24, 25. Heb. 13. 20. And the Gifts and Callings
thereof without Repentance, Romans 11. 27. 29. And if Mount Sinai Covenant, was
no other than a Covenant of Works, and accordingly now Repealed: It cannt be
denied but that the Covenant Genesis 17. 7, 8, 9. Was of the same Nature, and
therefore also now Repealed, Act. 15. 10. 24. Col. 2. 14.

. 3. If any shall Object that it is unlikely that the Covenant of Works should
be Renewed after Man's fall, and after the Covenant of Grace had actually taken
place, as it did, in the first promise Concerning the Woman's Seed, that was to
bruise the Serpents Head. We answer that how absurd so ever it may seem to us,
it is plain matter of fact that so it was; and we ought not to Impeach Infinite
Wisdom, that so appointed it. And if we will know the reason why the Covenant
of Works should be thus Renewed after the Fall; the Scripture Expressly tells
us: That the Law was added because of Transgressions, till the Seed should come
to whom the Promise was made, Gal. 3. 19. The Apostle had before told us, ver.
17. That the Covenant that was Confirmed before of God in Christ, the Law which
was 430. Years after, could not Disannul that it should make the Promise of
none Effect, wherefore then (says he, ver. 19.) Serves the Law? To which
himself gives this Resolution: That it was added because of Transgressions,
till the Seed should come to whom the Promise was made. And elsewhere the same
Apostle Informs us: That the Law entered that the Offense might abound, Romans 5.
20. Or as he Expresses it, Chap. 7. 13. That Sin by the Commandment might
become exceeding Sinful. It being Evident that the Law was appointed as a
Schoolmaster to Christ, Gal. 3. 24. For so it was to the Jews; that is, to
show them the Nature of Sin, and the Holiness and Righteousness of God; to
convince them of their Sin and Misery without Christ, and their necessity
therefore of a Savior, Romans 7. 7, 12. 13. And for this purpose it still serves
to all Men in an unregenerate State Romans 3. 19. But though the Law does indeed
show us our Necessity of Christ, and our Misery without him; yet it does not
bring us to Christ (as our Translation has it) for that is the Work of the
Covenant of Faith only, Romans 10. 6, 7, 8, 9. And that as it stands opposed unto
the Legal Covenant, ver. 5, 6, etc.

4. There is a double Enquiry made by the Apostle (says Dr. Owen, on Gal. 3.)
with respect unto the Law, or the Covenant of Sinai. [1.] Unto what end in
General it served? [2] Whether it were not contrary to the Promise of God? Unto
both these the Apostle answers from the Nature, Office, and Work of that
Covenant. For there were two things in it; First a Revival and Representation
of the first Covenant of Works with its Sanction and Curse. Secondly, A
Direction of the Church unto the Accomplishment of the Promise From these two
does the Apostle frame his Answer unto the double Enquiry laid down. And unto
the first Enquiry, Unto what and it served? He Answers, It was added because
of Transgressions. The Promise being given, there seems to have been no need of
it: Why then was it added to it at that Season? It was added because of
Transgressions. The fullness of time was not yet come wherein the Promise was
to be Fulfilled, Accomplished, and Established, as the only Covenant wherein
the Church was to Walk with God, or the Seed was not yet come; as the Apostle
here speaks to whom the Promise was made. In the mean time, some Order must be
taken about Sin and Transgression, that all the Order of things appointed of
God, were not Overflovved by them. And this was done two vvays by the Law.
[1.] By Reviving the Commands of the Covenant of Works, with the Sanction of
Death, it put an Awe on the minds of Men, and set Bounds unto their Lusts,
that they should not dare to run forth into that Excess which they were
Naturally inclined unto. It was therefore added because of Transgressions,
that in the Declaration of God's Severity against them some Bounds might be
fixed unto them: For the knowledge of Sin is by the Law. [2.] To shut up
Unbelievers, and such as would not seek for Righteousness, Life, and Salvation
by the Promise, under the Power of the Covenant of Works, and Curse attending
it. It concluded, or shut up all under Sin, says the Apostle, ver. 20. This
was the end of the Law for this end was it Added, as it gave a Reviveal unto
the Covenant of Works. Dr. Owen's Exposition on the, Hebrews. 3 d. Vol. p. 231.

. 5. It is true, that Scripture, Gal. 3. 24. where the Apostle tells us that
the Law was our Schoolmaster to Christ, that we might be Justified by Faith,
is strongly urged by some, to prove that the Law must needs be therefore a
Covenant of Faith. But it is Evident, that the School mastership of the Law,
and the Covenant of Faith are two quite different things; as appears by the
Words before and after. ver. 23. Before Faith came says he, we were kept under
the Law, shut up unto the Faith which should afterward be Revealed. ver. 24.
Wherefore the Law was our Schoolmaster to Christ, that we might be justified
by Faith. ver. 25. But after that Faith is come, we are no longer under a
Schoolmaster. So that the Schol mastership of the Law is one thing, and the
Covenant of Faith another: For when the one comes, the other cease. When
the one takes place the other vanishes. The Law therefore could not be a
Covenant of Faith, it being here so plainly Opposed or Contra distinguished
thereunto. Accordingly the Apostle elsewhere assures us, that the Law Written
and Engraven in Stones was a Ministration of Death and Condemnation, 2. Cor. 3.
6. 7. 9. And consequently gave no hopes of Relief to the Miserable Sinner as
the Covenant of Faith does. It convinced him indeed of the dreadful Nature of
Sin; and of the Infinite Purity and Holiness of Gods Nature and Being, against
whom it had Sinned; but it left no Room for Repentance. For Cursed is every one
(says the Law) that Continues not in all things which are Written in the Book
of the Law to do them. Therefore it is called the Handwriting of Ordinances
that was against us, which was contrary to us; which Christ took out of the
way, nailing it to his Cross, Col. 2. 14. So that the Law could not possibly be
a Covenant of Faith: It being constantly represented to us in the Scripture, as
being of a vastly different Nature therefrom, and that in the very Essence or
Substance thereof. The one being a Ministration of Death and Condemnation, the
other a Ministration of Life and Peace.

SECT. III.
WE are told indeed by Mr. Obadiah Segdwick, in his Discourse upon the Covenant
of Grace, p. 175. That the Covenant made with the People of Israel at Mount
Sinai, was at least subserviently the Covenant of Grace; a Covenant of Grace
for the Substance of it though propounded in a more dark way, and in a manner,
fitting for the State of that People, and that present time and condition of
the Church.

. 2. But this is but an Evasion, and serves for no other purpose than to darken
the Truth: For the thing is plain, that the Law was as much a Covenant of
Works, as that made with our First Parent. The Jewish Legal Covenant (says Dr.
Annesly in his Sermon upon the Covenant of Grace; Morning Exercise, p. 122)
Neither admitted of Faith in the Redeemer, nor Repentance of Sin: For Pardon of
sin and Curse for Sin are Inconsistent, Gal. 3. 10. As many as are of the Works
of the Law are under the Curse: For it is Written, Cursed is every one that
continues not in all things which are Written in the Book of the Law to do
them. As many as depend upon the Works of the Law for Justification, are under
the Curse. And the Law (says he) discovered no other way of Justification, but
by Works. Mr. Cooper also in the same Morning Exercise, p. 117. tells us, That
Moses his Law is opposed to the Covenant of Grace, as another Covenant, upon
this very distinguishing account of Obedience and Faith, Works and Grace; as
you may see (says he) at large among other Places, Heb. 8. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, etc.

. 3. The Law therefore was not so much as Subserviently a Covenant of Faith,
much less for the Substance of it so; for it is quite another thing, and is
constantly so represented unto us in the Scriptures. The Apostle says indeed,
The Law was our Schoolmaster to Christ (...) He does not say to bring us to
Christ, as our Translation has it: (For as we have already said, that is the
Work of the Covenant of Faith only) And therefore that Notion, that the Law was
Subserviently a Covenant of Faith has no Foundation: Those Words [to bring us]
being unduly added to the Original Text, and are accordingly put in a Different
Character in our Translation thereof. But, (says the Apostle in the words
immediately following) After that Faith is come, we are no longer under a
Schoolmaster. But how can that be if the Law was a Covenant of Faith? Must the
Covenant of Faith cease; at least in this World? Must the Covenant of Faith
Vanish, be Blotted out; taken out of the way, and done away, as the Apostle
speaks of the Law? Or was the Covenant of Faith against us, and contrary to us,
as he speaks of the Handwriting of Ordinances, that is now Blotted out. And
indeed therefore, neither could the Law be so much as Subserviently a Covenant
of Faith: For if it had, the Apostle would never have described it as has been
now declared.

. 4. And it is in vain to say, That the Law was a Covenant of Faith, though
propunded in a more dark way, and in a manner, fitting for the State of that
People, and that present Time and Condition of the Church, (as Mr. Sedgwick
speaks.) For the Apostle Expressly affirms, that the Law is not of Faith: (It is
not of Faith Absolutely, not Comparatively) but the man that does them, shall
live in them, Gal. 3. 12. The Law therefore was no other than a Covenant of
Works, since not only the Apostle does here assure us, that it is not of Faith,
but also the same Rule, Do this and Live, is that still retained therein as at
first. And it is therefore different from the Covenant of Faith; not barely in
respect of the Degrees or clearness of the Revelation of Gospel Grace, (as is
commonly Suggested:) For the Law, as has been already proved, discovers none
at all, but leaves the guilty Sinner wholly Remediless, without the least
glimps of Light or Comfort. The Law therefore differs from the Covenant of
Faith Specifically, in respect of the whole Nature or Essence of it. In which
respect the Law could never be appointed as a Schoolmaster to bring us to
Christ. Well it may convince us of our Necessity of him; but bring us to him it
cannot.

5. So that then these are the Reasons which the Holy Spirit himself
Suggesteth, why the Law was added? Or why the Covenant of Works was Revived
after Man's Fall, and even after the Proclaiming of the first Promise
concerning the Woman's Seed, Gen, 3. 15. which was renewed to Abraham, Genesis 22.
18. It was added, (says the Apostle) because of Transgressions, till the Seed
should come to whom the Promise was made. And it entered that the Offense might
abound. It being appointed as a Schoolmaster to Christ, to convince the Jews
of their necessity of a Savior. And since it cannot be denied, but that all
the Sons and Daughters of Adam must of Necessity be under one or another of the
two Covenants; either that of Works, or that of Grace; And since all Men by
Nature are Children of Wrath, Ephesians. 2, 3. And since it would be utterly absurd
to affirm, that such are under a Covenant of Grace till-Converted: It of
necessity follows, that unto such the Covenant of Works is still in force, and
under it they are till wrought upon by the Grace of the Gospel; the Law abating
nothing, but still exacting the utmost Farthing. Neither from the Impossibility
of Man's yielding that perfect Obedience which that Covenant requires; can we
justly conclude that therefore it is not still in Force: For God has not
forfeited or lost his Right of Dominion, though we have lost our Strength or
Capacity of Obedience. So that it is evident, that the Law given upon Mount
Sinai to the People of the Wilderness; or the Law written in Stones, (which was
a plain and clear Manifestation of the Law written in the Heart of Man at the
first) was no other than a Covenant of Works. Thus it was to the Jews, and thus
it still continues in its full Power, Force and Virtue to all Men in an
Unregenerate State. For what things soever the Law says, it says to them that
are under the Law, that every Month may be stopped, and all the World may
become Guilty before God, Romans 3. 19.

SECT. IV.
NEither was the Law by the Jews only Interpreted as a Covenant of Works, but
as it is evident by Moses himself, and by Paul also* We are told indeed by Mr.
Sedgwick in his forementioned Discourse upon the Covenants, p. 173. That we
must distinguish between the intention of God in giving the Law, and the Abuse
or Perverting of the Law. We grant (says he) that many of the Jews did set up
a Legal Righteousness for their Justifications, and rested upon the Works of
the Law, as if Life came by them; against which Paul does notably Argue in his
Epistles to the Romans and Galatians.) But this, says he, was not the
intention of God in the Sanction of Law. They could never find a justifying
Righteousness by the Law, or Works of the Law, under the Notion of a Covenant
of Works; nor did God ever propound it for that end.

2. For Answer hereunto we say; That since, by Mr. Sedgwicks own confession,
the Jews could never find a Justifying Righteousness by the Law, or by the
Works of it. From hence it inevitably follows, that it could not be a Covenant
of Faith. Sure it is that the Covenant of Faith Justifies all that are under
it: For being Justified by Faith, we have Peace with God, etc. Romans 5. 1. That
Covenant therefore that could never Justify any that were under it, could
never be a Covenant of Faith: But the Scripture is Express, that by the deeds
of the Law there shall no Flesh be Justified in God's sight, Romans 3. 20.
Therefore that Covenant could never be a Covenant of Faith. And yet again, that
Covenant under which though many were Justified; yet none were ever Justified
by it, or by virtue of it, could never be a Covenant of Faith: But such was the
nature of the Law, that though many were Justified under it, yet none were ever
Justified by it, or by virtue of it, Romans 3. 20. Therefore that Covenant could
never be a Covenant of Faith. And if the Law was not a Covenant of Faith, then,
^t must of necessity follow, that it could be no other than a Covenant of
Works. And indeed so it was appointed and declared by God himself, Lev. 18. 5.
Ye shall therefore keep my Statutes and Judgments; which if a man do, he shall
live in them. And this the Spirit of God by the Apostle Paul takes special
notice of, Romans 10. 5. For Moses (says he) describes the Righteousness which
is of the Law, That the man that does these things shall live by them. And what
can be a more plain Description of a Covenant of Works, and that of God's own
Designation and Appointment? And that not in the way of a Partial imperfect
Obedience: But as it is Written; Cursed is every one that continues not in all
things which are written in the Book of the Law to do them, Gal. 3. 10. which
the Apostle quotes from Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Cursed be be that Confirms not all the
words of this Law to do them. And all the People shall say Amen.

. 3. So that the Jews were right enough in their Notion concerning the Law, in
reference to the true Nature thereof, that it was indeed a Covenant of Works,
(For Paul does plainly acknowledge it to be such, and God himself by the Mouth
of his Servant Moses as plainly expresses it so to be, in the very first
Sanction of it) though they were out in respect of its proper use and
intention; which was not that any should attain unto Life and Righteousness
thereby: but as we have before observed, to show them the Nature of Sin, and
the Holiness and Righteousness of God; to convince them of their Sin and Misery
without Christ, and their necessity therefore of a Savior; which they being
ignorant of and still going about to Establish their own Righteousness, which
was of the Law; and refusing to submit themselves unto the Righteousness of
God, (which was now Manifested without the Law, as it had been before Witnessed
by the Law and the Prophets) They Stumbled at that Stumbling-stone, and were
accordingly Broken and Snared and Taken, Rom, 9. 31, 32, 33. Chap. 10. 3. And
this was the true ground of the Dispute between the Apostle and them.

4. But all this notwithstanding; it is evident that the Law was a Covenant of
Works still. And it is also as evident, that it was Appointed and Established
by God as a distinct Covenant from the Promise of Grace, and essentially
different therefrom, under which the Natural Posterity of Abraham were for a
Season to be Subjected, until the time appointed of the Father, Gal. 4. 1, 2,
etc. as the Fruit of infinite Wisdom, who thought fit to impose this Burden
upon them, notwithstanding, or rather Additional unto those Discoveries of
Grace: (For the Law is said to have been Added unto the Promise) that had been
otherwise Revealed unto them, and whereby they were Saved. So that the
forementioned Objection notwithstanding it still remains Firm and Unshaken,
that the Law was no other than a Covenant of Works: So it was designed and
appointed by God himself; and constantly in the Scripture is it Represented to
us under that Character.

SECT. V.
BUt whereas the Apostle tells us, that the Law is not against the Promises,
Gal. 3. 21. Mr. Sedgwick will needs hence conclude, that the Law was not a
Covenant of Works: For (says he) The Law is not against the Promises; nor does
Faith make void the Law. Both these can very well agree together; but so they
could not if the Law had been given as a Covenant of Works: For now the Law
would be Expressly against the Promises, and Faith will certainly make void the
Law. The Promises of God are contrary to a Covenant of Works, and Faith is
Destructive to a Covenant of Works. If therefore the Promises and Faith, and
the Law can consist, then the Law cannot be set up as a Covenant of Works.

. 2. To this we Reply; First, That it ought to be duly Observed, that the Law
and the Promise having diverse ends, it does not therefore follow that there is
an Inconsistency between them: For although there is nothing that can be
clearer than this, That the Law was set up and appointed by God, as a Covenant
of Works to the Jews, to convince them of Sin, and the necessity of a Savior;
yet did God never intend it as a Means to give Life and Righteousness: nor was
it able so to do. The end of the Primise was to give Life, Righteousness,
Justification and Salvation; all by Christ; to whom, and concerning whom it was
made. But this was not the end for which the Covenant of Works was Revived, in
the Covenant of Sinai. For although in its self it requires a perfect
Righteousness, and gives a promise of Life thereon, He that does these things,
shall live in them; yet it could give neither Righteousness nor Life to any in
a State of Sin, Romans 8. 3. Chap. 10. 4. Wherefore the Promise and the Law
having diverse ends, they are not contrary to one another. Nay, rather the Law
even as it is a Covenant of Works, instead of being against the Promise, it
tends to the Establishment of it, by declaring the Impossibility of obtaining
Reconciliation and Peace with God, any other way, but by the Promise: For
representing the Commands of the Covenant of Works, requiring perfect Sin-less
Obedience, under the Penalty of the Curse; it convinced Men, that this was no
way for Sinners to seek for Life and Salvation by. And herewith it so urged the
Consciences of Men, that they could have no Rest nor Peace in themselves, but
what the Promise would afford them; whereunto therefore they saw a necessity of
betaking themselves. So that though we affirm the Law to be no other than a
Covenant of Works, as the Apostle himself does; yet it does not therefore
follow that it is against the Promise, it having so Blessed a Subserviency
toward the Establishment thereof.

. 3. Secondly, though the Apostle does indeed tell us, Gal. 3. 21. That the Law
is not against the Promises. The following Words do sufficiently clear his
Meaning to be of quite another Nature than Mr. Sedgwick in his forementioned
Discourse, apprehends it to be. Mr. Sedgwick indeed will by no-means allow that
the Law was set up as a Covenant of Works; and then it must of necessity
follow, that it is a Covenant of Faith. But the Apostle seems to be of another
mind: For having told us, ver. 18. That if the Inheritance be of the Law, it is
no more of Promise: But God gave it to Abraham by Promise. And having answered
the Question, or Objection, ver. 19. Wherefore then serves the Law? To which
himself gives this Resolution, That it was added because of Transgressions,
till the Seed should come to whom the Promise was made. He brings in this
further Objection, ver. 21. against what he had before Asserted, viz. That if
the Inheritance be of the Law, it is no more of Promise, etc. Is the Law then
against the Promises? God forbid, (says he.) For if there had been a Law given
which could have given Life, verily Righteousness should have been by the Law:
But the Scripture has concluded all under Sin, that the Promise by Faith of
Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe. In the first place then it is
Evident and Undeniable, that Abraham's Inheritance was not derived unto him
through the Law: For, (says our Apostle) If the Inheritance be of the Law, it
is no more of Promise; but God gave it to Abraham by Promise. So that it
clearly appears by the scope of the Apostle's Argument, that the Law could not
be a Covenant of Faith: For if it had, it would have been honored as an
Instrument for the conveyance of Abraham's Inheritance: But, says he, God gave
it to Abraham by Promise, not by the Law; therefore the Law could not be a
Covenant of Faith. But is the Law then against the Promises? God forbid, (says
he.) For if there had been a Law given, which could have given Life, verily
Righteousness should have been by the Law; but the Scripture has concluded all
under Sin, that the Promise of Faith by Jesus Christ might be given to them
that Believe. So that the Law could not be a Covenant of Faith, since the
Apostle does here so plainly distinguish between them; setting forth the
Weakness of the one, and the Strength and Perfection of the other. The Law
(says he) Could not give Life; but the Covenant of Faith does. The Law indeed
would, but could not: It promises Life, but it could not perform it through
the Weakness of the Flesh. (So there is no Repugnancy in the Law against the
Promises) but what the Law could not do, the Covenant of Faith performs: For
it not only promises Life, but accomplisheth what it has promised, and sets
the Soul in Safety.

4. According to the plain and clear Scope of the Apostle's Reasoning,
therefore; the Law is so far from being a Covenant of Faith, that it is quite
another thing. For if it had been a Covenant of Faith, it would have given
Life, as the Covenant of Faith does: But it could not give Life, therefore it
could be no other than a Covenant of Works. But is the Law then against the
Promises? God forbid, says Paul; and so say we. For supposing the Law to be,
as it is indeed, a pure Covenant of Works; yet through the Satisfaction of
Christ, there is no Repugnancy, or Hostile Contrariety betwixt the Law and the
Promises, or between the Law and Faith, which has respect to the Promises.
There is only a difference of Deficiency, in respect of that Strength that
there is in the one, to what there was in the other. The one being Weak through
the Flesh; the other Strong and Powerful, and goes through-stitch with its
Work. But what the Law could not do through our Weakness, that Christ has
performed, by fulfilling its Commands, and submitting to its Curse, on our
behalf; whereby God's Justice is satisfied, and Everlasting Righteousness
obtained, for the Salvation of Sinners. And indeed herein consists the
Covenant of Faith; here is the Object of it, and in this path is the very Law
and Justice of God it self most highly Glorified. Shall we say then, that
because the Law is a Covenant of Works, that it is therefore against the
Promises? God forbid. For who shall lay any thing to the Charge of God's Elect,
so as to hinder the accomplishment of the Promises upon them? The Law it self
does not, cannot Impeach them, since it is God that Justifies. Or, Who shall
Condemn them? The Law it self cannot; since it is Christ that Died. It is true,
the Law says, That the man that does these things, shall Live by them. And
indeed herein the very Essence of the Covenant of Works consists. But the
Covenant of Faith leads us to what Christ has done and performed for us; which
the Covenant of Works does not. But though the Law leads us not to Christ; yet
Christ being made under it, and giving it its due honor on our behalf; hence
it follows, that the Law it self that was before our Enemy, stands up as our
Friend: Even that Law that was before against us, which was Contrary to us, and
which was in it self no other than the Ministration of Death and Condemnation;
even that Law stands up as our Friend, through the Mediation of Christ, whom
God therefore has set forth to be a Propitiation through Faith in his Blood to
declare his Righteousness that he might be Just, and the Justifier of him that
Believes in Jesus, Romans 3. 24, 25, 26. So that the Law (through the
Satisfaction of Christ; though it be, as it is indeed a Covenant of Works; yet)
is not against the Promises; there is no Real Repugnancy, or Contrariety
between them, whatever there seems to be: Which made the Apostle Propound the
Question as he does.

5. Besides, the same Apostle that tells us, The Law is not against the
Promises, does also expressly Assure us, That the Law is not of Faith, but the
Man that does them shall live by them, Gal. 3. 12. So that though it is true,
the Law is not against the Promises, Since Mercy and Truth, Righteousness and
Peace are met together in Christ; yet it is as true, that the Law is not of
Faith. And if the Law is not of Faith; then neither can it be a Covenant of
Faith, but of Works; as the same Apostle does plainly affirm it is, Romans 3. 27,
28. And therefore neither could it give Life: For if it could, Righteousness
should have been by it: But (says he) The Scripture has concluded all under
Sin, that the Promise by Faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that
Believe. The Law therefore was not a Covenant of Faith: For if it had, it would
have given Life, and so Righteousness should have been by the Law: But it could
not give Life, and so Righteousness was not by the Law, therefore it was not a
Covenant of Faith. The like Inference may be clearly drawn from Romans 10. 5, 6,
etc. Moses (says the Apostle) Describes the Righteousness of the Law, that
the Man which does these things shall live by them. But the Righteousness which
is of Faith, (or Gospel Covenant) speaks on this wise, etc. If thou
Believe, thou shall be Saved. Wherein we cannot but observe, that the Apostle
makes a plain difference betwixt the Righteousness of the Law, and the
Righteousness of Faith. The one, says he, speaks after this sort; the other
speaks after quite another rate, From whence also it plainly follows, that
the Law could not be a Covenant of Faith; since the Righteousness of the one is
here so plainly Opposed to the Righteousness of the other; which yet it would
not be, had the Law been a Covenant of Faith; nay, though it had been so only
more Darkly, and not with that clearness of Demonstration as the Gospel Reveals
it; had it been so Subserviently only; much more if it had been such for the
Substance of it, as it Affirmed. For it cannot be imagined, that if it had been
a Covenant of Grace, or a Covenant of Faith Subserviently, much more if it had
been such for the Substance of it; that ever it would have been set in point
blank Opposition to it, as quite another thing, as it is. When the Apostle
tells us therefore, that the Righteousness which is of the Law says, Do this,
and Live; but the Righteousness of Faith speaks in quite another Dialect: It
is plain there is a difference between them toto Genere; or in the whole Kind,
or Substance thereof, and not barely in the several Degrees of Manifestation;
as is suggested: For as the Apostle Reasons concerning Election, Romans 11. 6.
So it is here. If it be of Works, then it is no more Grace; otherwise Work is
no more Work. And if by Grace, then it is no more of Works; otherwise Grace is
no more Grace. Either therefore the Law was a Covenant of Grace, or it was a
Covenant of Works: If it was a Covenant of Grace, then according to the scope
of the Apostle's Reasoning, it was not a Covenant of Works; or it is no more of
Works; that is, it is not of Works at all: And consequently Moses does not
describe the Righteousness which is of the Law as he does, that the Man that
does these things, shall live by them. But if this be absurd, and it be evident
that it is, as it is indeed, a Covenant of Works: For the same Reason therefore
neither can it in any Sense, be a Covenant of Gospel Grace; otherwise (as the
Apostle speaks) Work is no more Work. For these two, Grace and Works, or Faith
and Works, are constantly in the Scripture opposed the one unto the other, in
point of our Justification before God's Presence, (which is our present case)
and admit of no Mixture.

. 6. So that though the Law (even as it is a Covenant of Works) is not against
the Promises; that is, there is no Repugnancy between them; there being a sweet
Harmony and Conjunction of all the Blessed Attributes of God in Christ in the
way of the Salvation of Sinners; yet the Law is constantly in the Scripture
represented in a way of Contradistinction to the Promises; and so it is in the
words foregoing, as has been already observed, ver. 18. If (says the Apostle)
the Inheritance be of the Law, it is no more of Promise; but God gave it to
Abraham by Promise. And (which is yet clearer) the same Apostle does also
assure us, Romans 4. 14. That if they which are of the Law be heirs, Faith is
made void, and the Promise made of none Effect. Therefore the Law could not
possibly be a Covenant of Faith, but of Works.

SECT. VI.
ANd whereas the Apostle does also tell us, Romans 3. 31. That we do not make
Void the Law through Faith, but Establish it. This also is true, and no way
Contradicts, but is Consistent enough with what has been Asserted, viz. That
the Law is no other than a Covenant of Works: Forasmuch as Christ our surety
has fulfilled it for us, given it its due Honor, and satisfied its Penalty on
our behalf. So that we are so far from making void the Law, through Faith; that
it is rather thereby Established; as having received greater Honor by the
obedience and Sufferings of Christ, than ever could have been given it by us.

. 2. And yet further, (which is also Objected to the same purpole as before)
whereas the Apostle does also tell us, Romans 10. 4. That Christ is the end of
the Law for Righteousness to every one that believes. The Sense is Evident:
Forasmuch as what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the Flesh;
God sending his own Son in the likeness of Sinful Flesh, and for Sin (or by a
Sacrifice for Sin) Condemned Sin in the Flesh, that the Righteousness of the
Law might be fullfilled in us (that is in the Person of our surety for us) Romans
8, 3, 4. And thus Christ is the end of the Law for Righteousness to every one
that believes, by fulfilling its Commands, and answering its Penalty on our
behalf. But does it therefore follow that the Law is a Covenant of Faith? It is
Evident that Christ Submitted to it as a Covenant of Works. And if it was so to
Christ, it was so to us, and would have been so, and the Curse thereof had
accordingly lighted on us, had not Christ Interposed for our Relief. But,
(says the Apostle) when the Fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son
made of a Woman, made under the Law, to Redeem them that were under the Law,
that we might receive the Adoption of Sons, Gal. 4. 4, 5. From whence it
clearly appears, that the Law was not a Covenant of Faith: For if it had, what
necessity was there for Christ to have Redeemed us from under it? Can we
imagine that Christ ever shed his Blood to Redeem us from being under a
Covenant of Faith, or from being under a Gospel Covenant? The Law was therefore
no other than a Covenant of Works, from which Christ has now Redeemed us, by
his Blood and Sufferings for us. The Law indeed shows us our Sin and Misery
without Christ, but Relieves us not, Romans 7. 7, 8, 9, 10. which the Covenant of
Faith does, Romans 10. 6, 7, 8, 9. Nay the Law, instead of Relieving or Curing
us, it brings us under the Curse, which the Covenant of Faith delivers us from,
Gal. 3. 8, 9, 10. But though we are delivered from the Law as a Covenant of
Life, Do this, and live; yet it is also as true, that All true Believers are
still under the Law to Christ, as a Rule of Life, 1 Cor. 9. 21.

SECT. VII.
MR. Sedgwick does indeed also tell us in his forementioned Discourse upon the
Covenants, p. 174. That that Covenant which God made with Moses, and under
which Moses stood, was no Covenant of Works: But Moses and the People of Israel
were both under the same Covenant. Exodus 34. 27. I have made a Covenant with
thee and with Israel. If any doubt under what Covenant Moses stood, (whether of
Works or Grace) let him peruse Heb. 11. 26. What a Description he shall there
find of Moses. He shall there find him to be a Choice and Eminent Believer in
Christ; Esteeming the Reproach of Christ greater Riches than the Treasures in
Egypt, and having respect to the Recompense of Reward, etc. Now, certainly
such a Choice Believer in Christ, was not under a Covenant of Works. And p.
175, 176. speaking of the immediate Introduction unto the giving of the Law,
Exodus 20. 2. I am the Lord thy God, which have brought thee out of the Land of
Egypt. Why (says he) there is the very Covenant of Grace. Here is God as our
God; (And Blessed are the People who have the Lord to be their God.) And here
is Jesus Christ the Mediator of the Covenant implied; for in Christ does God
become our God. And there is our Redemption from Sin and Satan* intimated, by
their Deliverance out of Egypt. And presently there is the Worship of God
Instituted and Appointed, which if Acceptable to God* must be performed with
Faith: For without Faith it is impossible to please God. And (says he) upon
the Breaking of the Tables of the Covenant, before they were Written again,
there is such a Preface made by God, as can no way fit any Covenant but that of
Grace, as you may see in Exodus 34. 7. The Lord, the Lord, Gracious and
Merciful, Long-suffering and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for
thousands, forgiving Iniquities, Transgressions and Sin.

2. To this we Reply, that it is indeed most certain and undeniable, that both
Moses and all the Elect among that People of Old, were under the same Covenant
of Grace with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and all the rest of the Holy
Patriarchs before; and by that they were Saved; and without it there had been
no Salvation for them. And accordingly we are told, Exodus 33. That upon Moses
his earnest request unto God, that he might see his Glory; and that he would
afford unto him his Gracious Presence, for the more comfortable Conduct of that
great and mighty People through that vast and howling Wilderness: The Lord is
pleased ver. 17. to Promise, that he would do this thing that Moses had spoken:
For (says he) thou have found grace in my sight, and I know thee by name, And
he said, I will make all my goodness pass before thee, and I will proclaim the
name of the Lord before thee, and will be gracious to whom I will be gracious;
and will show Mercy to whom I will show Mercy. And accordingly, Chap. 34. 5, 6,
7. The Lord descended in the Cloud, and stood with him there, and proclaimed
the name of the Lord. And the Lord passed by before him, and Proclaimed, the
Lord, the Lord God, merciful and Gracious, Long-suffering, and abundant in
goodness and truth; keeping mercy for thousands; forgiving iniquity,
transgression and sin. Which was absolutely and undeniably a Covenant of Grace,
which God then made and confirmed unto Moses by Name, and unto all that were
Elected among that People; (for it was not to all, since God expressly tells
Moses, that he would be gracious to whom he would be gracious, and would show
mercy to whom he would show mercy.) And accordingly this was that that God's
People then lived upon, and were saved by: For if there had been no other
Covenant made with them than that that was contained in the two Tables of
Stone, it had been utterly impossible that either Moses or any of the rest
could ever have been Saved. And this Gospel Cordial seems to have been
purposely afforded unto Moses and the rest of the Faithful with him, for the
Relief of their sinking Spirits under the dread and terror of that Fiery
Burning Law, Deuteronomy. 33, 2. The Lord came from Sinai, and rose up from Seir unto
them; he shined forth from Mount Paran; and he came with ten thousands of
Saints: From his right hand went a Fier^e Law, that had been before proclaimed
by the Mouth of God himself, and had been also written with God's own Finger;
and was now about to be renewed, upon the breaking of the first Tables of
Stone. Which discovery of Gods Infinite Holiness, Justice and Righteousness,
proclaimed with so much Majesty and Glory, attended with such Thunderings,
Blackness, Darkness and Tempest, was so dreadful and terrible, that Moses
himself exceedingly fears, and quakes at the Sight and Hearing thereof: And is
accordingly taken Notice of and represented by the Apostle as a Discriminating,
or Distinguishing Character between that and the Gospel Covenant, Heb. 12. 18.
etc. You are not come (says he) to the Mount that might be touched, and that
Burned with Fire, nor unto Blackness, and Darkness, and Tempest, and the sound
of a Trumpet, and the voice of Words; which Voice they that heard, entreated
that the Word should not be spoken to them any more. And so terrible was the
Sight, that Moses himself said, I exceedingly fear and quake. But ye are come
unto Mount Sion, to the City of the Living God, to the Heavenly Jerusalem, to
God the Judge of all; to Jesus the Mediator of the New Covenant, etc. From
whence it is evident that there is an Essential difference between these two,
the Law and the Gospel; so as that what the one is, the other is not; the Law
is not the Gospel, nor the Gospel the Law. You are not come (says he) unto the
Legal, but unto the Gospel Covenant. The Legal Covenant discovered nothing but
Blackness, and Darkness and Tempest, and a voice of Words that could not be
endured: For according to the Apostle's own present Description or Character
thereof, it made no discovery of the least glimps of Gospel Grace at all. The
Legal Covenant therefore could not be a Covenant of Grace, or a Covenant of
Faith, that made no discovery of any such thing, but rather the contrary; so as
that it makes Moses himself exceedingly Quake and Tremble.

. 3. However, it is certain that both Moses, and all the Elect among that
People of Old, were under the Covenant of Grace, as we have already said, and
by that were saved: And accordingly we are told, that they did all (that is,
all the Elect among them) Eat the same spiritual Meat, and did all Drink the
same spiritual Drink: For they Drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them,
and that Rock was Christ. 1 Cor. 10. 3. 4. And it is as Evident that it was no
other than Christ himself that was the Angel of Gods presence, that was to go
before them and Conduct them in the way they were to go. But yet all this
notwithstanding, it is plain that the Law was a Covenant of Works still; and it
is also as Evident that it was a distinct Covenant, and Essentially different
from the Covenant of Grace: And was accordingly made with Moses, and the whole
Body of the Congregation, and not with Moses and those that were Elected among
them only; as the Covenant of Grace was. And therefore Exodus 19. 5, 6. (Says
God, there to the whole Body of the Congregation of Israel, at the foot of
Mount Sinai. Now therefore if ye will Obey my voice indeed, and keep my
Covenant, then ye shall be a Peculiar Treasure unto me above all People: for
all the Earth is mine: And ye shall be to me a Kingdom of Priests, and a Holy
Nation. These are the Words that thou shall speak unto the Children of Israel.
Mark it: These are the words that thou shall speak unto the Children of Israel,
that is, unto the whole Body of that People, without Exception of any, as being
of Universal Concernment unto them all. And these are the Words, that is, these
are the Terms on which thou shall propound these my Promises to them, viz. If
you will Obey my Voice indeed, and keep my Covenant with all your Heart, and
with all your Soul; so as not in the least to vary, or step aside from what I
have now Commanded you; then I will do thus and thus, unto, and for you, and I
will give you a Convincing Discovery, that I am indeed the Lord your God, which
have brought you out of the Land of Egypt. For upon these and no other terms do
I now enter into Covenant with you. And Cursed shall he be that Confirms not
all the words of this Law to do them: The promises I now make you, are full and
Glorious enough: But these are the Terms on which you must Expect if ever you
come to the Fruition of them. This is the Substance of the Preface, and after
Explication, that God himself makes, unto, and concerning the Covenant which he
now made with Moses, and with Israel, even with the whole Body of that People;
which was by the Finger of God himself Written and Engraven in Stones: And is
accordingly mentioned at large, Exodus 20. In the several ten Branches,
Commandments, or main Heads thereof.

4. In the next place, if we Enquire into the Nature of this Covenant: What
sort of Covenant it was? Whether a Covenant of Grace, or a Covenant of Works:
As it is Evident that it could be no other than a Covenant of Works; since we
see it required perfect Obedience as the condition of obtaning the mercies
therein promised; wherein the very Essence of that Covenant Consisted: So in
order to a further discovery of the true nature of the Covenant in question, We
must compare some passages in Exodus 34. with 2 Cor. 3. and Col. 2. 14. In Exodus
34. 1. The Lord said unto Moses, hew the two Tables of Stone like unto the
first: And I will Write upon these Tables the words that were in the first
Tables, ver. 4. And he hewed two Tables of Stone like unto the first: And Moses
went up unto the Mount Sinai, as the Lord Commanded him, and took in his hand
the two Tables of Stone. ver. 28. And he was there with the Lord 40 days and 40
nights; and he Wrote upon the Tables, the words of the Covenant, the ten
Commandments. And it came to pass, when Moses came down from Mount Sinai (with
the two Tables of Testimony in Moses's hand, when he came down from the Mount)
that Moses Wist not that the Skin of his Face shone, while he talked with him.
And when Aaron and all the Children of Israel saw Moses, behold the Skin of his
Face shone; and they were afraid to come nigh him. If we will know therefore
the true Nature of the Covenant, we shall find that the Spirit of God by the
Apostle, does give us a clear determination thereof in the forementioned, 2.
Cor. 3. 5, 6. Our Sufficiency (says he) is of God, who has also made us able
Ministers of the New Testament; not of the Letter, but of the Spirit; (that is,
not of the Law, but of the Gospel) For the Letter Kills, but the Spirit
gives Life. But (says he, ver. 7.) If the Ministration of Death Written and
Engraven in Stones was Glorious, so that the Children of Israel could not
steadfastly behold the Face of Moses for the Glory of his Countenance, which
Glory was to be done away; how shall not the Ministration of the Spirit be
rather Glorious. So again, ver. 9. If the Ministration of Condemnation be
Glory, much more does the Ministration of Righteousness exceed in Glory.
Wherein we cannot but observe, that the Apostle does evidently Reflect upon the
fore mentioned Passage in Exodus 34* 28, 29, etc. Where we are told, that Moses
Received from God the two Tables of Stone, wherein the words of the Covenant,
even the Ten Commandments, were Written and Engraven by the Finger of God
himself; and this Expressly under the Denomination of the Covenant, which God
then made with Israel, Deuteronomy. 4. 13. Which made Moses his Face to shine, so that
Aaron and all the Children of Israel were afraid to come nigh him. It Is clear
then, that this is the Covenant that Paul hear speaks of. And what Character or
Description does he give thereof? Why (says he) The Law Written and Engraven
in Stones, (how Glorious soever it was in it self) was of a Killing Nature; it
was the Ministration of Death and Condemnation; and that which was to be done
away. To which same purpose, the same Apostle also tells us, Col. 2. 14. That
Christ has Blotted out the Handwriting of Ordinances that was against us,
which was contrary to us, and has took it out of the way, nailing it to his
Cross. Where the Apostle speaks plainly of the same thing and to the same
purpose, as he does to the Corinthians; for there he speaks of the Law Written
in Stones, which (says he) was a Ministration of Death and Condemnation. And
hereof the Handwriting of Ordinances that was against us, and contrary to us,
(as the Law must needs be, if it was indeed no other than a Ministration of
Death and Condemnation, as the Apostle describes it.) But is the Covenant of
Faith of this Nature? Or was the Covenant of Grace a Ministration of Death and
Condemnation, as the Apostle Affirms the Law written in Stones to be? Was the
Covenant of Grace against us, Contrary to us, and therefore now Blotted out,
done away, taken out of the way, and Nailed to the Cross of Christ, as the
Apostle speaks of the Handwriting of Ordinances, or the Law written in Stones?
These are Sol^cisms too strong for Digestion. It can never be imagined. And yet
all this must needs follow, if the Law was a Covenant of Grace, as is Affirmed.
It Is true, there was a Covenant of Grace that ran Current therewith, (as has
been before declared) whereby Moses and all the Elect among that People, were
delivered from the Curse of that Fiery Burning Law, that was thus given them.
But shall we therefore call the Ministration of Death, a Ministration of Grace?
Or the ministration of Condemnation, a Ministration of Life and Righteousness,
which the Apostle does so plainly set in Opposition thereunto? Or shall we say,
that that which was against us, and contrary to us, was a Covenant of Grace, or
for the Substance of it such? The Apostle (as we have already seen) tells us
the quite contrary. And so he does Romans 7. 9, 10. When the Commandment came
(says he) Sin Revived, and I Died: And the Commandment which was Ordained to
Life, I found to be unto Death. And how then can it be justly Affirmed, that
the Law was a Covenant of Gospel Grace, or that it was such for the Substance
thereof, when the Apostle found it by Experience to be a Ministration of Death.

. 5. Indeed the World Groans under the Burden of such Subtle Sophistical
Distinctions, whereby the Truths of the Gospel have been so long Obscured, as
they have been, and are, in respect of the present Point; a Point of such vast
Consequence and Concernment to the Church of God. For what can be of greater
Moment than the Two Covenants; the Truths concerning which, are as the two
Master Veins that branch themselves forth, and lie dispersed up and down,
throughout the whole Body of the Scriptures? If therefore it shall be found
that we have been all this while Mistaken in our Notion about the Covenants,
what they are, and which they be; or that we have given the Appellation of the
Covenant of Grace, to a Covenant of Works; and hereon have built up an
Answerable Superstructure of Faith and Practice; how great will such a
Miscarriage prove to be at last? Indeed, there is no part of the Christian
Faith or Practice, but must one way or other have been Influenced and Corrupted
thereby. Accordingly hence has sprung that Jumbling or Confounding of Law and
Gospel together, which the Spirit of God does so Distinguishingly represent
unto us in the Word of Truth; and which the Apostle does so severely Rebuke the
Teachers among the Galatians, concerning. I Marvel (says he, Gal. 1. 6, 7.)
that ye are so soon removed from him that called you into the Grace of Christ,
unto another Gospel, which is, not another; but there be some that trouble you,
and would Pervert the Gospel of Christ. They would Pervert it, that is, they
would change it, Overthrow it, and turn it upside down; by mingling Law and
Gospel together; pretend unto the Gospel, and yet seek for Righteousness, as it
were by the Works of the Law. But certainly, as we are not to Separate or put
asunder what God has Conjoined; so neither are we to mingle what God has
Separated, and does plainly Distinguish. The Law is not the Gospel; nor is the
Gospel the Law. These two are distinct, and must be kept so; as having their
Distinct Services, and in their proper Places. To call therefore the Covenant
of Works a Covenant of Faith; or the Legal Covenant delivered on Mount Sinai, a
Covenant of Grace; is no other than to Blend or Confound Law and Gospel
together, as if they were the same thing, and no distinstion at all to be made
betwixt them, only in respect of the different Degrees, or clearness of the
Revelation of Gospel Grace.

. 6. But whatever we may Imagine, the Apostle does most plainly distinguish
betwixt Law and Gospel, and that in Respect of the whole Entire Nature,
Essence, or Subsistence of either. Tell me (says he, Gal. 4. 21. etc.) You
that desire to be under the Law, do ye not hear the Law? Know you not that
Abraham had two Sons, the one by a Bondwoman, the other by Free; the one Born
after the Flesh, the other by Promise? And know you not that this was plainly
Typical of the two Covenants, the Legal and the Gospel? And that these two must
needs be therefore Essentially Different, as much as Bondage is from Liberty:
Or a Birth after the Flesh, from that by promise? Tell me (says he) You that
desire to be under the Law, do ye not hear the Law? Does not the Old Testament
it self speak this Language to you? But whom does the Apostle mean when he
speaks of them that desire to be under the Law? It Is strange that after, the
Gospel took place, any should desire to be under the Law; or that any should be
desirous of returning to that old and former Yoke of Bondage, they had so long
been Laboring under, and were now delivered from: To be under the Law is not
to be under Grace: For these two are directly opposite. Romans 6. 14. Sin shall
not have Dominion over you for ye are not under the Law, but under Grace. But
yet nevertheless, it seems such there were, even in the Apostle's time, who
were desirous to be under the Law: And it is as plain that such there are now.
But who are they? Why they are plainly those that Affirm that the Law is a
Covenant of Faith, or a Covenant of Grace. Those must needs be of the Number of
them that desire to be under the Law. And how can it be otherwise? For ought we
not to submit our selves to a Covenant of Faith, and Subject our selves under
the Power and Dominion of Gospel Grace? If therefore we affirm that the Law is
a Covenant of Faith, or a Covenant of Grace, we cannot be true to our own
Principles, if we do not desire to be under it, and under the Power and
Dominion of it; and that not barely as a Rule of Life (which we all grant) but
as a Covenant of Life, or as a Covenant of Faith and Grace, as it is affirmed
to be. But if we are desirous to be under the Law, (let our Notion thereof be
what it will; that it is a Covenant of Works, or a Covenant of Grace) This is
the direct and ready way for Christ to become of no Effect unto us. For (says
the Apostle, Gal. 5, 4.) Whosoever of you are Justified by the Law, ye are
fallen from Grace. And Consequently, instead of being not under the Law, but
under Grace, (as the same Apostle speaks of the believing Romans.) We are
rather under the Law, and not under Grace. For these two are there (as well as
in many other places besides) plainly distinguished as quite Opposite the one
unto the other: So that if we are under the one, we are not under the other. If
we are under Grace, we are not under the Law; And if we are under the Law, we
are not under Grace.

. 7. But, tell me (says Paul in the forementioned, Gal. 4 21: etc.) You that
desire to be under the Law; Do you not hear the Law? For it is Written, that
Abraham had two Sons, the one by a Bond-Maid, the other by a Freewoman. But he
who was of the Bondwoman, was born after the Flesh: But he of the Freewoman,
by Promise. Which things are an Allegory: For these are the two Covenants; the
one from Mount Sinai, which gendereth to Bondage, which is Agar: For this Agar
is Mount Sinai in Arabia, and answers to Jerusalem which now is, and i^ in
Bondage with her Children. But Jerusalem which is above, is free, which is the
Mother of us all. For it is Written, Rejoice thou barren that bear not, etc.
Now we Brethren (says he) as Isaac was, are the Children of the Promise.
Wherein the Apostle does make a plain Difference between the two Covenants, the
Legal and the Gospel, in the very Radical Nature, or Essence of either; Not in
point of the Degrees of the Manifestation of Gospel Grace (as is by many
Divines suggested) For the Law Written in Stones discovers none at all. The
Covenant from Mount Sinai (says our Apostle.) gendereth to Bondage: For this
Agar is Mount Sinai in Arabia, and is in Bondage with her Children. So that
Mount Sinai Covenant is no other than a Bondage Covenant; it gendereth to
Bondage; this is the natural scope, and tendency of it; and accordingly all her
Children are in Bondage. And therefore, unless we shall say that the Covenant
of Faith gendereth to Bondage; Or that the Covenant of Grace is a Bondage
Covenant; And that all those that are under it, or are the Children of it, are
in Bondage; we can by no means allow that Mount Sinai Covenant was ever
designed by God as a Covenant of Faith, or as a Covenant of Grace, as by many
Divines it is Confidently Affirmed to be. And therefore also, All those that
desire to be under it (which cannot be avoided by those that affirm it to be a
Covenant of Faith) must of necessity (according to the Apostles Reckoning) be
desirous of Returning to that old Bondage which Christ has delivered us from;
and which the Apostle does so earnestly Exhort us to avoid, Gal. 5. 1. Stand
fast therefore in the Liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, and be not
Entangled again with the Yoke of Bondage.

. 8. But though Mount Sinai Covenant (which answered to Jerusalem that then
was) is a Bondage Covenant; The Gospel Covenant (says the Apostle, which
answers to Jerusalem that is above) is free, which is the Mother of us all.
The Gospel Covenant therefore being a free. Covenant* It must not, it ought not
to be Blended, or Mixed with that from Mount Sinai, as if the one were the
other, and no difference at all to be made betwixt them; only in Respect of
the different Degrees of the Discovery of Gospel Grace. No (says the Apostle)
What says the Scripture? Cast out the Bondwoman and her Son! For the Son of
the Bondwoman shall not be Heir with the Son of the Freewoman. So then
Brethren, we are not Children of the Bondwoman, but of the Free. In the 30.
and 31. Verses of the forementioned 4th to the Galatians. And this we must be;
And thus we must do (as the Apostle here advises us) unless we shall mingle
Law and Gospel together; Bondage and Liberty; Works and Grace; Death and Life;
And a ministration of Condemnation with that of Righteousness and Peace: Which
would be no other, than (as much as in us lies) to overthrow the whole Gospel,
and to obscure, darken and confound those truths that are of highest
Importance; And which ought therefore to be carefully and distinctly handled by
us, according to the different Services they are designed and appointed for.

SECT. VIII.
BUT then, we are yet further told by Mr. Sedgwick in his forementioned
Discourse, page 174. That that Covenant which was Confirmed by Blood and
Sprinkling (which Typified the Blood of Christ, Gonfirming and Ratifying the
Covenant) was no Covenant of Works. But the Covenant which God made then with
the Israelites was Confirmed by Blood, Exodus 24. 7. Moses took the Book of the
Covenant, and read it in the Audience of the People. And they said; All that
the Lord has said we will do and be Obedient, Verse. 8. And Moses took the
Blood and Sprinkled it on the People; And said; Behold the Blood of the
Covenant which the Lord has made with you concerning all these words. Now this
very place is quoted by the Apostle, Heb. 9. 19. He Sprinkled both the Book and
the People, Verse. 20. Saying, This is the Blood of the Testament, which God
has Enjoined you. And expressly Interprets it, and applies it to the Blood of
Christ, Verse. 14. and Verse. 23. And therefore that Covenant with that People
was not a Covenant of Works; which never was, nor shall be Confirmed by the
Blood of Christ.

. 2. To which we Reply, First, That it is Evident, that the Covenant, the Blood
whereof Moses Sprinkled on the People, in the forementioned, Exodus 24. 7, 8.
Could not possibly be the Law Written in Stones; which will appear in a
diligent Examination of the words before and after Verse. 3, 4. Moses came and
told the People all the words of the Lord, and all the Judgments. And all the
People Answered with one Voice, and said; All the words which the Lord, has
spoken we will do. And Moses Wrote all the words of the Lord and rose up early
in the Morning and builded an Altar, etc. Verse. 5. And be sent Young Men of the
Children of Israel, which offered burnt offerings, and Sacrificed Peace
offerings of Oxen unto the Lord, Verse. 6. And Moses took half of the Blood, and
put it in Basins; And half of the Blood be Sprinkled on the Altar, Verse. 7. And
he took the Book of the Covenant, and read in the Audience of the People. And
they said; All that the Lord has said we will do, and be Obedient, Verse. 8.
And Moses took the Blood, and Sprinkled it on the People, and said, behold the
Blood of the Covenant which the Lord has made with you concerning all these
words. Now that the Book of the Covenant here spoken of, the Blood whereof was
thus Sprinkled on the People; could not be the Law Written in Stones; appears
most evidently from the following words, Verse. 9. Then went up Moses and Aaron,
Nadab and Abihu, and Seventy of the Elders of Israel; And they saw the God of
Israel, etc. Verse. 12. And the Lord said unto Moses; Come up to me into the
Mount, and be there; And I will give thee Tables of Stone, and a Law and
Commandments; which I have Written, that thou may teach them. Wherein first
we cannot but observe; That whereas the words of the Covenant, the Blood
whereof was Sprinkled on the People, Verse. 8. are expressly said, Verse. 4. to be
Written by Moses; So on the other hand, the Law Written in Stones is here
expressly said to be Written by God himself. And Secondly, It is also as evident
that Moses had not as yet so much as received the Law Written in Stones from
God, till after he had Sprinkled the Blood of the forementioned Covenant
(wherein the Statutes and Judgments were contained) upon the People. So that
the Law Written in Stones therefore could not possibly be the Covenant the
Blood whereof was so sprinkled; but was indeed another Covenant, and delivered
at a distinct Season, and in a distinct Method; the one uttered and declared by
^he Mouth of God himself, in the Audience of all the People; the other
delivered unto them by the Mouth and Ministration of Moses only. The one
Written with Gods own Finger in the two Tables of Stone; the other Written in a
Book by the Hand of Moses* which is accordingly here called the Book of the
Covenant, by way of distinction from the Tables of Stone. From whence by the
way it clearly appears; That that Covenant, which as Moses elsewhere assures
us, God himself with his own Immediate Mouth and Voice declared unto Israel;
and that in the Audience of all the People, Deuteronomy. 4. 10, 11, 12, 13. was in
this as well as in other respects, as much a Covenant of Works as that made
with our first Parent: For if the Covenant made with Adam had no Mediator; so
neither had this. It Is plain indeed that God made use of the Ministration of
Moses in the delivery of the Ceremonial Covenant; but not so in the
Promulgation of this: For this was both Written and declared Immediately by the
Hand and Mouth of God himself.

. 3. But to return; Whereas Mr. Sedgwick tells us; That that Covenant with that
People, which was Confirmed by Blood and Sprinkling (which Typified the Blood
of Christ Confirming and Ratifying the Covenant) was not a Covenant of Works,
which never was nor shall be Confirmed by the Blood of Christ; and makes no
distinction thereon, between the Ceremonial Covenant, that was Dedicated with
Blood, and the Law Written in Stones, that was not so Dedicated; How strangely
does he Confound and Obscure the word and truth of God, which ought to have
been cleared, and distinctly to have been declared to those he had Preached or
Written unto? For first he seems to take it for granted that there was no other
Covenant made with Israel at Sinai, but what was Confirmed, by Blood. And
Secondly, That that Covenant which wa^ so Confirmed must of necessity have been
Confirmed also by the Blood of Christ Typified thereby, and therefore not a
Covenant of Works. But both these are no other than ungrounded suppositions
that want a Foundation.

. 4. For first, It has been already proved, That the Law Written in Stones had
not been so much as received from God, when the Ceremonial Covenant was so
Confirmed. And accordingly it was so far from being Confirmed by the Blood of
Christ, that we do not read that it was ever Dedicated with any other sort of
Blood whatsoever. It is indeed suggested that the Law Written in Stones by Gods
own Finger, had been also Written by Moses in the Book of the Covenant wherein
the Statutes and Judgments were contained, when the Blood thereof was sprinkled
on the People; Since we are told, Exodus 24. 3, 4. That Moses came and told the
People all the Words of the Lord, and all the Judgments. And Moses Wrote all
the Words of the Lord, and took the Book of the Covenant, and Read in the
Audience of the People, and took the Blood and Sprinkled it on the People;
saying, Behold the Blood of the Covenant which the Lord has made with you,
concerning all these Words. But if we duly attend unto the Scope of the Spirit
of God, in these passages, we shall find it utterly Improbable, that the Ten
Commandments that had been Written in Stones with Gods own Finger, were at all
contained in the Book of the Covenant, when the Blood thereof was Sprinkled on
the People: Forasmuch as God afterward calls up Moses into the Mount, saying,
I will give thee Tables of Stone, and a Law and Commandments which I have
Written, that thou may teach them, Ver. 12. Which clearly Implies that the
Ten Commandments, which was the only matter contained in the two Tables of
Stone, had not been Written by Moses in the Book of the Covenant, wherein the
Statutes and Judgments were contained, and which he had accordingly Read in the
Audience of the People: For then it had been altogether Improper to say, I will
give thee Tables of Stone, and a Law and Commandments, that thou may teach
them. Since, according to this Reckoning, Moses had already done it. When we
are told therefore that Moses came and told the People all the Words of the
Lord, and all the Judgments, etc. We are plainly to understand it according to
Deuteronomy. 4. 13. 14. where having Informed us that the Lord himself declared unto
them his Covenant which he commanded them to perform, even Ten Commandments,
and he Wrote them upon two Tables of Stone: He Expressly adds. The Lord
Commanded me (says he) at that time, to teach you Statutes and Judgments. And
accordingly, Exodus 24. 3. Moses came and told the People all the Words of the
Lord, and all the Judgments; That is, all the Statutes, and all ^he Judgments,
not the Ten Commandments: For that God himself had already declared unto them,
with his own Mouth. So that it is evident that it was the Statutes and
Judgments only that Moses had then in Commission, to declare unto the People.
And accordingly it is as evident, that it was the Statutes and Judgments only,
that were contained in the Book of the Covenant, when the Blood thereof was
sprinkled on the People; Though afterward it is plain, that upon the Receiving
of the two Tables of Stone, wherein ^he Ten Commandments were Inserted, he had
a fresh Commission to teach them the Ten Commandments also, as appears by Verse
12. And which we find was accordingly performed by him, Deuteronomy. 5. in the Several
Ten Branches, or Particulars thereof.

. 5. It is therefore a great mistake for any to affirm, that the Law written in
Stones, was not a Covenant of Works, because confirmed by Blood and Sprinkling;
whereas, when it comes to be duly examined, there appears no such matter: but
instead of being proved thereby to be a Covenant of Grace, it is the more
convincingly proved to be as it is indeed, no other than a Covenant of Works.
In which respect Mr. Sedgwick's forementioned Argument may more justly and
truly be thus formed.

That Covenant that was not confirmed by the Blood of Christ (which alone can
cleanse us from all unrighteousness) no, nor so much as by the Blood of Bulls,
or Goats, or Calves, which was plainly typical thereof; could not possibly be a
Covenant of Grace, but of Works: But the Law written in Stones, was so far from
being confirmed by the Blood of Christ; that it was never (that we read of)
confirmed by any other sort of Blood whatsoever. Therefore that Covenant could
not possibly be a Covenant of Grace but of Worlds.

. 6. Secondly, Whereas the Apostle, Heb. 9. speaking of the Ceremonial
Covenant, which was dedicated by Blood and Sprinkling; does plainly represent
it unto us under the denomination of the first Covenant that had a Worldly
Sanctuary, verse. 1. Opposing it to Christ, as the Figure to the Substance,
verse. 9. Calling the Statutes and Judgments therein contained by the name of
Carnal Ordinances; and such as could not make him that did the Service Perfect,
as pertaining to the Conscience, verse. 10. Another Building, verse. 11. And the
First Testament, as it is Contradistinguish'd from the New Testament, and Christ
the true and only Sacrifice thereof, verse. 18, 19. Besides what he had told us
in the 8th Chap. concerning this same First, or Old Testament; that it was of a
faulty, decaying, vanishing nature, verse. 7, 13. From all this it plainly
appears, that even the Ceremonial Covenant it self, could be no other than a
Covenant of Works, as well as that written in Stones. And accordingly the
Apostle informs us, Gal. 3. 10. That as many as are of the Works of the Law,
are under the Curse: For it is written, Cursed is every one that continues not
in all things which are written in the Book of the Law, to do them. Which Book
of the Law, here spoken of, must of necessity be the Book of the Covenant,
written by Moses himself, wherein the Statutes and Judgments, or the Ceremonial
Precepts, were contained. In respect whereof it is evident, that though the
Sacrifices, and other things thereunto belonging, pointed at Christ, and the
way of Salvation by him; yet such was the severity of the Divine Sanction
thereunto annexed; that if those under that Administration had wrought never so
hard, and kept themselves in a Path of perfect and Universal Obedience to the
multitude of those Ceremonial Precepts all their days, (which was impossible;)
yet if at last cast there happened to be never so small a transgression, though
in the least Circumstance, the Curse of the Law presently took hold upon them,
and that without mercy. For (as James says) Whosoever shall keep the whole
Law, and yet offend in one Point, he is guilty of all: And accordingly the
Curse of the Law was pronounced upon every one that continued not in all things
therein contained, to do them. This is the true Scope and Tenor even of the
Ceremonial Covenant it self, to all under it, that were not relieved by the
Grace of the Gospel.

. 7. Wherefore, though it is plain, that the Law written in Stones, and the
Book wherein the Statutes and Judgments were contained; were two distinct
Covenants, and delivered at distinct Seasons, and in a distinct Method; the one
with, the other without a Mediator; the one dedicated with Blood and
Sprinkling, the other (that we read of) not so dedicated; yet it is as clear
from the Premises, that they were both of the same Nature; that is, no other
than a Covenant of Works, and accordingly both now Repealed, and that under the
Denomination of the First, or Old Covenant, which was of a decaying, vanishing
nature, Heb. 8. ult. And accordingly, though the Blood of the Legal Sacrifices,
wherewith the Ceremonial Covenant was dedicated, was plainly Typical of the
Blood of Christ; yet forasmuch as the Apostle informs us, it could not take
away sins, nor make the Comers thereunto perfect, as pertaining to the
Conscience; Heb. 9. 9. Chap. 10. 1, 4. That Covenant therefore which was
dedicated only by the Blood of such Sacrifices, could never be a Covenant of
Grace, properly so called (which has Christ alone for the Mediator thereof,
and was confirmed only by his Blood and Sufferings for us) but of Works.

. 8. Besides, If the Ceremonial Covenant, which was thus dedicated by Blood and
Sprinkling, had been indeed a Covenant of Grace, and confirmed also by the
Blood of Christ; why should it be Repealed, as we know it was (as well as the
Law written in Stones, which is said to be now done away?) Is it possible that
a Covenant of Grace, confirmed by the Blood of Christ, should ever be Repealed?
Or why did God appoint the New Covenant to succeed it, which was Really so
Confirmed, and which is also opposed thereunto as another Covenant, and of a
quite different Nature? Unless we shall say, that there were two Covenants of
Grace Confirmed by the Blood of Christ; the one whereof was of a faulty,
accaying, vanishing Nature, as the First Covenant is by the Spirit of God
himself described; which to affirm, would be perfectly to Contradict the whole
Scope of the Scriptures.

. 9. The Blood of those Sacrifices therefore, wherewith the Ceremonial Covenant
was dedicated, together with the rest of the Types that were then afforded,
served only as an Example, Figure, and Shadow of Heavenly things. They were not
(as the Apostle speaks) The Heavenly things themselves, Heb. 9. 23. For the Law
(says he, Heb. 10. 1, etc.) having a shadow of good things to come, and not
the very Image of the things, can never with those Sacrifices which they
offered year by year; continually, make the Comers thereunto perfect: For then
they should not have ceased to be Offered, because that the Worshippers once
purged, should have had no more Conscience of Sins. But in these Sacrifices,
there is a remembrance again made of Sins every year: For it is not possible
that the Blood of Bulls and of Goats should take away Sins. All those
Sacrifices therefore; could never amount to the value of the Blood of Christ.
And accordingly, that Covenant, though dedicated by Blood and Sprinkling, was
no other than a Covenant of Works, for as much as it was not confirmed by the
Blood of Christ: For if it had, it would have made the Comers thereunto
Perfect, as pertaining to the Conscience; which it did not.

. 10. Besides, the Apostle expressly tells us, That Christ has obtained a more
Excellent Ministry, than that of Moses; by how much also he is the Mediator of
a Better Covenant, which was Established upon better Promises, Heb. 8. 6. Which
Better Covenant, the Apostle does plainly oppose unto the First, or Old
Covenant, verse. 7, 8, 9, 13. From whence it plainly follows, that Christ was
not the Mediator of the First, or Old Covenant, unless we shall say, that he
was the Mediator of two Covenants, a Better and a Worse: And consequently it
does as plainly follow, that the First Covenant was no other than a Covenant of
Works, since neither was Christ the Mediator of it; nor did he ever shed his
Blood for the Confirmation thereof.

SECT. IX.
HAving thus far considered Mr. Obadiah Sedgwick's Arguments, wherewith he
labors to prove that the Sinai Covenant was not a Covenant of Works, but of
Grace: We should next have considered Mr. Francis Roberts his Arguments also to
the same purpose, in his large Discourse upon the Covenants; But that the most
substantial part of them have been already dispatched in the Answers we have
returned to Mr. Sedgwick's Arguments. Only we cannot but take notice of two
grand Absurdities which Mr. Roberts, and all others who Assert that the Sinai
Covenant was a Covenant of Faith, do, and cannot but unavoidably run into, and
fasten upon the Scriptures, on that Hypothesis. The first is this; Whereas Mr.
Roberts pretending to Answer several Objections which are urged by way of
opposition to his forementioned Doctrine, the Fourth Objection which he
mentions, page 769. of his forementioned Discourse; runs thus;

. 2. Object. 4. The Sinai Covenant is opposed by the Prophet Jeremy, and by the
Apostle Paul, to the New Covenant, and is said to be broken by the People of
Israel, Jer. 31. 31, 32, etc. Heb. 8. 8, 9, 10. Therefore it is not a Covenant
of Faith, which is everlasting and cannot be broken; But a Covenant of works,
which is but Temporary and liable to be broken.

This is indeed a substantial Argument or Objection against, what he Asserts;
But how substantially answered may appear by what follows: For thus he returns
thereunto.

These Premises (says he) will not bear this Conclusion, for first, though the
Sinai Covenant made with Israel, when God brought them out of the Land of
Egypt, is said to be unlike, or not according to the New Covenant; yet it is
not said either by the Prophet or Apostle, to be unlike to the Covenant of
Faith.

. 3. Reply. But what a strange Evasion is this? And whither will not Men run
when left to themselves? For is not the New Covenant a Covenant of Faith? And
therefore when the Sinai Covenant is opposed to the New Covenant; is it not
plainly opposed to the Covenant of Faith? Or shall we make the New Covenant,
and the Covenant of Faith opposite, and Contradistinct the one from the other,
as Mr. Roberts plainly does; when he says, that though the Sinai Covenant is
opposed to the New Covenant; yet it is not opposed to the Covenant of Faith: As
if the New Covenant and the Covenant of Faith, were not one and the same thing?
But certainly the New Covenant, to which the Sinai Covenant is opposed, must
needs be a Covenant of Faith, or there is no Covenant of Faith mentioned in the
Scriptures; And consequently since the Sinai Covenant is both by the Prophet
and Apostle, so plainly opposed to the New Covenant, from hence it plainly
follows, that it was never designed by God ^s a Covenant of Faith: For else why
is it opposed thereunto?

. 4. But (says Mr. Roberts) the Dissmilitude or Difference here Intimated
betwixt the Sinai Covenant and the New Covenant; is not in substance or kind:
For in both the Lord says, I will be their God, and they shall be my People;
But only in the manner of Administration or Degree: God promising in the New
Covenant a greater, fuller, and clearer Measure of Grace unto his People, than
under the Sinai Covenant. Whereof he gives Three Instances, in point of
Sanctification, Illumination, and Remission. And then Concludes; Thus (says
he) the Sinai Covenant, gradually, not specifically, differs from the New
Covenant. They are both Covenants of Faith: But the New Covenant every way more
Excellent, Complete, and Perfect.

. 5. To this we reply, That as the Dissimilitude or Difference here Intimated
betwixt the Sinai Covenant and the New Covenant, i^ not in Substance; Since in
both the Lord says, I will be their God, and they shall be my People: So
neither in the manner of Administration; that is, If by the manner of
Administration, we understand the Measure or Degrees of the Divine Blessedness
therein Promised. For what can be a greater, or more Comprehensive Blessedness,
than for God to be their God, and they to be his People? For this Comprehends
Justification, Sanctification and Illumination, in the height and Perfection
of them. And indeed what is not promised where God is promised? And accordingly
this is the Blessedness promised in both Covenants. The Difference or
Dissimilitude, therefore, betwixt the Sinai Covenant and the New Covenant, upon
the Account whereof they are here opposed the one unto the other, must of
necessity Consist in the terms of either, and in that alone. For Moses (says
the Apostle Romans 10. 5.) describes the Righteousness of the Law, that the Man
which does these things shall live by them. Whereas Life and happiness is
promised in the Gospel Covenant in the way of believing only, from Verse. 6. to
12. And indeed nothing short of this can be duly supposed as the ground of
such an opposition as here Insisted on: For can it be rationally imagined, that
a bare difference in the Extent or Degrees of the Divine Blessedness promised
in either, could be a sufficient ground for the Prophet or Apostle to speak as
they do, that the New Covenant was not like, or not according to the Sinai
Covenant? For if the Substance be the same, there is still a likeness between
them, though in Respect of Degrees Circumstantially different. A Child has the
likeness of a Man, though not grown up to a Perfect Stature. But if the
Difference or Dissimilitude lie in the terms of either, and those terms
Essentially different; Then, though the Promises are the same for the Substance
of them, and the Degrees of the Mercy promised also; yet it may be justly and
properly said, that the one is not like, or not according to the other: For as
Covenants, they are Essentially different, because the terms are so. And
accordingly it is evident, both from the forementioned Romans 10. 5, 6, etc. as
also from Jer. 31. and Heb. 8. Where the Sinai Covenant, is opposed to the New
Covenant, that whereas the Promises of the Sinai Covenant run all upon
condition of Universal and Perfect Obedience to whatsoever the Law requires;
the Promises of the New Covenant are all of them Absolute, and therefore only
to be received by Faith: For as therein God promises that he will put his Laws
in their Mind, and write them in their Hearts: So he does also freely Promise,
that he will be Merciful to their Unrighteousness, and their Sins and
Iniquities will he remember no more. All which promises of Grace were plainly
wanting in the Sinai Covenant: For that required Obedience, as the Condition of
Life, but gave no strength to perform it; And not only so, but pronounced a
dreadful Curse upon every Transgression and Disobedience, leaving no room for
Repentance. So that it is plain that the Sinai Covenant and the New Covenant
differ Specifically; the One being a Covenant of Faith, the Other^ of Works.
And on this Account only are they opposed the one unto the other both by Paul,
and Jeremy. In which Respect, though the Promises in both are the same, for
Substance; I will be their God, and they shall be my People: As also in respect
of the Degrees of the Divine Blessedness promised in either; yet the terms of
Enjoyment being Essentially different, hence it plainly follows, that so are
the Covenants themselves, that ^^, Essentially, or Specifically different.

. 6. Secondly, Whereas it is justly urged, That since the Sinai Covenant is said
to be broken by the people of Israel, Jer. 31. Heb. 8. Therefore it is not a
Covenant of Faith, which is Everlasting and cannot be broken; but a Covenant of
Works, which is but temporary and liable to be broken. To this Mr. Roberts
returns thus;

Though (says he) Israel brake the Sinai Covenant by their Idolatry; yet they
brake it not utterly and Irreparably, as Adam brake the Covenant of Works by
his first Transgression: For God admitted them to Repentance; upon their
Repentance Pardons them; and renews the Sinai Covenant again with them.
Therefore this Breach of Covenant does no way prove the Sinai Covenant to be a
Covenant of Works, not of Faith; Temporary, not Everlasting.

. 7. Reply. But why should any part of the truth of God be concealed, which was
so necessary here to have been discovered? For though the Sinai Covenant was
renewed in the Second Tables, after the first were broken, upon the Idolatry of
the Israelites about the Golden Calf, Exodus 34. Yet it clearly appears, and we
cannot be Ignorant, that afterward it was utterly broken, and they Rejected, as
they are to this Day. Else why does God say, which my Covenant they brake, they
continued not in it, and I regarded them not, Jer. 31. 32. Heb. 8. 9. which
plainly looks further than the first Breach: For it is clear that after the
first Breach they were regarded by God, since upon Moses his Intercession they
were admitted to Repentance; and it is evident that upon their Repentance the
Lord Pardons them, and Renews the Sinai Covenant again with them. But it is as
Evident, that at length having broken it again and again, God plainly tells
them that he Regarded them not. So that though it is true, the first Breach does
no way prove the Sinai Covenant to be a Covenant of Works, not of Faith;
Temporary, not Everlasting; yet the after Breaches do. Else why does the
Apostle tell us as he does, concerning the same Sinai Covenant, that it is
dis-annulled, Heb. 7. 18 For there is verily a dis-annulling of the Commandment
going before, for the weakness and unprofitableness thereof. So likewise, Heb.
8. 7. For if that first Covenant had been faultless, there should no place have
been sought for the second. And Verse. 13. In that he says a New Covenant, he
has made the first Old. Now that which decays and waxes old, is ready to
vanish away. Though the Sinai Covenant therefore was Renewed after the first
Breach thereof; yet the Scriptures do give us a Positive Assurance, that at
length it was utterly and irreparably broken; And so broken, that at last it
was dis-annulled, made to Expire, and vanish away, which is utterly
Inconsistent with the Nature of the Covenant of Faith, according to the whole
Scope and Tenor of the Scriptures. So that we see that without a Manifest and
Palpable Absurdity, there is no Resisting the force and Evidence of the
forementioned Objection. The Conclusion whence Resulting, is therefore highly
Rational, and remains firm and unshaken. That since the Sinai Covenant is both
by the Prophet and Apostle plainly opposed to the New Covenant, and is said to
be broken, and so broken as to Expire and vanish away; Therefore it is not a
Covenant of Faith, which is Everlasting and cannot be broken; but a Covenant of
Works, that was but Temporary, and liable thereunto.

As for the unchangeable nature of the Covenant of Faith, at least on Gods
part, whatever it is on ours; besides a multitude of other Testimonies that
might be produced. the 89. Psalm gives us a clear and convincing Evidence
thereof, Verse. 30. etc. If his Children forsake my Law, and walk not in my
Judgments; if they break my Statutes, and keep not my Commandments; Then will I
Visit their Transgression with the Rod, and their Iniquity with Stripes;
Nevertheless my Loving kindness will I not utterly take from him, nor suffer my
faithfulness to fail; My Covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is
gone out of my Lips. Once have I Sworn by my Holiness that I will not lie unto
David, his Seed shall endure for ever, and his Throne as the Sun before me. It
shall be Established for ever as the Moon, and as a faithful Witness in Heaven.
The like Assurance we have concerning the Promise made to Abraham. Wherein
(says the Apostle, Heb. 6. 17, 18.) God willing more abundantly to show unto
the Heirs of Promise the Immutability of his Counsel, Confirmed it by an Oath,
that by two Immutable things in which it was Impossible for God to lie, we
might have strong Consolation, etc. So that we see, the Covenant of Faith, or
which is all one, the Covenant of Grace, is every way perfect, unchangeable,
unrepealable, and Everlasting. Whereas the Sinai Covenant, was of a faulty,
decaying, vanishing Nature, and accordingly was at last disannulled; and
therefore could not possibly be any other than a Covenant of Works.

. 8. The Second Absurdity is this. Whereas Mr. Roberts, page 772. of his
forementioned Discourse, pretending to Answer the Seventh Objection against his
Assertion; the Objection it self as himself states it, runs thus.

Object. 7. The Condition upon which Life and Happiness is held forth in the
Law, or Sinai Covenant, is Perfect Doing: For Moses describes the
Righteousness which is of the Law; that the man which does these things, shall
live by them, Romans 10. 3. with Lev. 18. 5. Gal. 3. 12. And he denounces a
Curse upon the least failing; Cursed is every one that continues not in all
things which are written in the Book of the Law, to do them, Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Gal.
3. 10. But the Condition upon which Life and Happiness is tendered in the
Covenant of Faith, is Believing in Christ, Romans 10. 6. to 12. Doing, and
Believing; Works, and Faith; are two Contrary Conditions of Life: Consequently;
the Law, or Sinai Covenant, which requires Doing unto Life, cannot be a
Covenant of Faith; but must needs be a Covenant of Works.

The Answer which Mr. Roberts returns unto this Strong and Substantial
Objection; first of all in general runs thus;

This Objection (says he) as it is most Obvious to every one, that reads the
Epistles of Paul to the Romans, and Galatians; so it is in my judgment, of
greatest difficulty to be clearly and satisfactorily Answered. And yet it is of
great Consequence and Necessity to be Cleared; because otherwise, the true
Nature and Intent of this Sinai Covenant, as a Covenant of Faith in Christ
Jesus, will not be fully and sufficiently evidenced. Several Answers are given.
I shall propound them, and pitely upon such as afford best satisfaction. And
accordingly he proceeds to give an Account of the several Answers given
thereunto by Mr. John Ball, and Peter Ma^^yr, by D. Pareus, and Mr. Anthony
Burgess; but neither of these fully pleasing him, p. 775. I add therefore
(says he) for the unfolding of this Mystery more clearly, and for Answering
of this Objection more fully; First, That the Sinai Covenant was purposely so
dispensed, as to tender Life and Happiness upon two Opposite, and Contrary
Conditions, viz. Works, and Faith; Perfect Doing, and Believing. This is clear
(says he) by Paul's Epistles without Dispute. -- And to deny this which is so
clear, will but tend to weaken Paul's Authority, to darken many Scriptures,
both of Moses, and Paul, and to strengthen the Objection. And so proceeds to
make out this Notion.

. 9. Reply. But if ever there was an Absurdity, or plain Contradiction imposed
upon the Scriptures; we think we may justly and truly say, that here it is. For
though it is true, there are those that labor to fasten an absurdity upon such
as affirm that Gods People of old were under two Contrary Covenants, at one and
the same time; yet was it ever known, that the same Fountain did at the same
time send forth Bitter Waters and Sweet? Or can it ever be rationally imagined,
that the same Sinai Covenant was purposely so dispensed, as to tence life and
happiness upon two Opposite and Contrary Conditions? For though it is true, two
Opposite Covenants may be allowed to be purposely so dispensed, as to tender
Life and Happiness upon two Opposite and Contrary Conditions, Works and Faith;
yet it is utterly impossible that the same Covenant should be so dispensed. For
as the Apostle reasons concerning Election, Romans 11. 6. So it is here; If by
Grace, then it is no more of Works; otherwise Grace is no more Grace. But if it
be of Works, then it is no more Grace; otherwise Work is no more Work. So that
we see, according to the Apostles reckoning, it is utterly impossible that two
Opposite and Contrary Conditions, should be able to consist together in one and
the same Covenant. Either the Sinai Covenant therefore is a Covenant of Grace,
or it is a Covenant of Works. If it is a Covenant of Grace, then according to
the scope of the Apostles Reasoning, it is no more of Works. And if so, whence
is it that Works are so plainly required, as the Condition of obtaining the
mercies therein promised, and which the forementioned Objection does give such
a full demonstration concerning; that it shines with a clear and convincing
Evidence in the faces of those that assert it, to be a Covenant of Grace? If
therefore it be, as indeed it is, a Covenant of Works, and purposely so
dispensed, as to tender Life and Happiness upon Condition of Doing (which Mr.
Roberts himself grants) How comes it to be a Covenant of Grace, since the
Apostle assures us, that if it be of Works, then it is no more Grace; otherwise
Work is no more Work? So that we see the Scripture allows of no such Mixture;
and shows us, it is impossible that the same Covenant should be so dispensed, as
to tender Life and Happiness upon two such Opposite and Contrary Conditions, as
Faith and Works. And yet this Absurdity, all those must of necessity run into,
that affirm the Sinai Covenant, to be a Covenant of Faith: Since it is evident
and cannot be denied, but that Life and Happiness are therein frequently and
plainly tendered upon Condition of Doing.

. 10. But (says Mr. Roberts) in this Sinai Covenant those Opposite Conditions
of Perfect Doing, under pain of Curse and Death; and of Believing in Christ,
are very differently Required and Revealed. Believing in Christ is revealed
very Sparingly and Obscurely. Perfect Doing, very frequently and plainly (that
by the way is well granted.) But (says he) though these two Conditions of
Perfect Doing, and Believing, he thus differently Revealed and Required in the
Sinai Covenant; yet Believing in Christ unto Life and Reighteousness, was
therein chiefly and ultimately intended; and Perfect Doing only urged in
subordination and tendency to Believing. And that Believing in Christ unto
Righteousness, is chiefly and ultimately intended in the Sinai Covenant, is
plain from Moses himself, drawing the Righteousness of Faith from that
Covenant, Deuteronomy. 30. 11, to 15. Compared with Romans 10. 6, to 11.

. 11. Reply. But if Believing in Christ unto Life and Righteousness, was
chiefly and ultimately intended in the Sinai Covenant; and Perfect Doing, only
urged in subordination and tendencie to Believing: How comes it to pass that
the Apostle does so directly oppose the Righteousness of that Covenant to the
Righteousness of Faith, in the forementioned Romans 10. 5, 6. For Moses (says
he) describes the Righteousness which is of the Law, that the man which does
these things, shall live by them. But the Righteousness which is of Faith
speaks on this wise, etc. in a quite different strain and style. Wherein when
he tells us, that the Law says, Do this and Live: How can it be understood,
but that his Meaning is, that this is the Only Righteousness which the Law
requires, in order to Life and Salvation: Or this is that which it ultimately
intends, and no other way does it propound in order thereunto: For otherwise we
cannot rationally understand him; especially, since he does elsewhere assure
us, that the Law is not of Faith, Gal. 3. 12. The Objection against which, from
Deuteronomy. 30. 11, etc. Compared with Romans 10. 6. etc. (from whence it is inferred,
that the Law requires Faith in Christ, in order to Life and Righteousness, as
well as the Gospel) has been already Answered in the foregoing parts of this
Discourse; where it has been plainly proved, that the 30th of Deuteronomy is
taken up with the Description (not of the Covenant at Sinai, but) of that New
and Evangelical Covenant, that God intended to Establish with Israel in
aftertimes; and is accordingly represented as a quite different Covenant from
that at Sinai, as plainly appears by the manner of Paul's allegation thereof,
Romans 10. 6. And that chiefly, for as much as it required faith in Christ, in
order to Life and Righteousness, as the Apostle there interprets it. Whereas
the Sinai Covenant (as both Paul and Moses himself describes it) insists on
Works only; that the Man which does these things shall live by them, And to
say, that these two opposite Conditions may be Required in one and the same
Sinai Covenant; is plainly to Contradict the Apostle, who in his Interpretation
thereof, sets the Righteousness of the Law, and the Righteousness of Faith in
direct Opposition the one unto the other, as Inconsistent in one and the same
Covenant. Moses (says be) describes the Righteousness which is of the Law,
that the Man which does these things shall live by them: But the Righteousness
which is of Faith speaks on this wise, etc. If thou shall believe thou shall
be saved. Whereby he would have us plainly to understand that these are two
opposite Covenants; Whereas had it been his meaning, that the Law or Sinai
Covenant was purposely so dispensed as to tender Life and Happiness upon two
such opposite and contrary Conditions, he would not have said that the Law
requires one thing; and the Righteousness of Faith, another: But that the Law
requires both. And therefore it must of necessity follow* that the Apostle
speaks of two contrary Covenants, requiring two opposite Conditions; It being
indeed Impossible; that one and the same Covenant should be so dispensed.

. 12. And here by the way it may be observed, that though Mr. Baxter: (as has
been already noted in the foregoing part of this Discourse) seems plainly to
grant, that the Law or Sinai Covenant was no other then a Covenant of Works,
requiring perfect Obedience as the Condition of Life, unto which the
Righteousness of Faith, or the Gospel Covenant is opposed by the Apostle, Romans
10. 5, 6. Which Gospel Covenant he supposes to be insisted on, both in the
29th and 30th Chapters of Deuteronomy, and that from both, the Apostle draws
that Description of the Righteousness of Faith he speaks of, making no
difference between the Covenants or Promises mentioned in those two Chapters.
Mr. Roberts on the other hand we see; makes the Sinai Covenant, and the
Covenant of Faith to be all one For (says he) that believing in Christ unto
Righteousness is chiefly and ultimately intended in the Sinai Covenant, is
plain from Moses himself, drawing the Righteousness of Faith from that
Covenant, Deuteronomy. 30. 11, to 15. compared with Romans 10. 6, to 11. So that in th^s
Respect, Mr. Roberts, or Mr. Baxter, most of necessity be out of the way,
either the one or the other, or both of them. For to say as Mr. Baxter does,
that though the Righteousness of Faith is by the Apostle opposed unto the Law
or Sinai Covenant; yet not unto the Covenant mentioned; Deuteronomy. 29. reckoning
that in the 30th Chapter to be all one with that in the 29th is widely
different from the Truth; Since it has been already plainly proved, that the
Covenant mentioned; Deuteronomy. 29. is of the same Stamp and Tenor with the Sinai
Covenant, and that both are Essentially different from the Covenant of Faith
mentioned, Deuteronomy. 30. And again, on the other hand, to say as Mr. Roberts does,
that the Sinai Covenant is a Covenant of Faith, and that Moses draws the
Righteousness of Faith from that Covenant, would be plainly to contradict Mr.
Baxter, and not only so, but would be point blank to contradict the
Interpretation given thereof by Paul himself in the forementioned, Romans 10. 5,
6. where he does clearly oppose the Righteousness of Faith to the Sinai
Covenant.

. 13. Indeed the Principal ground of Mr. Roberts his mistake, or that which he
seems to lay the greatest stress upon, when he affirms the Sinai Covenant to be
a Covenant of Faith, is this; because the Description that Paul gives of the
Righteousness of Faith, Romans 10. 6, etc. is drawn from the Description that
Moses gives thereof in the 30th of Deuteronomy, as if because the Law was given
by Moses, the Description he there gives of the Righteousness of Faith must
needs be understood of the Sinai Covenant; whereas it is Evident that Paul was
of another Mind: For he makes the Description that Moses gives there of the
Righteousness of Faith, to be quite opposite to the Description that Moses
elsewhere gives of the Law or Sinai Covenant. Moses (says he) describes the
Righteousness of the Law, that the Man which does these things shall live by
them; which he cites from Lev. 18. 5. and Deuteronomy. 29. 9. Whereas the
Righteousness of Faith, or the Gospel Covenant speaks after quite another
sort; That if thou shall believe, thou shall be saved; which he quotes from
Deuteronomy. 30. From whence, what can be more Evident, than that he brings in Moses
describing two Opposite and Essentially different Covenants in respect of the
terms of Life propounded in either? Besides, though the Law was given by Moses,
whereof he was the alone and only Mediator; yet it is evident, that even Moses
himself does give sufficient notice of another Covenant, that was to take place
in after times; and that not only in the forementioned 30th of Deuteronomy,
but in the 18th Chapter, which is also noted by the Apostle Peter, Acts 3. 22.
Moses truly said unto the Fathers, a Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up
unto you of your Brethren, like unto me; him shall yea hear in all things
whatsoever he shall say unto you. Moses therefore gives them sufficient notice
of another Covenant, and not only so, but of another Prophet also that God
would raise up unto them to be the Mediator thereof. And that this other
Prophet was to be the Mediator of another Covenant, is plain from what the
Author to the Hebrews tells us, Chap. 8. 6. But now (says he) has he obtained
a more Excellent Ministry (to wit, than that of Moses spoken of in the
foregoing Verse) by ^ow much also he is the Mediator of a Better Covenant which
was Established upon Better Promises.

. 14. So that it is Evident, that the Covenant made with Israel at Mount Sinai,
Exodus 19. and 20: which was afterward renewed with them in the Land of Moab,
Deuteronomy. 29. is another Covenant and Essentially different from the Covenant of
Faith, or the Gospel Covenant mentioned Deuteronomy. 30. Romans 10. 6, etc. And that not
only since the Terms are Essentially different, but since it has also another
and far different Mediator. Wherefore the forementioned Objection*
notwithstanding, the Apostles Testimony, remains firm and cannot be Evaded;
That the Law is not of Faith. And accordingly whatever Subordination or
Tendency the Law has to drive us to the Covenant of Faith for Relief and
Shelter, to be sure the Law it self gives us no Relief: For neither chiefly nor
Ultimately does it propound Faith as the Condition of Life, but Doing only;
and consequently is another Covenant, and Essentially different from the
Covenant of Faith to which it drives us. The Law (says Moses) requires Doing
unto Life. The Gospel (says Paul) requires Faith. And these (says he Gal. 4.
24, 25, 26.) are the two Covenants; the One from Mount Sinai in Arabia, and
answers to Jerusalem that now is; the Other to Jerusalem that is above; the
one gendering to Bondage; the other to Liberty; the one a Ministration of
Death, and Condemnation; the other a Ministration of Life and Righteousness, 2
Cor. 3. 7, 8, 9. Now whom shall we believe? Whether Paul, who affirms that
these are two Covenants; and who in effect also affirms that these two
Covenants are Essentially and Specifically different, in respect of the terms
propounded in either; as well as also in respect of the consequent Issues
thereof to such as are under them: Or those that affirm that the Sinai Covenant
was purposely so dispensed, as to tender Life and Happiness upon two opposite
and contrary Conditions?

. 15. But we shall Proceed no further in the Confutation of this Un-scriptural
Notion. What has been already said being (if we mistake not) sufficient to
overthrow the whole of what Mr. Roberts delivers in his Voluminous Discourse
toward the Proof of his grand Position; That the Law was given to Israel at
Mount Sinai, as a Covenant of Faith in Christ Jesus. Only it ought to be duly
Considered, that it will be of no small Consequence to the Church of God, if it
shall be at last found that such Doctrines as these have sadly tended to the
Obscuring and Confounding many Gospel Truths. But sufficient hint^ of this
Nature having been already given, we shall leave it unto the Godly Wise to
determine upon the whole of what has been said in these Respects. Thus far by
way of Answer to Mr. Sedgwicks and Mr. Roberts his Arguments.

SECT. X.
BUT whereas we have Asserted that the Covenant which God made with Israel at
Mount Sinai, was as much a Covenant of Works as that made with our first
Parent. We are told That the Covenant of Works made with Adam in the state of
Innocence, when he was able to have kept it, was never Revived or Renewed after
the fall to the same Intent and Purpose it wa^ first made with him, that is, to
Obtain Life and Righteousness by Personal Obedience to it: For had God
Promulged the first Covenant again at Sinai to the same use and Purpose it was
first made with Adam; then in Establishing this he had utterly subverted the
New Covenant, Gal. 3. 21. Life and Salvation was not then its end; that is, in
it self, it neither was, nor could be given after the Fall for such a design
and purpose. And therefore though it is Evident, that the Sinai Covenant,
Materially Considered, is the same with Adams Covenant; yet Intentionally it is
vastly different.

. 2. To this we Reply, That it is indeed too Evident fairly to be denied, but
that the Law given from Mount Sinai, w^^ a Covenant of Works; Since your selves
cannot but acknowledge that Materially Considered it is the same with Adams
Covenant: But then (say you) Intentionally it is vastly different. But how does
that Appear? For though it is true God never designed, o^ Intended that any
should obtain Life and Righteousness by their Personal Obedience to it; yet
even in this Respect also it was a^ much a Covenant of Works, as that made with
our first Parent* For God never intended that Adam himself should obtain Life
and Righteousness by his Obedience to that Covenant: For if he had, the purpose
or intention of God in that respect, must of necessity have been accomplished:
And accordingly Adam should have stood, and Life and Righteousness should that
way have been derived unto him; and not only unto him, but unto all his
Offspring also. But it is evident, that Man that was in Honor, abode not, but
fell, and we all in him; and accordingly a New Covenant takes place, whereby
Life and Righteousness was to be derived, both unto him, and all his Elect
Offspring.

. 3. So that if that Covenant at Sinai was materially a Cove-of Works, though
God intended not, that Life should be that way derived unto us; so it was in
respect of Adam's Covenant also. For as in the Legal Covenant, God does now
plainly tell sinners, That the Man that does these things, shall live by them:
that is, if you can perform a steady, perfect Obedience, Life and Salvation
shall be your Reward; thus, and no otherwise was our first Parent himself dealt
withal. For this was all the stipulation, or agreement that we find God made
with him: Genesis 2. 16. The Lord God commanded the man, saying; of every Tree of
the Garden, thou may freely eat: But of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and
Evil, thou shall not eat of it; for in the day that thou eatest thereof, thou
shall surely die. Carrying with it an implicit, conditional Promise; that if
he forbore it, both Himself, and Posterity should live. For God, never, that we
can find, made any absolute Promise of Life to him; only implicit, and
conditional. And since it cannot, with any shadow of truth, be affirmed, that
God ever made any absolute Promise of this nature unto him: Neither therefore
can it be justly affirmed, that God ever intended, that Life and Righteousness
should be conveyed unto him by his Obedience unto that Covenant. Nay, rather it
is clear, that God foresaw he would fall; and consequently designed that Life
and Righteousness should not that way be derived unto HIm, or to any of his
Offspring. From whence it plainly follows, the Sinai Covenant, was as much a
Covenant of Works, as that made with our first Parent; not only since it is
materially the saine, but in this respect, intentionally also.

SECT. XI.
BUt whereas it is further objected; That if God never since the Fall published
the Covenant of Works with a design to justify any man by it; and yet in the
Sinai Covenant has given it (materially Considered) a Second Edition, and
Promulgation: It must needs follow, that it was done in Subserviency to Christ,
and the Covenant of Grace; or done in vain, as to the Elect. To set it forth in
opposition to the Covenant of Grace, can never be imagined. To make it a
Coordinate way of Salvation with Christ, is proved impossible. Therefore it
must be subordinate, or not at all; there being nothing else left us. And this,
(say they) the Scriptures fully assert and confirm; Romans 10. 4. Christ is the
end of the Law for Righteousness, to every one that believes. Are the End and
Means contrariant? Or must not the means be always subordinate to the end? This
is plain and clear Reasoning, not easily Answered. So Gal. 3. 24. The Law it as
our Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ; that is, to bring us to a Conviction
of his Necessity; as it did Paul, Romans 7. after Christ was come, and thousands
more since Paul. Again, Gal. 3. 23. It shut us up to Christ, or Faith, as our
only Remedy. This was, and still is its use and design, and will be so to the
end, to all that come to Christ. As to others it has another end; even to
Judge and Condemn them that continue under it, as a Covenant of Works; Romans 2.
12. But to Believers, it is subservient to Christ; both to bring them to him at
first, and regulate their Lives* as a Moral Rule ever after. And therefore the
two Tables are put into the Ark, Heb. 9. 4. to show their subserviencie to him,
and in this sense, its consistence with him.

. 2. For Answer whereunto, We do indeed acknowledge the subserviencie of the
Law to Christ, and the Covenant of Grace; in which respect it is also true,
That the Means is not Contrariant to the End, but is always subordinate
thereunto. But it does not therefore follow, that the Law is a Covenant of
Gospel Grace, (for that is the only Point we are Contending about, or Enquiring
after.) It has indeed a plain subserviencie; or subordination thereunto; as
Hagar the type of the Bondage Covenant, had unto Sarah the type of the Gospel
Covenant. But yet neither is the Handmaid the Mistress, nor the Mistress the
Handmaid. These two are still distinct. The Law is not the Gospel, nor the
Gospel the Law. And therefore, though the one of them is plainly subservient to
the other, yet they ought not to be mixed, ^^ended, or confounded the one with
the other, as if they were but one and the same Covenant, and no difference to
be made between them; only in respect of the Different Degrees of the Discovery
of Gospel Grace, as has been suggested.

. 3. It Is true, the Law is appointed as our Schoolmaster to Christ, (for so
the words run in the Original Text, as your selves have acknowledged;) that is,
to show us the Nature of Sin; together with the Holiness, and Righteousness of
God's Nature and Being; to Convince us of our Sin and Misery without Christ,
and our Necessity therefore of a Savior. And in all these respects, it has
Indeed a plain subserviency to drive us to Christ; and to induce us to fly with
the more earnestness to lay hold upon New-Covenant-Grace, wherein Christ is
plainly exhibited unto us for our Relief. But then it does not therefore
follow, that the Law it self is subserviently a Covenant of Gospel Grace; or
that it is such for the substance of it; as both Mr. Sedgwick, Mr. Roberts, and
many other worthy Divines, affirm it is. A subserviency in any thing to promote
the Ends of something else, does not make it to be the thing it self; the Ends
whereof are promoted thereby. The temptations of Satan, and the persecutions of
Wicked Men, have a plain subserviency, (and that by God's own appointment,
through his Overruling Providence) to promote the Ends of the Covenant of
Grace; and to make us fly the more earnestly thereunto for Succor; yet it
would be too absurd to affirm, that either of these are the Covenant of Grace;
or subserviently such. So it is in our present Case: For though the Law is in
it self against us, and contrary to us, as being a Ministration of Death and
Condemnation, (as the Apostle witnesses it is) in which respect the Legal
Covenant is directly opposite to the Gospel Covenant, (as in our 23d Argument
following, is more plainly and particularly demonstrated,) yet through the
overruling Grace and Mercy of God; the Law with all its thundering Curses, and
Menacies upon every Transgression and Disobedience; instead of destroying us;
it is converted to a notable subserviency toward our Everlasting Comfort, by
forcing us with the more speed to Christ, and the Covenant of Grace for Relief
and Succor: So as that out of the Eater* comes Meat; and out of the strong,
Sweetness. But shall we say therefore, that the Law it self is a Covenant of
Gospel Grace, (which is constantly in the Scripture represented unto us as
quite another thing) because it has a subserviency to drive us thither for
shelter.

. 4. So that to allow, that there is indeed a subserviency in the Law to drive
us to Jesus Christ, and the Covenant of Grace for Succor; and yet to deny,
that the Law it self is therefore a Covenant of Grace, is Harmonious enough,
and implies no Contradiction at all; (as it has been suggested it does) for as
much as it is impossible, (and therefore it must rather of necessity be a plain
contradiction on the other hand to affirm) that any thing can be subservient to
the Ends of another; and at the same time, to be the same thing it self, which
it is thus subservient unto: For if it be the same, how is it subservient to
something else, as to another? The Law therefore being a Distinct Covenant from
the Gospel; it must of necessity be a Covenant of Works, unless we shall say,
there are two Covenants of Gospel Grace; the one perfect, the other faulty; the
one to endure for ever, the other to be Repealed, and Blotted out, as being
against us, and contrary to us; a Ministration of Death and Condemnation, (as
the Legal Covenant has been proved to be) which in any sense, can never be
applied to the Covenant of Grace, according to the Scripture Dialect.

. 5. It is certain therefore (as has been before hinted) that the Law shuts us
up to Christ, or Faith, as our only Remedy; and indeed this was, and still is
its use and design; and will be so to the end, to all that come to Christ; that
is, it precludes, or shuts us up from all other ways and Expectations of
Comfort; by showing us our utter incapacity, to attain unto Life, by our own
Righteousness; and therefore forces us, if ever we will be saved, to have
recourse to the only Remedy. Accordingly the two Tables were put into the Ark,
Heb. 9. 4. to show their subserviency to Christ; and in this sense, its
consistence with him; typically demonstrating, that though the Covenant of
Works could not be kept, or performed by us; yet it should be perfectly
fulfilled in Christ for us: In which respect he is said to be the end of the
Law for righteousness to every one that believes. But then it does not
therefore follow, that the Law, that thus shuts us up, is the Remedy it self;
or that the School-masters-Rod, that drives us to Christ, is Christ himself, or
the Covenant of Grace it self; since the Means cannot be the End; nor the end
the Means; though the Means is indeed subservient, or subordinate thereunto.

SECT. XII.
BUT then we are also told, That the Intention and Design of God, in the
Promulgation of the Law at Sinai, was fatally mistaken by the Jews, and
perverted to a quite contrary end; namely, to obtain Righteousness by their own
Works of Obedience to it; and so to slight and oppose the Righteousness of
Christ; not considering, that Christ was the end, or scope of the Law for
Righteousness, to every one that believes: Nor that the Law was their
Schoolmaster, to convince them of Sin, and Impotency; and so drive them to
Christ their only Remedy. Now this mistake of God's Intention in giving the
Law, is the true Reason and Ground of those Seeming Contradictions, which we
find in the New Testament. For when the Apostle speaks of the Law, according to
the true end and use of it, which God designed it for; then he magnifies the
Law, and calls it Holy, Just, and Good; a Spiritual Law, a Good Law: Our
Schoolmaster to Christ, tells us, that Christ is the end of it for
Righteousness, to every one that believes: With many more high Encomiums of
its Excellency and Usefulness. But when he considers it, as perverted by men;
and reduced again to its Primitive Intention, to give Life and Righteousness by
our Obedience to it; then he as much decries, and thunders against it; calling
it a Ministration of Death and Condemnation; a weak and beggarly thing; with
many other Notes of Disparagement. Nor can it be enough decried, when instead
of Subordination, it is put in Competition; yea, in Opposition to Christ. And
that this is no Fiction, or Groundless Distinction, which Obscures and
Confounds Law and Gospel; appears not only by the Impossibility of Reconciling
the Apostle with himself, but by this means: As also, by that plain Text in
which it is grounded, Romans 10. 3, 4. And 1 Timothy 1. 8. The Law is good, if a Man
use it lawfully: That is, i'ts good or bad, according to the use men make of
i^. If they take it according to those Excellent Ends, for which God Promulged
it, viz. to prepare them by Convictions for Christ: And afterward, when in him,
as a moral Rule of Duty and Obedience; then it is Good and Excellent: But if it
be made the Ground and Matter of our Righteousness, and so set in opposition to
Christ; then nothing more fatal and pernicious. So that this Distinction is the
Apostles own Distinction, given us as a Key, to open this Controversy by.

. 2. Reply. But can weindeed think that when the Apostle thunders, as he does
against the Law; Calling it a Ministration of Diatb and Condemnation; a weak
and beggarly thing; that which was against us, contrary to us; and that which
is therefore now blotted out, and taken out of the way; being nailed to the
Cross of Christ, etc. That he utter^ and declares all this, only because men
had perverted the Law, and reduced it (as they thought) to its Primitive
Intention, to give Life and Righteousness by their Obedience to it? It Is true,
the Jews did plainly pervert, and misunderstood God's Design and Intention, in
giving the Law as a Covenant of Works unto them; which was not, that any Person
whatsoever, should ever attain unto Life and Righteousness thereby; but only to
Convince them of their Necessity of a Savior. But does it therefore follow,
that all those thundering Expressions, before mentioned, concerning the Law,
were uttered by the Apostle, only because the Jews had perverted it? Does not
Moses himself call it a Fiery Law, that proceeded from God's right Hand, Deuteronomy.
33. 2. And does not God himself pronounce a Curse upon every one that
continues not in all things therein contained, to do them, Deuteronomy. 27. 26* Gal.
3. 10. And is it not as plain, that from hence, even that from hence it is,
that the Apostle calls it as he does, a Ministration of Death and Condemnation:
Against us, and Contrary to us, etc. Besides, it ought to be duly considered,
that the Gospel and Covenant of Grace it self, was liable to a^ great an abuse
as the Law, by being turned into Lasciviousness; as the Scriptures tells us it
was; and yet the Apostle never thunders against the Gospel, as he does against
the Law, because Men had abused it. It Is true, he tells us concerning the
Gospel; that to some it is the savor of death, unto death, to others it is the
savor of life, unto life; that is, to those that Reject it, it is the savor
of death unto death; to those that Receive it, it is the savor of life, unto
life. But this is vastly different from the character he gives of the Law: For
(says he) By the deeds of the Law, there shall no Flesh be justified in his
sight, Romans 3. 20. And therefore, whether it is Received or Rejected, it is, as
the Apostle calls it, a Ministration of Death, etc. Whereas the Gospel is such,
only to those that Reject it, and do not give a saving entertainment to it. So
that the Distinction we now oppose, is altogether without Scripture Warrant;
and is indeed no other, than to impute unfaithfulness to Paul, and Moses also,
in declaring the Nature of the Law as they do. And accordingly hence we have
just reason to conclude, that the Law was never instituted as a Covenant of
Faith,, or as a Covenant of Grace, that has such Epethites fixed thereon by
the Spirit of God himself.

. 3. It Is true, as you say, the Law was our Schoolmaster to Christ; to
Convince us of our Necessity of him. And Christ is also said to be the end of
the Law, for Righteousness, to every one that believes; that is, he was the
accomplishment thereof; he having perfectly fulfilled its Commands, submitted
to its Curse, and answered its Penalty on our behalf; whereby it received the
Greatest Honor that could be given it; a greater by far, than ever could be
given it by us, in our own persons. For what the Law could not do, in that it
was weak, through the Flesh; God sending his own Son, in the likeness of sinful
Flesh, and for sin, (or by a Sacrifice for Sin) condemned Sin in the Flesh;
that the Righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us; that is, in the
Person of our Sure^y for us, Romans 8. 3, 4. But then it is so far from being
true, that the Law was therefore a Covenant of Faith; that it is so much the
more Convincingly Evident, that it was no other than a Covenant of Works: For
as much as it is plain, that, as such, Christ himself submitted thereunto on
our account. And it is as plain that, as such, it would else have lighted on us
in our own Persons, in the Execution of its most dreadful Curses and
Threatenings. But if we will rather have the sense of the words to be, as you
suggest it is, that Christ was the End [or Scope] of the Law for Righteousness,
to every one that believes; that is, that it was God's design, thereby to
drive them to Christ, their only Remedy, by Convincing them of their Necessity
of him; It still comes to the same Reckoning: For though it is true, there is a
plain subserviency in the Law, toward the promoting of the Designs of the
Covenant of Grace; yet (as we have already seen) it no way follows, that the
Law is therefore the Covenant of Grace it self; or the Handmaid the Mistress
her self: For (says the Apostle, Gal. 4. 24. 25, 26.) These are the two
Covenants; the one from Mount Sinai, which gendereth to Bondage, and is in
Bondage with her Children: The other Answers to Jerusalem that is above;
which is free, and is the Mother of us all. And if these were the two
Covenants, and those two essentially different the one from the other, in the
nature and tendency of either; as it is plain by the Apostles scope they are;
so they must be kept. Two they were, and two they still remain to be; so as
what the one is, the other is not. Hagar had indeed a plain subserviency to
Sarah: But yet as were the Types, so are the Antitypes themselves; Essentially
different; so as that the Bondage Covenant, can with no more Sense, nor Justice
be called a Covenant of Faith, because it has a subserviency thereunto; than
the Covenant of Faith can wish any shadow of pretense be called a Covenant of
Bondage.

. 4. Besides, when the Apostle speaks of the two Covenants, these were the two
Covenants; the one from Mount Sinai meaning the Legal; the other the Gospel
Covenant. He does sufficiently Intimate, that there were never but two General
Covenants; made with Mankind, in all; that is, the Covenant of Works and the
Covenant of Grace. And if so, then if there were any such thing as a Covenant
of Works made with our first Parent before the Fall (as we all affirm there
was) it must of necessity be Included in the Sinai Covenant; And that both
Materially Considered, and Intentionally also: Else there were three Covenants;
and those Specifically different each from other; whereas the Apostle tells us
but of two. To say it was Included in the Gospel Covenant is wholly Absurd;
Therefore it must of necessity be Included in the Sinai Covenant; so as that
both together make up that first or old Covenant, which the Scripture speaks
of. For when the Apostle, Heb. 8. calls the Sinai Covenant by the Name of the
first or Old Covenant (as he there does several times over) it cannot possibly
be understood that it was therefore the first Covenant that God ever made with
Men in respect of time; for there had been an Express Covenant made with
Abraham, and with Noah also, long before; And we also acknowledge that there
was an Implicit Covenant of Works made with our first Parent, upon his first
Creation besides the Promise of Grace that followed soon after the Fall.
Therefore the Sinai Covenant must of necessity be called the first or old
Covenant, because of its Congruity, Harmony, and Identity, with the Covenant of
Works made with our first Parent; And that both in respect of the matter, and
Intention thereof also; Or else i^ could never with any Propriety, or fitness
of Expression, be called the first or old Covenant, as by the Apostle diverse
times over it is, in the forementioned 8th to the Hebrews.

. 5. The Law therefore could not possibly be a Covenant of Gospel Grace; (as by
many the most Learned and Worthy Divines, and it may be the far greater part
(of Moderns at least) it has been confidently affirmed to be) For (as we have
before acknowledged;) though there was never any Covenant that God ever made
with Men; but has more or less of Grace therein; Since it is an Infinite
Condescension in God, that he will have to do with Men at any Rate; yet that
the Covenant from Mount Sinai, was in any Sense; or is by virtue of any proper
Scripture Distinction, to be understood as a Covenant of Gospel Grace; whereof
Christ alone is the Mediator; This is that which for all those forementioned
Reasons, we utterly deny. And this is the Point, the only Point, which in the
beginning of this Discourse we undertook to disprove; And that as being of no
small Consequence to the Church of God. For upon this Hypothesis, or
Supposition; That the Covenant at Sinai was indeed a Covenant of Grace, or a
Gospel Covenant (for any other Notion of it will not serve the turn) and
consequently that the Covenant of Circumcision made with Abraham, Genesis 17. 7,
8, 9. is of the same Nature; the greatest part of the most plausible Arguments
for the support of Infants Baptism, are founded. But if we have, or c^^
substantially prove, that neither of these forementioned Covenants, were Gospel
Covenants; no wonder if we make an Answerable Improvement thereof in its proper
place, by way of opposition to the forementioned Practice.

. 6: As for the Scripture before alleged, 1 Timothy 1. 8. We know that the Law is
good if a Man use it Lawfully; It is indeed highly observable: For as much as
there is a Lawful as well as an unlawful use that Men may make thereof; that
is, if we make use of it as the Rule of our Obedience, then we make that Right,
Just, Proper, and Lawful use thereof, which God requires. For we know that in
this Respect we are still under the Law to Christ. And in this Respect it is
true enough, as the Apostle tells us, that the Law is Holy, Just and Good: For
there is therein a Spiritual Discovery of the Holiness and Righteousness of
Gods Nature and Being; whose Image must be Engraven upon us, if ever we arrive
unto true Blessedness. But if we Preach it up, or endeavor to Establish it, as
a Covenant of Life; or as a Covenant of Faith, and Grace (which are Equipollent
terms; Let us distinguish as we please, between a Covenant of Grace Absolutely,
and subserviently such) and consequently are desirous in that Respect to be
under it (as the Apostle tells the Gallatians, and which we cannot avoid if we
reckon it to be a Covenant of Grace) then, according to the Apostles plain
Scope, in the whole Epistles to the Romans and Gallatians; instead of using it
lawfully, we make an unlawful use thereof, by perverting it to such a service
as God never Intended it for; And are guilty of mingling Law and Gospel
together: Life and Death; and as we have said before; a Ministration of
Condemnation, with that of Righteousness and Peace, which would be no other
than to overthrow both the Law and Gospel. And this is the Apostles own
Distinction, given us as a Key to open this Controversy by, Gal. 1. 6, 7.

SECT. XIII.
BUT whereas it is yet further Objected; That after this Rate, both Moses and
Abraham, and all the Old Testament Saints, were under two contrary Covenants,
at one and the same time, from whence many Absurdites do follow. As to this, we
dare not Impeach or Control Infinite Wisdom. We have only declared plain
matter of Fact; so far as the Scriptures themselves do inform us: For therein
it is Evident (as has been already proved) that both Moses and the whole Body
of that People of Israel in the Wildernest, were under the forementioned
Covenant from Mount Sinai; and that expressly as the Covenant which the Lord
Commanded them to perform, Deuteronomy. 4. 13. And that under the severest Penalties
of a dreadful Curse, upon every one that Confirmed not all the Words of this
Law to do them, unto which all the People were to say Amen, Deuteronomy. 27. 26. This
Covenant therefore they were absolutely under, as being expressly made both with
Moses, and the whole Body of the Children of Israel, without Exception of any,
Exodus 34. 27. which we have already argued at large, could be no other than a
Covenant of Works; A Ministration of Death and Condemnation; A hand writing of
Ordinances that was against us, contrary to us; And therefore now Blotted out,
and taken out of the way, being Nailed to the Cross of Christ. When yet it is
also as Evident from the same Holy Scriptures of Truth; That at the same time;
both Moses, and all the Elect among that People, were under a pure Covenant of
Gospel Grace, as we have already proved; when the Lord told Moses that he had
found Grace in his Sight; and that he knew him by Name; and would make all his
Goodness to pass before him; and would Proclaim the Name of the Lord before
him: Saying, I will be Gracious to whom I will be Gracious; And I will show
Mercy to whom I will show Mercy: And when accordingly, the Lord descended in
the Cloud, and stood with Moses there; And Proclaimed the Name of the Lord: The
Lord God Merciful and Gracious, Long-suffering, and Abundant in Goodness and in
Truth; keeping Mercy for Thousands; forgiving Iniquity, Transgression and Sin.
Now we have already proved that these were two Distinct Covenants; The one made
with Moses, and the whole Body of that People; The other with Moses, and those
that were Elected among them only. And if these were two contrary Covenants,
and in themselves, just opposite, the one unto the other of them (^s indeed
they were) we have nothing to say; but to Conclude with the Apostle in another,
case concerning the Call of the Gentiles, and Rejection of the Jews, that were
once Gods only Beloved People; to whom pertained the Adoption, and the Glory,
and the Covenants and the giving of the Law, and the Service of God, and the
Promises O the depth of the Riches both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! How
unsearchable are his Judgments, and his Ways p^st finding ^ut! Romans 11. 33, 34.

. 2. However, though it is true; New Testament Saints are absolutely freed from
the Law as a Covenant of Works, by the Sacrifice of Christ; yet it is Evident,
that during the time thereunto appointed by the Father; those before were under
the Power and Tyranny thereof, notwithstanding those Discoveries of Gospel
Grace that were otherwise Revealed unto them. To this purpose the Apostle tells
us Expressly, Gal. 3. 23. etc. Before Faith came, we (says he, that is, we
Jews, not we Gentiles, for these passages agree not with the Gentiles at all,
but we Jews) were kept under the Law, shut up unto the Faith which should
afterward be revealed; ^or as he had said before; The Law was added because of
Transgressions, till the Seed should come to whom the Promise (...) made.
Wherefore the Law was our Schoolmaster to Christ, that we might be Justified
by Faith: But after that Faith is come, we are no longer under a Schoolmaster.
So again Chap. 4. 1, 2, 3. etc. Now I say that the Heir, as long as he is a
Child, differe^h nothing from a Servant, though he be Lord of all: But it under
Tutors, and Governors, until the time appointed of the Father; Even so we,
when we were Children were in Bondage, under the Elements of the World: But
when the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a Woman,
made under the Law, to Redeem them that were under the Law, that we might
Receive the Adoption of Sons. So that upon the whole, it is plain matter of
Fact, evident and undeniable (Resolve we the Mystery thereof how we will) That
the Jews, even the whole Body of that People, without exception of any, were
for the time appointed of the Father; under the Dominion and Tyranny of the
Law; and that as a Covenant of Works, or a Bondage Covenant; when yet it is
equally as evident, that at the same time, all the Elect among them, were under
a Covenant of pure Gospel Grace, whereby they were saved.

. 3. Wherefore we must grant, that God's People were then under two distinct;
or essentially different Covenants: We say, we must do so; provided always,
that the way of Reconciliation, and Salvation, was the same under both. But it
will be said, and with great pretense of Reason, (for it is that which is the
sole Foundation they all build upon, who affirm the Legal and the
Gospel-Covenants, to be only a twofold Administration of the same Covenant)
That this being the Principal End of a Divine Covenant: If the way of
Reconciliation and Salvation be the same under both, then indeed they are for
the Substance of them but one: And we grant, that this would inevitably follow,
If it were so equally by virtue of them both. If Reconciliation, and Salvation
by Christ, were to be obtained, not only under the Old Covenant, but by virtue
thereof, then it must be the same for substance with the New. But this is not
so; For no Reconciliation with God, nor Salvation, could ever be obtained by
virtue of the Old Covenant, or the Administration of it: For by the Deeds of
the Law, there shall no Flesh be justified in his sight; (as our Apostle
disputes at large, Romans 3. 20, etc.) though all Believers were R^^onc^led,
Justified and Saved, by virtue of the Promise, whilst they were under that
Covenant.

. 4. And how absurd soever it may seem to be, to affirm, that God'^ People were
under two Contrary Covenants, at one and the same time; yet, as we see the
Scriptures do plainly assure us they were; so it is evident that the absurdity
is by far the greater, on the other hand, to affirm that the Sinai Covenant was
purposely so dispensed, as to tender Life and Happiness upon two Opposite, and
quite Contrary Conditions, viz. Works, and Faith: Perfect Doing and Believing,
as if the same Foundai^^^, could at the same time yield forth bitter waters and
sweet. Which absurdity, all those must of necessity run into, that affirm the
Sinai Covenant; to be a Covenant of Faith in Christ Jesus: As has been already
shown.

SECT. XIV.
ANd here we should have drawn up the sum of what has been already offered on
the present Subject; but that there are four Arguments yet behind, pretending
to prove, that the Sinai Covenant, and that made with Adam in Paradise, were
not the same, but widely different Covenants; which remain therefore to be
Answered. Only by the way it must be remembered, that two Arguments to the same
purpose, have already been dispatched. The First was, That though the Sinai
Covenant, materially Considered, is the same with Adams; yet intentionally, it
is vastly different. The Second was; That the Sinai Covenant had a Mediator,
which Adams wanted. Both which, we hope, have been Satisfactorily Answered, in
the foregoing parts of this Discourse. It remains therefore, that we proceed to
the Consideration of those that follow; The first whereof runs thus;

Arg. 1. Those Covenants that differ in the Subjects, or Parties with whom they
are made, are not the same, but different Covenants: But so does that at Sinai,
and that in Paradise. The Covenant made with Adam, was made with Innocent and
Perfect Man, able to keep it; This with Lapsed, Sinful Man, utterly disabled to
keep any one Precept of it.

Reply. To which we Reply; That the difference betwixt the Subjects, makes no
alteration in the Substance, or Essence of the Covenants; Especially since we
have already, by several Arguments substantially proved; not only that they
were Materially the same (which your selves cannot but acknowledge) but
intentionally also. And forasmuch as it is undeniable, That God has not
forfeited or lost his Right of Sovereignty, or Dominion over us, though we have
forfeited and lost our strength and capacity of Obedience; the Covenants in
question therefore may very well be the same, notwithstanding the difference
betwixt their Subjects.

Arg. 2. Those Covenants that vastly differ in their Dedication, are not the
same but diverse: But so does the Covenants with Israel, and with Adam. The
Covenant with Adam taught no way of the Expiation of Sins by the Dedication of
it; so did that with Moses, Exodus 24. 8. And Moses took the Blood, and
sprinkled it on the People, and said; Behold, this is the Blood of the
Covenant, which the Lord has made with you, concerning all these words.

Reply: To this we Reply; That it has been already proved, That though the
Ceremonial Covenant, was indeed dedicated with Blood, and Sprinkling; yet the
Law written in Stones was no^. So that if Adam's Covenant wanted Confirmation,
or Dedication with Blood, showing the Remission of Sins; so did that written in
Stones also: And therefore in this respect there is no difference at all
betwixt them. True it is, that the Ceremonial Covenant was ^o dedicated; in
which respect there is a plain difference betwixt that, and the Covenant made
with Adam. But this alters not the Case; For it is evident, that the Law
written in Stones, was not so dedicated; and that is enough to prove what we
have all along asserted; That the Covenant of Works made with our First Parent,
was renewed to that People in the Wilderness. And though it is true, the
Ceremonial Covenant being dedicated as it was, did point unto Christ, and the
way of Salvation by him; yet nevertheless, it has been already proved, that it
was a Covenant of Works, as well as that written in Stones; and therefore both
of them now Repealed, to make way for the New Covenant, which was established
upon better Promises. And it having been proved, that they were both, no other
than two several Editions of the same Covenant of Works; and that neither of
them can, with any shadow of Truth or Justice, be styled a Covenant of Grace,
or a Gospel Covenant (which cannot be affirmed without contradicting the whole
Scope of the Scriptures) it sufficiently serves the design we level at; whether
there be a Perfect Identity in every Circumstance between either of these, and
Adam's Covenant or no. For as Dr. Owen well observes; Whatever variations may
be made in, or Additions unto the Dispensation of the First Covenant, so long
as this Rule is retained, Do this and Live; it is still the same Covenant for
the Substance, and Essence of it.

Arg. 3. Those Covenants which vastly differ in the Privileges contained in
them, are not just the same, but far different Covenants: But so does the
Covenant with Adam, and that with Israel differ. In Adam 's Covenant no Pardon
was admitted or accepted upon Repentance: But so it is in Moses Covenant; God
proclaimed himself at the Promulgation of it, a Sin Pardoning God, Exodus 34.
And promises Pardon on Repentance for the Breach of it, Lev. 26. from verse.
40. to verse. 46. If you say this was the Covenant with Abraham, not with Moses;
then Abraham's Covenant, was the Covenant of Grace: But see, verse. 46. and all
is ended.

Reply. The Answer we have returned to the foregoing Argument, may very well
serve for this also. For if the Sinai Covenant, which was delivered by Gods own
immediate Mouth and Voice; and which was also written with God's own Finger,
upon the two Tables of Stone; was not dedicated with Blood and Sprinkling
(which showed Remission of Sins) as the Ceremonial Covenant was; then it
plainly follows, that in this respect also, there is no difference between this
and the Covenant made with Adam: For if in Adams Covenant, no Pardon of Sin was
admitted or accepted upon Repentance, as wanting that which showed the
Expiation thereof; so it was in this. But whereas you say, that at the
Promulgation of Moses Covenant, God proclaimed himself a Sin Pardoning God,
Exodus 34. We freely acknowledge he did so; for else none had been saved. But
then we have also proved, that the Covenant of Grace, there mentioned, was
vastly distinct, and essencially different from that mentioned, Exodus 20. The
one being made with Moses, and the Elect only; the other with the whole Body of
the Congregation of Israel. And not only were they two distinct Covenants, in
respect of their different Subjects; but in respect of their vastly different
nature also: For though the Covenant or Promises mentioned in the 33d and 34th
Chapters of Exodus, expressly declared God to be a Sin Pardoning God; A God
Merciful and Gracious, forgiving Iniquity, Transgression and Sin; yet there is
nothing that can be more evident than this, that the other discovered no such
thing, but rather the contrary. The Jewish Legal Covenant (says Dr. Annesley)
neither admitted of Faith in the Redeemer, nor Repentance of Sin. For Pardon of
Sin, and Curse for Sin, are inconsistent, Gal. 3. 10. As many as are of the
Works of the Law, are under the Curse: For it is written, Cursed is every one
that continues not in all things which are written in the Book of the Law, to
do them. As many as depend upon the Works of the Law for Justification, are
under the Curse, And the Law discovered no other way of Justification but by
Works, Morn. Exercise, p. 122.

. 2. But (say you) God promises Pardon, on Repentance, for the Breach of Moses
Covenant, Lev. 26. 40, etc. And (say we) so he did in respect of Adam's
Covenant; for otherwise we had all been undone for ever. But as Adam's Covenant
promised no Pardon on Repentance, so neither did the Jewish Legal Covenant: For
indeed it rather threatens, and inflicts the contrary, viz. a dreadful Curse
upon every Transgression and Disobedience; and as the Doct. well observes,
admits of no Repentance. For as it is evident, that the Law written in Stones,
neither discovered, nor admits of any such thing: So as for the Ceremonial
Covenant it self; the Apostle expressly tells us, Heb. 9. 9. that the Sacrifices
thereof could not make him, that did the Service perfect, as pertaining to the
Conscience: For (says he, Chap. 10. 1, 4.) the the Law having a shadow of good
things to come, and not the very Image of the things, can never with those
Sacrifices which they offered year by year continually, make the Comers
thereunto perfect. -- For it is not possible, that the Blood of Bulls and of
Goats, should take away Sins. Other Covenants ('it is true) there were, wherein
God plainly discovered the mercifulness of his nature in that respect: And
among the rest, the Covenant made with Abraham; which in the forementioned Lev.
26. God does plainly direct them to for their Relief. But (say you) if you say,
This was the Covenant with Abraham, not with Moses; then Abraham's Covenant was
the Covenant of Grace. But yet (say we) neither will this do the business you
allege it for: For having diligently examined, Lev. 26. 40, etc. We find
recorded to this purpose; that in the latter days, after that the People of
Israel should have been scattered into all Nations, and had all sorts of
Plagues inflicted on them for their sins: If (says God) they shall confess
their sins, and the iniquities of their Fathers, etc. Then will I remember my
Covenant with Jacob, and also my Covenant with Isaac, and also my Covenant with
Abraham will I Remember. From whence, First, It may be plainly collected, that
there was no Pardon to be expected by them, from the Sinai Covenant: For God
does not direct them to apply themselves thither for Relief; nor does he in the
least suggest, that that way any thing of Pardon could be justly expected by
them: But he directs them rather to have recourse unto the Covenant made with
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; for that is the Covenant (says God) that I will
Remember. And Secondly, It ought also to be duly observed, that though the
Covenant of Circumcision, which God made with Abraham, Genesis 17. 7, 8, 9, 10.
was indeed of the same nature with the Sinai Covenant (as we have already
proved;) yet it is evident, that God had long before the Covenant of
Circumcision was in being, entered into a Covenant of Grace, or a Covenant that
was truly Evangelical, with Believing Abraham, wherein God freely promised,
That in him, that is, in his Seed, all the Nations of the earth should be
blessed, Genesis 12. 2, 3. And accordingly, this is the Covenant that Peter
directs the Bleeding Jews unto in his time, Act. 3. 25. Ye are the Children of
the Prophets, and of the Covenant which God made with our Fathers; saying unto
Abraham, and in thy Seed shall all the Kindreds of the Earth be blessed. Which
free Gospel Promise does plainly comprehend both Jews and Gentiles. And this
therefore undoubtedly, is the Covenant that God tells them in Leviticus, he
will Remember for the future Comfort of Distressed and dispersed Israel: For as
Peter refers the Jews thereunto and unto that alone, so this very Covenant, and
that in these very terms, had not only been made with Abraham, but as God here
speaks with Isaac, Genesis 24. 4. and with Jacob also: Genesis 28. 14. Whereas the
Covenant of Circumcision had not been so Renewed or Repeated: And therefore
this must be the only Covenant that God here speaks of. And whereas God tells
them Verse. 45. That he would for their sakes remember the Covenant of their
Ancestors, whom he brought forth out of the Land of Egypt. This must of
necessity have Reference either to the forementioned Covenant with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob: Or the Promises mentioned Exodus 33. 34. And cannot possibly
have any Reference to the Sinai Covenant: For that was a Bondage Covenant, Gal.
4. 21, 22, etc. A Ministration of Death and Condemnation, 2 Cor. 3. 7, 8, 9.
Against us and contrary to us; And therefore now Blotted out, Col. 2. 14. And
is accordingly by Moses himself represented as a fiery Law that Proceeded from
Gods Right Hand, Deuteronomy. 33. ^^. So that that could not possibly yield any
comfort unto them: Whereas the forementioned Covenants did plainly give them
hopes of Relief and Pardon. But (say you) see Verse. 46. and all is ended. We
have therefore accordingly Examined that Text; But cannot discern that it
speaks any thing by way of opposition to what we have Asserted: For thus run
the words. These are the Statutes and Judgments, and Laws which the Lord made
between him, and the Children of Israel at Mount Sinai, by the Hand of Moses,
which can have no other Sense than this, That this being the last Verse of the
last Chapte (save one) of Leviticus, wherein the Statutes and Judgments, or the
several branches of the Ceremonial Law had been particularly Rehearsed unto
them: These words in this 46th Verse contains therefore only the general Sum
thereof; So that we cannot discern that it makes off or on as to the present
Argument.

Arg. 4. The Fourth and last Argument runs thus; Those Covenants which have
Seals annexed of vastly different Nature, are not Absolutely or just the same,
but widely different Covenants: But so have these two Covenants; Ergo, not the
same. The Tree of Life was the only Sacrament Annexed to the first; but the
Passover and Circumcision to the last: Both holding forth Christ and Salvation
by him. The first a plain Type of Christ in the Paschal Lamb. The other a Seal
of the Righteousness of Faith.

Reply. First, as to what concerns the Tree of Life, which you say was the
only Sacrament annexed to Adams Covenant; That it was either a Sacrament or a
Seal annexed to that Covenant, the Scripture gives us no Account thereof that we
can find. And as the Passover and Circumcision, which you make to be the Seals
of the Sinai Covenant, the Scripture is as silent even in that Respect also. As
for the Passover, it was indeed as you say, a plain Type of Christ, as many
other things then were: But we do not find that it is ever called, a Seal of
the Sinai Covenant; Nor do we find that Circumcision is ever called the Seal
thereof. It is indeed called a Seal of the Righteousness of the Faith that
Abraham had yet being uncircumcized, Romans 4. 11. But the same Apostle expressly
tells us, Gal. 3. 12. That the Law is not of Faith. And if the Law is not of
Faith, then neither can it be a Covenant of Faith; And then it does also as
plainly follow, that Circumcision, which is by the Apostle termed a Seal of the
Righteousness of Abraham's Faith, could not be the Seal thereof. And in this
Respect therefore it is highly observable; That though Circumcision is
frequently called a Token of the Covenant mentioned. Genesis 17. 7, 8, 9. to the
generality that were under it; yet the Scripture no where tells us, That it was
a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, but unto Abraham only: For indeed none
else had ever before or after their Circumcision, such a Faith that Entitled
them to such Singular Promises, and Prerogatives as Abraham had. But of this we
have already said so much, toward the Resolution of the present Point, in the
Seventh Branch of our Answer to the Eleventh Objection, in the Second Part of
this Discourse foregoing; and have yet so much to say in what follows, where we
shall have a further occasion purposely to handle this Argument, that we shall
need to say the less of it here.

SECT. XV.
FOR a Conclusion of the present Point, we shall only Collect the sum of the
foregoing Arguments already Insisted on; proving that the Legal Covenant was
not a Covenant of Faith: But was indeed and in truth, no other than a Covenant
of Works. For;

First, That Covenant that is not of Faith, cannot possibly be a Covenant of
Faith. But the Apostle does expressly affirm, that, the Law is not of Faith,
Gal. 3. 11, 12. Therefore neither can it be a Covenant of Faith.

Secondly, That Covenant which is now Repealed could not be a Covenant of
Faith. But the Apostle does plainly affirm, that the first Covenant for the
faultiness thereof, is now Repealed, Heb. 8. 7, 13. 2 Cor. 3. 7, 11. Col. 2.
14. Heb. 7. 18. Therefore that Covenant could not be a Covenant of Faith.

Thirdly, That Covenant that could not give Life, could not be a Covenant of
Faith: But the Law could not give Life, Gal. 3. 21. 22. Therefore it could not
be a Covenant of Faith.

Fourthly, That Covenant that is opposed to the Covenant of Faith, as quite
another thing, could not be a Covenant of Faith. But the School-mastership of
the Law, is by the Apostle plainly opposed, and contradistinguished unto the
Covenant of Faith, as quite another thing, Gal. 3. 23, 24, 25. Therefore it
could not be a Covenant of Faith.

Fifthly, That Covenant, the Righteousness whereof is opposed to the
Righteousness of Faith; cannot be a Covenant of Faith. But the Righteousness of
the Law is plainly by the Apostle opposed to the Righteousness of Faith, Romans
10. 5, 6, etc. Therefore it could not be a Covenant of Faith.

Sixthly, That Covenant that could never Justify any that were under it, could
never be a Covenant of Faith. For being Justified by Faith, we have Peace with
God through our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 5. 1. But the Scripture does expressly
Testify; That by the Deeds of the Law, there shall no Flesh be Justified in
his Sight, Romans 3. 20. Therefore that Covenant could never be a Covenant of
Faith.

Seventhly, That Covenant under which, though many were Justified; yet none
were ever Justified by it, or by virtue of it; could never be a Covenant of
Faith. But such is the Nature of the Law, that though many were Justified under
it; yet none were ever Justified by it, or by Virtue of it, Romans 3. 20.
Therefore that Covenant could never be a Covenant of Faith.

Eighthly, That Covenant that says, Do this and Live; Or that the Man that
does these things shall Live by them; cannot possibly be a Covenant of
Gospel Grace, but of Works: Since the Apostle Informs us, That to him that
works is the Reward reckoned, not of Grace but of Debt, Romans 4. 4. But the
same Apostle does expressly tell us; That Moses describes the Righteousness of
the Law, that the Man which does these things shall live by them, Romans 10. 5.,
Therefore that Covenant could be no other than a Covenant of Works.

Ninthly, That Covenant that is plainly and in direct terms opposed unto Grace,
cannot be a Covenant of Grace. But the Law is by the Apostle directly opposed
unto Grace. Romans 6. 14. Sin shall not have Dominion over you: For ye are not
under the Law, but under Grace. Therefore that Covenant could never be a
Covenant of Grace.

Tenthly, That Covenant that was not only by the Jews Estimated as a Covenant
of Works, but was so by Gods own Appointment, must needs be a Covenant of
Works. But the Law was not only by the Jews so Reckoned, but by Gods own
Appointment it was expressly so designed, Lev. 18. 4, 5. Deuteronomy. 27. 26. Romans 10.
5. Gal. 3. 10, 12. Therefore that Covenant must needs be a Covenant of Works.

Eleventhly, That Covenant through which Abraham's Inheritance was not derived,
could not be a Covenant of Faith but of Works. But the Apostle does expressly
tell us, That if the Inheritance be of the Law, it is no more of Promise: But
God gave it to Abraham by Promise, Gal. 3. 18. Therefore the Law could not
possibly be a Covenant of Faith, but of Works.

Twelfthly, That Covenant through which had the Inheritance been conveyed,
would have made void Faith, and made the Promise of none effect, could not
possibly be a Covenant of Faith. But the Apostle does expressly tell us; That if
they which are of the Law be Heirs, Faith is made void, and the Promise made of
none effect, Romans 4. 14. Therefore the Law could not possibly be a Covenant of
Faith,

Thirteenthly, That Covenant from the Curse whereof, we were Redeemed by
Christ, could not be a Covenant of Grace, but of Works. But the Apostle Informs
us; That Christ has Redeemed us from the Curse of the Law; himself being made
a Curse for us, Gal. 3. 13. chap. 4. 4, 5. Therefore the Law could not be a
Covenant of Grace but of Works.

Fourteenthly, That Covenant that is set forth by the Apostle as a Ministration
of Death, and Condemnation, could be no other than a Covenant of Works. But the
Apostle does assure us, that the Law Written in Stones was a Ministration of
Death and Condemnation, 2 Cor. 3. 7, 9. Therefore it could be no other than a
Covenant of Works,

Fifteenthly, That Covenant in which (...) the Hand writing of Ordinances
contained, was against us, and contrary to us, which is therefore now Blotted
out, and taken out of the way, being Nailed to the Cross of Christ; could be no
other than a Covenant of Works. But such is the Nature of the Law, Col. 2. 14.
2 Cor. 3. 6, 7, 8, 9. Therefore it could be no other than a Covenant of Works.

Sixteenthly, That Covenant which when it comes, Revives Sin, and kills the
Sinner; And which though it was Ordained to Life, is by Experience found to be
unto Death, could not be a Covenant of Grace: But Paul does expressly tell us;
That when the Commandment came, Sin Revived and he died. And the Commandment
which was Ordained to Life, he found to be unto Death, Romans 7. 9, 10. Therefore
that Covenant could not be a Covenant of Grace but of Works.

Seventeenthly, That Covenant that is a Bondage Covenant, which gendereth to
Bondage; all whose Children also are in Bondage, cannot possibly be a Covenant
of Faith, but of Works. But the Apostle does Expressly Inform us, that Mount
Sinai Covenant is a Bondage Covenant, that is gendereth to Bondage, and that
her Children also are in Bondage, Gal. 4. 21, 22, 23, 24, 26. Therefore Mount
Sinai Covenant could be no other than a Covenant of Works.

Eighteenthly, That Covenant that admitted not of Faith in the Redeemer, nor
Repentance of Sin: Since Pardon of Sin and Curse for Sin are Inconsistent;
could not be a Covenant of Grace. But the Scripture does expressly assure us;
That as many as are of the Works of the Law are under the Curse: For it is
Written, Cursed is every one that continues not in all things which are
Written in the Book of the Law to do them, Gal. 3. 10. Therefore that Covenant
could not possibly be a Covenant of Grace but of Works.

Nineteenthly, That Covenant that had not Christ for the Mediator of it, could
never be a Covenant of Faith but of Works. But the Apostle speaking of the
Legal Covenant made with Israel at Mount Sinai, tells us; That Christ has
obtained a more Excellent Ministry, by how much also he is the Mediator of a
better Covenant, which was Established upon better Promises, Heb. 8. 6, 7, 8.
9. From whence it plainly follows, that Christ was not the Mediator of the
Legal Covenant. Therefore that Covenant could never be a Covenant of Faith, but
of Works.

Twentiethly, That Covenant that was not Confirmed by the Blood of Christ
(which alone can cleanse us from all unrighteousness) but only by the Blood of
Bulls, and Goats, and Calves, and the Ashes of an Heifer sprinkling the
unclean, which only Sanctified to the Purifying of the Flesh, and could never
take away Sins, nor make him that did the Service perfect as pertaining to the
Conscience; could not be a Covenant of Faith. But the Ceremonial Law was of
this Nature, and the Sacrifices thereof, wherewith alone it was Dedicated, Heb.
9. 9, 10. 11, 12, 13, 14. Chap. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. Therefore that Covenant
could not possibly be a Covenant of Faith but of Works.

Twenty first, That Covenant that was not confirmed by the Blood of Christ; No,
nor so much as by the Blood of Bulls, or Goats, or Calves, which was plainly
Typical thereof; could never be a Covenant of Grace but of Works. But the Law
Written in Stones was so far from being confirmed by the Blood of Christ, that
it was never (that we read of) Dedicated with any other sort of Blood
whatsoever. Therefore that Covenant could not possibly be a Covenant of Grace,
but of Works.

Twenty second, That Covenant that is Represented to us in the Scripture as a
Fiery, Burning Law; the Proclamation also whereof was attended with dreadful
Thunderings and Lightenings; with Blackness and Darkness, and Tempest; And such
a Voice of Words as could not be endured, which made Moses himself exceedingly
to quake and tremble, could not be a Covenant of Faith, but of Works. But such
was the Nature and Quality of the Legal Covenant at Mount Sinai, Exodus 20. 18.
19. Deuteronomy. 33. 2. Heb. 12. 18, 19, 20, 21. Therefore that Covenant could not be
a Covenant of Faith but of Works.

Twenty third, That Covenant that is just opposite to the Gospel Covenant;
which the Scripture represents unto us as a Covenant of Peace and Liberty,
making a Joyful found, and speaking with a small, still, comfortable, and
alluring Voice, in the Ears, and to the Hearts of Sinners; that has also Jesus
for the Mediator thereof, and speaks better things than the Blood of Abel;
Proclaiming the Lord, the Lord God, Gracious, and Merciful, Abundant in
Goodness, and in Truth, forgiving Iniquity, Transgression and Sin. That
Covenant can never be a Covenant of Grace, but of Works. But the Legal Covenant
is plainly in Scripture opposed unto the Gospel Covenant in all these Respects,
Heb. 12. from the 18th to the 24th Gal. 3. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Gal. 4. 21, etc.
Therefore the Legal Covenant could not possibly be a Covenant of Grace, but of
Works.

. So that notwithstanding all the most plausible Arguments, which are usually
urged by way of opposition to what we have now Asserted (unless we must shut
our Eyes) there can be nothing more plain than this; That the Law given by
Moses to the Seed of Abraham at Mount Sinai, instead of being a Covenant of
Faith in Christ Jesus, or a Covenant of Gospel Grace (as many Divines famous
for Learning and Piety do confidently affirm it is) was no other than a
Covenant of Works, and that which is therefore now done away, 2 Cor. 3. 7, 8,
9, 11. Col. 2. 14. Heb. 8. 7, 13. From whence it plainly and undeniably
follows, that the Covenant of Circumcision, mentioned Genesis 17. 7, 8, 9, 10.
(which God there promised to Establish betwixt Himself, Abraham and his Seed
after him in their Generations) being the same thing and of the same nature (as
has been already proved) is therefore now also Repealed and done away
therewith, Acts 15. 10. Gal. 5. 3, 4, 5. Col. 2. 14. And consequently all the
Arguments thence deduced, howsoever, or by whomsoever formed, for the support
of Infants Baptism, do of themselves vanish.

THE FIFTH PART,
Containing a Description of that truly Evangelical Covenant, God was pleased
to make with Believing Abraham: Wherein lies the Sum of the Everlasting Gospel
then Preached unto him; since Proclaimed by the Apostles, and which now remains
to be yet further Published unto all Nations, for the Obedience of Faith, Romans
16. 25, 26. Rev. 14. 6, 7-

Wherein the true Nature and Difference betwixt the two Covenants; that of
Works, and that of Grace, is further Explained.

Rev. 11. 19. And the Temple of God was opened in Heaven and there was seen in
his Temple the Ark of his Testament; and there were Lightnings, and Voices, and
Thundrings, and an Earthquake, and Great Hail.
SECT. I.
. 1. BUT though the Covenant of Circumcision, which God was pleased to make
with Abraham, Genesis 17. 7, 8, 9, 10. was no other than a Covenant of Works, as
the Covenant at Sinai was, and are both therefore now done away; yet (as we
have already declared) it is evident and undeniable, that God was also pleased
to enter into a Covenant of Grace with Believing Abraham, even such a Covenant
as was purely Evengelical, and that which never shall be abolished. And it is
also as evident, that this Gospel Covenant had been Established and Preached
unto Abraham, long before the Covenant of Circumcision was made with him: (For
both Abraham and all true Believers, in that Age, were in the Covenant of Grace
long before the Covenant of Circumcision was made, and would have been so, if
that had never been) which Covenant of Grace or Gospel Covenant, which God was
thus pleased to make with Believing Abraham, is indeed the great Charter, by
which the Believing Gentiles always did, and do claim Heaven and Earth, and all
the Promises they have title to. For in this respect it is, that the Apostle
tells us as he does, Gal. 3. 8. That the Scripture, foreseeing that God would
justify the Heathen through Faith; preached before the Gospel unto Abraham,
saying; in thee shall all Nations be Blessed; Which he quoteth not from Genesis
17. 7, 8. but from Genesis 12. 2, 3. Where before Abraham's removal out of his own
Country (and therefore long before the Covenant of Circumcision was in being)
God enters into a solemn Covenant with Abraham, saying; I will make of thee a
great Nation, and I will bless thee, and make thy Name great; and thou shall be
a Blessing. And I will Bless them that Bless thee, and Curse him that Curses
thee; and in thee shall all the Families of the Earth be blessed.

. 2. If we are to seek therefore of the Covenant of Grace that God made with
Abraham, which is the Great Charter of the Gentiles hope; behold and see, lo
here it is; a Covenant of Grace indeed. A Covenant truly Evangelical, as being
every way Extensive, Full, Free, Absolute, and without those Conditions that
the Covenant of Circumcision was manifestly clogged withal. And therefore
called the Covenant of Promise, in the forementioned 3d of the Galatians; for
having told us, verse. 8. of the Promise that God had made unto Abraham, that in
Him should all Nations be Blessed. And having also told us, verse. 14. 16. that
the blessing of Abraham was to come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ, that
we might receive the Promise of the Spirit through Faith. He adds, verse. 17,
18. And this I say, that the Covenant that was confirmed before of God in
Christ; the Law which was 430 years after, cannot disanul that it should make
the Promise of none Effect. For if the Inheritance be of the Law, it is no more
of Promise; but God gave it to Abraham by Promise. Which clearly argues the
Absoluteness of this Gospel Covenant: For if it had not been Free and Absolute,
but Conditional, as the Covenant of Circumcision was, and as the Legal Covenant
at Mount Sinai was; then according to the Scope of the Apostles Reasoning, it
had not properly been a Covenant of Promise, but a Legal Covenant; and so the
Inheritance had been of the Law: For wherein differs the Law from a free
Promise, but that the one is Conditional, the other Absolute? The one promises
Life upon condition of Obedience; the other without Money, and without Price,
Isa. 55. 1. And therefore the Covenant which God made with the Israelites at
Mount Sinai, though it had many Glorious Promises in it; that God would be
their God, and they should be his peculiar People, and Treasure, etc. Yet these
Promises being clogged with Conditions of Obedience, impossible to be
performed: That Covenant therefore is never presented to us in the Scripture,
under the Notion, or Denomination of a Covenant of Promise; but under the
Denomination of the Law, or as a Covenant of Works only. For Moses (says the
Apostle) describes the Righteousness of the Law, that the man that does these
things shall live by them, Romans 10. 5, And so likewise, Gal. 3. 10. As many as
are of the Works of the Law, are under the Curse: For it is written, Cursed is
every one that continues not in all things that are written in the Book of the
Law, to do them. And verse. 12. The Law is not of Faith, but the man that does
them, shall live in them. And for the same Reason therefore is the Covenant of
Circumcision, represented to us also, under the same Denomination of the Law:
Romans 4. 13. (as shall be afterward shown) because though it is true, it had
Promises in it that were full and glorious enough; yet those Promises being not
absolute, but conditional, as the Covenant at Mount Sinai was, it is therefore
represented to us under the same Character; and not as a Covenant of Promise,
or an Evangelical Covenant: For that is the Peculiar Character or Denomination
which is given by the Holy Spirit himself, to the forementioned Covenant, Genesis
12. 2, 3. which God had made with Abraham long before.

. 3. Wherefore (says Dr. Owen) the Covenant of Grace; supposing it a New, Real
Absolute Covenant, and not a Reformation of the Old, or a Reduction of it unto
the use of our present Condition (as some, says he, imagine it to be) must
differ in the Essence, Substance, and Nature of it from that First Covenant of
Works, Ibid. ut supra, p. 389.

. 4. The Covenant of Grace (says Mr. Troughton, in a late Discourse of his,
Entitled, Lutherus Redivivus, Part. 1. p. 111.) is expressed in the Nature and
Form of a Promise, throughout the Scripture. Thus it was to our First Parents,
soon after the fall, a Promise that the Seed of the Woman should overcome the
Devil and his Seed: No Terms, no Conditions added, but a bare Declaration of
Mercy to their Dejected, Self-condemned Consciences. Next when the Covenant was
Revealed to Abraham, Genesis 12 1, 2, 3. It is a Formal Promise, that God would
bless him, and all Nations in his Seed; and accordingly ever after it is called
the Promise made to Abraham, which Israel waited to see performed. And the
Apostle, Gal. 3. 18. affirms, that the Inheritance was given to Abraham by
Promise and not by Law; and in verse. 15, 16, 17. he makes the Covenant and
Promise equipollent terms. The Law, (says he) which was 420 years after,
cannot disannul the Covenant with Abraham, that the Promise should be of none
Effect. Neither was this Promise only of Christ's coming in the Flesh, but of a
Blessing through Christ, verse. 14. Yea, the giving of the Holy Spirit is a part
of the Blessing Promised to Abraham; That the Blessing of Abraham might come on
the Gentiles through Jesus; that we might receive the Promise of the Spirit
through Faith.

. 5. And indeed this is that therefore that renders it sure, and certain to all
the Seed therein concerned: For as it is evident, that this Gospel Covenant,
mentioned Genesis 12. 2, 3. was Preached unto Abraham, long before the Covenant of
Circumcision was made with him: So the Addition of the Covenant of Circumcision
afterward (as the Apostle speaks of the Law given by Moses; because of
transgressions, till the Seed should come, to whom the Promise was made) could
not disannul, that it should make this forementioned, and fore-established
Promise to be of none Effect. For it being most plainly a Gospel Covenant,
wholly free and absolute, and only to be received by Faith: Hence it follows,
that it is of an Everlasting, Unchangeable Nature; and consequently sure,
without any possibility of Miscarriage, unto all the Seed thereunto belonging
(which the Covenant of Circumcision, being Conditional, was not) as is most
excellently reasoned and argued by the Apostle to this purpose, Romans 4. 13.
where he tells us, that the Promise that Abraham should be the Heir of the
World (which is the same in effect with his being the Father of all them that
believe, just before spoken of) was not to him, or to his seed, through the
Law; but through the Righteousness of Faith. Not through the Law; that is, not
through the Covenant of Circumcision, (as shall be afterward demonstrated: For
that was as much a Covenant of Works, as the Covenant at Mount Sinai was, and
therefore a Legal Covenant) But through that mentioned, Genesis 12. 2, 3. which
was purely Evangelical; and therefore through the Righteousness of Faith alone:
Which gives the only Security to the Seed therein concerned, as is afterward
asserted, verse. 14, 15, 16. of the forementioned 4th to the Romans; For (says
he) if they, which are of the Law be Heirs, Faith is made void, and the Promise
made of none Effect; because the Law works wrath: for where no Law is, there
is no Transgression. Therefore it is of Faith, that it might be by Grace, to
the end the Promise might be sure to all the Seed, not to that only which is of
the Law (that is the Jews) but to that also that is of the Faith of Abraham
(that is, the Gentiles) who is the Father of us all; as it is written, I have
made thee Father of many Nations; according to that which was spoken; so shall
thy Seed be.

SECT. II.
. 1. IT is indeed suggested by Dr. Burthogg; That the forementioned Promise,
That Abraham should be the Heir of the World, (which as the Apostle tells, was
not to him, or to his Seed through the Law; but through the Righteousness of
Faith) is to be understood in reference to Genesis 17. 8. Where God promises to
give unto Abraham. and to his Seed after him, the Land of Canaan for an
Everlasting Possession. From whence he infers, that the Covenant there
mentioned, is a Covenant of Faith, and therefore a Covenant of Grace. But it
does not follow, because Canaan was promised in the Covenant of Circumcision,
that therefore, according to the Apostles reckoning, that Covenant should be a
Covenant of Faith: For as much as the Promise concerning Abraham's Heirship of
the World, which the Apostle here speaks of, is of a vastly different Nature
from the Promise of Canaan; or indeed any Terrestrial Inheritance whatsoever.

. 2. It is true, as the Apostle tells us, That Godliness is profitable unto all
things; that is, in all respects; in respect of this World, as well as in
respect of the other. And why so? Because it has the Promise: Having the
Promise of the Life that now is, as well as of that to come. In which respect
it ought to be duly observed, that Abraham was promised Canaan long before the
Covenant of Circumcision was made with him: For so we are told, Genesis 12. 7. The
Lord appeared unto Abraham, and said, unto thy Seed will I give this Land. So
Genesis 13. 15. All the Land which thou see, to thee will I give it, and to thy
Seed for ever. So likewise Genesis 15. 18. In that same day the Lord made a
Covenant with Abraham; saying, unto thy Seed have I given this Land, from the
River of Egypt, unto the Great River, the River Euphrates. From all which it
plainly appears, that Abraham was promised Canaan long before the Covenant of
Circumcision was made with him: And it was indeed therefore a free Promise, or
a part of that Covenant of Promise, which the Apostle speaks of, Gal. 3. 17,
18. which was afterward ratified and confirmed by Oath, so as that it shall
never be disannulled: For so we are expressly assured, Psalm. 105. 8, 9, 10, 11.
He has remembered his Covenant for ever, the Word which he commanded to a
thousand Generations; which Covenant he made with Abraham, and his Oath unto
Isaac, and confirmed the same unto Jacob for a Law, and to Israel for an
Everlasting Covenant; saying, unto thee will I give the Land of Canaan, the lot
of your Inheritance. And though it is true, Canaan was only promised in the
Letter, and was inherited only by the Carnal Seed and Descendants of Abraham;
yet in the mystery, it means the whole World, of which Canaan was a part, in
which he took Possession; or as it were, had Livery and Seisin given him in the
name of the whole.

. 3. The like is to be said concerning the Spiritual Seed of Abraham; even the
Gentiles also, on whom that self-same Blessing of Abraham (as being the fruit
of the Free Promise) does also descend. For in this respect it is that the
Apostle tells us, that all is ours: But how? For we are Christ's; and Christ is
God's. And therefore as God has promised, that the Meek shall inherit the
Earth, Psalm. 37. 11. Mat. 5. 5. So he has also promised, that the Kingdom and
Dominion, and the greatness of the Kingdom and Dominion, under the whole Heaven
shall be given to the People of the Saints of the Most High, whose Kingdom is
an Everlasting Kingdom, So likewise, Rev. 5. 10. Thou have made us unto our
God, Kings and Priests, and we shall Reign upon the Earth. All which are
glorious Promises, and shall certainly receive their full accomplishment in the
appointed Season; as being indeed no other than Gospel Promises; and of the
same Nature with the free Promise of that kind, even the Promise of Canaan,
made unto Abraham, long before the Covenant of Circumcision was made with him.
So that it is no wonder that the Apostle tells as he does, that Godliness has
the Promise of the Life that now is, as well as of that that is to come.

. 4. It Is true, Canaan was promised in the Covenant of Circumcision also as was
also the Promise of a Celestial Inheritance too: When God told Abraham, I will
be a God to thee, and to thy Seed after thee; I will give unto thee, and to thy
Seed after thee, the Land wherein thou art a stranger; All the Land of Canaan,
for an Everlasting Possession; and I will be their God, Genesis 17. 7, 8. But all
these Promises, though good enough in themselves; yet being Conditional, they
were therefore failable, and still liable to forfeiture, as they were contained
in that Covenant. And therefore the Apostle would have us strictly to observe,
that the forementioned Promise, concerning Abraham's Heirship (whatever it
signifies) was not to him, or to his Seed through the Law, but through the
Righteousness of Faith. For though it should be granted that it has reference
to a Terrestrial Inheritance in Canaan, and consequently to his Interest in the
whole World, in the sense but now mentioned: Yet forasmuch as this Promise wa^
made unto him, long before his Circumcision; and was therefore a part of the
free Promise: The Apostle does sufficiently suggest, that that was the Promise
he had most reason to trust unto, or to rely upon, as being a far surer
Promise of the two (and that both to himself and his Seed also) than was the
Promise of the same kind, as it was contained in the Covenant of Circumcision;
which the Scripture does so plainly represent unto us as a Conditional
Covenant. The Promise (says he) was not to him nor to his Seed, through the
Law. And why not through the Law? Because (as he also tells us in the very next
following words) If they which are of the Law be Heirs, Faith is made void, and
the Promise made of none; effect: Because the Law works wrath; for where no
Law is, there is no Transgression. Therefore, it is of Faith, that it might be
by Grace; to the end the Promise might be sure to all the Seed. The like he
tells the Galatians also, chap. 3. 18. If the Inheritance be of the Law, it is
no more of Promise; But God gave it to Abraham by Promise. Which clearly argues
the Freeness, or Absoluteness thereof; which the Covenant of Circumcision was
not: It being evident, that it obliged all that were under it to Perfect and
Universal Obedience, as the Condition of Obtaining thc Mercies therein
contained, Gal. 5. 3. For I testify to every man that is Circumcised, that he
is a Debtor to do the whole Law. And therefore though it is true, Canaan was
promised in that Covenant as well as in the other; as was also the Promise of
the Celestial Inheritance too; when God promised to be a God to Abraham, and
to his Seed; yet those Promises there mentioned, being bounded as they were
with Conditions impossible to be performed, and therefore of a Legal Stamp, and
liable to forfeiture: That is not the Way, that is not the Channel, through
which the Blessings in Promise must be derived unto the Heirs of Promise: For
if ever they be derived, it must be through the Free Promise, and through that
alone. Yea, if ever they be derived, it must be through the Free Promise. or
not at all. For (says he) verse. 21. If there had been a Law given, that could
have given Life, verily Righteousness should have been by the Law: But the
Scripture has concluded all under sin, that the Promise by Faith of Jesus
Christ might be given to them that believe.

. 5. But as we have already said, the Promise that Abraham should be the Heir
of the World, is of a vastly different nature from the Promise of Canaan;
neither indeed is it at all contained in the Covenant of Circumcision, where
the Promise of Canaan is inserted: For it is evident, that the Promise that
Abraham should be the Heir of the World, has a single reference to his
Fatherhood unto all them that believe; that is, both Jews and Gentiles; or the
whole World of Believers. Thus Pareus in his Comment upon the Place, carries
the sense of the Words; and so the Apostle himself interprets it, verse. 11, 12.
And it is as evident, that there is no Promise at all of that kind in the
Covenant of Circumcision, that Abraham should be the Common Father of all them
that Believe; That Covenant having a plain reference to Abraham's Natural
Posterity only; for as much as all those to whom the Promises of that Covenant
were made, were bound to be Circumcised, as the Sign or Token of it; which does
not concern the Gentiles at all. So that it is the Gospel Covenant therefore
which we have before spoken of, which we find mentioned. Genesis 12. 2, 3. and not
the Covenant of Circumcision, mentioned Genesis 17. 7, 8, 9. that is the Great
Charter, by which the Believing Gentiles always did, and do rightly claim both
Heaven and Earth, and all the Promises they have Title to.

SECT. III.
. 1. BUT whereas the Doctor lays a mighty stress upon those words of the
Apostle before mentioned Romans 4. 13. For the Promise that he should be the Heir
of the World was not to Abraham or to his Seed through the Law; but through the
Righteousness of Faith. Whereby he endeavors to prove that the Covenant of
Circumcision, mentioned Genesis 17. 7, 8, 9. is that very Covenant of Grace that
the Believing Gentiles are now under, and from whence all their hopes and
Comforts are derived: We must of necessity therefore endeavor to overrhrow and
remove the seeming strength of what he offers by way of opposition to what we
have asserted, before any through Conclusion can be drawn.

. 2. The Sum then of his Argument is this; It is Evident (says he) that the
Covenant of Promise made to Abraham, which is called the Blessing of Abraham,
is still in being; and is the Covenant of Grace, into a Participation of which
the true Believing Gentiles are taken; which is the true ground and Foundation
of all their hopes and Comforts: For thus the Apostle carries it when he
affirms that God gave the Inheritance to Abraham by Promise. And by what
Promise, but that ratified Covenant of Promise. I will be a God to thee and to
thy Seed. -- In short (says he) this is the Climax. If Believers then Christ's;
If Christ's then Abraham's Seed; If Abraham's Seed then Heirs according to the
Promise: For the Promise is; I will be a God to thee and thy Seed; And I will
give to thee and thy Seed. Nor does it make any alteration in the case, that
Faith is now the requisite condition of Salvation; or that we must believe to
be saved. This but Evidences the more clearly that the Gospel is but a
Renovation of the Covenant of Abraham: For as it is through Faith that we
Gentiles do become Christ's, and by being Christ's that we become the Seed of
Abraham, and consequently Heirs of Salvation according to the Promise; so it
was through Faith, the Righteousness of Faith that Abraham the Father of the
Faithful had the Promise himself. For so the Apostle, Romans 4. 13. For the
Promise that he should be the Heir of the World, was not to Abraham, or to his
Seed through the Law; but through the Righteousness of Faith. And if the
Promise made to Abraham be the ground and Foundation of all our hopes and
expectations as we are Christians, and it be the true Covenant of Grace, to be
sure it is still in being, or we do but beat the Air, and are at a loss; our
hope is in vain, and our rejoicing vain, which God forbid.

I know you take it for a very strong Argument, that the Covenant of Abraham,
Genesis 17. 7, 8. cannot be the Evangelical or Gospel Covenant, because it is a
Mixed one, and Composed of a Temporal (as well as an Eternal) bequest: But for
that Reason, I the rather take it to be Evangelical: For this is Gospel, that
Godliness is profitable unto all things, that is in all Respects; In respect of
this World, and in respect of the other; And why so? Why it has the Promise.
Having the Promise of the Life that now is, as well as of that to come. And
what is this but a finger to point you to the Covenant of Promise, as the
Evangelical Covenant, the Promise, the Blessing that did descend on the
Gentiles. And indeed the Inheritance promised to Abraham, and which in, by, and
under him is descended on the Gentiles, is not only a Celestial, but a
Terrestrial one also: For by that Promise Abraham was not only the Heir of
Heaven; but also Heir of the World. And so the Apostle styles him. And the same
Apostle tells all is ours; And Abraham being Constituted by the Promise, Heir
of the World; he and his descendants according to the Flesh were to take
Possession of it, and to have Livery of Seisin given in Canaan; a Livery of
Seisin, which was given indeed, and taken but in part of the World, (as Livery
of Seisin usually is) but in the Name of the whole. From the whole of which the
Doctor Infers; That that Covenant mentioned, Genesis 17. 7, 8. where this Promise
of a Terrestrial Inheritance bequeathed to Abraham and his Seed, is inserted
(which he takes to be the same with his being the Heir of the World) must be a
Covenant of Grace, or an Evangelical Covenant: For since the Promise that
Abraham should be the Heir of the World, was not to him, or to his Seed through
the Law; but through the Righteousness of Faith; Therefore the Covenant
mentioned Genesis 17. 7, 8. where this Promise is Inserted, must of necessity be a
Covenant of Grace, and such a Covenant as on which all the Hopes and Comforts
of Believing Gentiles are Built.

. 3. This is the substance of what the Doctor offers; by which it may be easily
perceived that there is a necessity that this now mentioned Argument of his, be
substantially resolved, and removed out of the way, before we can draw any
through Conclusion from the Premises; It being true enough; That if Abraham's
Heirship of the World, spoken of Romans 4. 13. And the Promise of a Terrestrial
Inheritance in Canaan, mentioned Genesis 17. 8. be one and the same thing, and not
of a quite different nature; then indeed, there will be some kind of
appearance, or some shadow at least of Argument in what the Doctor offers,
toward the proof of what he asserteth; That the Covenant mentioned Genesis 17. 7,
8. is the Covenant of Grace. Though should it be granted that the Doctors
Notion is right; That Abraham's Heirship of the World, is to be understood of
the Promise of a Terrestrial Inheritance in Canaan; Yet it will not therefore
follow, that the Inheritance the Apostle speaks of, is derived unto Abraham or
to his Seed, through the Righteousness of that Covenant, and consequently that
it is a Gospel Covenant: Because (as has been already observed) though that be
one of the Promises contained in that Covenant; yet since the same thing had
been before assured unto Abraham, and his Seed also, by virtue of the free
Promise, mentioned Genesis 12. 7. etc. which the Apostle takes such special notice
of Gal. 3. 17. 18. And forasmuch as the Conditional Covenant of Circumcision,
might be broken as it was; and the Mercies therein contained, forfeited, as
they were; which the other could not: From hence it plainly follows, that the
free Promise, and that alone, is that Covenant of Grace, or Anchor of Hope,
that both Abraham and his Seed were only to trust unto, and through which the
Inheritance was to be derived.

SECT. IV.
HOwever, since the Doctor lays the stress he does upon the Argument before us;
It is necessary that it be Examined, and brought to the Test, whether right or
no? In order whereunto our main business will be to prove that Abraham's
Heirship of the World, spoken of Romans 4. 13. And the Promise that was made unto
him of a Terrestrial Inheritance in Canaan, mentioned Genesis 17. 8. is not one
and the same Promise; but of a vastly different Nature and Tendency. The one
being the Great Charter of all the Gentiles hope and blessedness, in reference
both to this World, and that that is to come; The other being the Promise of a
Terrestrial Inheritance only, and that which concerned Abraham alone, and his
Natural Offspring. And if this can be substantially proved, it will easily be
acknowledged that the Doctors forementioned Argument falls to the ground. In
order therefore hereunto two things must be done, and that is; First diligently
to Examine the Scope of Romans 4. 13. where the words themselves do lie that are
the bottom of his Argument. And Secondly to compare that with other Scriptures
that give light thereunto.

. 2. As to the Scope of the place mentioned; It ought to be duly observed,
that in the 11th and 12th Verses, it is told us of Abraham, That he received
the Sign of Circumcision, a Seal of the Righteousness of the Faith, which he
had yet being Uncircumcised, that he might be the Father of all them that
Believe, though they be not Circumcised, that Righteousness might be Imputed to
them also. And the Father of Circumcision, to them who are not of the
Circumcision only, but also walk in the steps of that Faith of our Father
Abraham, which he had yet being Uncircumcised. The plain Scope of which is to
show that Abraham was appointed by God as the Common Father of all sorts of
true Believers whatsoever, whether Jews or Gentiles; And that this Divine
Privilege was not conferred on him upon the Account of the Works he had before
spoken of Verse 2. 3. or because of his Circumcision which was a main part
thereof, and which he had been just now insisting on; but through Faith; Even,
that Faith which he had yet being Uncircumcised. Which self same Argument he
further prosecutes in the next following words. For (says he immediately Verse.
13.) the Promise that he should be the Heir of the World, was not to Abraham or
to his Seed, through the Law, but through the Righteousness of Faith. Now let
it be Judged what was the Apostles meaning, as to Abraham's Heirship of the
World; whether it were concerning the Promise made unto him of a Terrestrial
Inheritance in Canaan, mentioned Genesis 17. 8. that in that respect he should be
the Heir of the World? Or rather whether it is not to be understood concerning
his Common Fatherhood to all them that Believe; which he had just before been
speaking of? For there he had been plainly treating, not concerning any
Terrestrial Inheritance whatsoever; but concerning Abraham's Spiritual Relation
as a Father to all sorts of true Believers. And in that sense the words in the
13th Verse come in most aptly and Conerently with what he had before told u^;
which was that Faith was reckoned to Abraham for Righteousness, not in
Circumcision, but in Uncircumcision, even long before he was Circumcised. That
he received the Sign of Circumcision a Seal of the Righteousness of the Faith
which he had yet being Uncircumcised that he might be the Father of all them
that Believe, as well Jews as Gentiles, and Gentiles as Jews, Verse. 10. 11, 12.
In which respect well might the Apostle tell us as he does, Verse. 13. that
Abraham was promised that he should be the Heir of the World; Since the whole
World both* of Jews and Gentiles, even as many as the Lord our God shall call,
were now to become his Spiritual Seed by Believing.

. 3. And that this is the true Scope and Genuine Sense of the place, is plain
also from the following words; when he comes to the proof of what he had
Asserted, Verse. 13. For (says he Verse. 14) If they which are of the Law be
Heirs; Faith is made void, and the Promise made of none effect, because the Law
works Wrath: For where no Law is* there is no Transgression. Therefore it is
of Faith that it might be by Grace, that the Promise might be sure to all the
Seed; not to that only which is of the Law (that is the Jews) but to that also
which is of the Faith of Abraham (that is the Gentiles) who is the Father of us
all. What Promise is it the Apostle here speaks of? No doubt the same Promise
he had spoken of just before, even the Promise that Abraham should be the Heir
of the World; or as he here expresses it; The Father of us all. But how does
that appear? Or where is that Promise? As it is Written (says he Verse. 17.) I
have made thee a Father of many Nations, before him whom he Believed; even God
who quickens the dead; who against hope believed in hope, that he might
become the Father of many Nations, according to that which was spoken; so shall
thy Seed be. Wherein it is evident what was the Apostles meaning when he tells
us of the Promise that Abraham should be the Heir of the World; that is, not
that he should be the Heir of Canaan, or of any Terrestrial Inheritance
whatsoever (though that be true too, and is a part of the same Gospel Covenant,
as has been before proved; and shall therefore be gloriously fulfiled in the
appointed Season; when not Canaan only shall be the Possession and Inheritance
of Gods People; but the greatness of the Kingdom and Dominion under the whole
Heaven shall be given unto them) But that which the Apostle intends in these
words, is, that Spiritual Relation whereunto Abraham was designed and appointed
by God, as the Father of many Nations; Or the Father of all them that Believe;
according to that which was spoken so shall thy Seed be. Wherein he plainly
refers to the Gospel Covenant which was first Recorded, Genesis 12. 2, 3. that God
had made with Abraham before his removal out of his own Country; and therefore
long before the Covenant of Circumcision was made with him: For then God first
promised that he would make of him a Great Nation; make his Name Great; and
that in him should all the Families of the Earth be blessed; which free Gospel
Covenant was again repeated; Genesis 15. 5. and Genesis 17. 4, 5. where it is
promised, that there should be of the Nations innumerable, that should be
Abraham's Seed by Believing. To which the Apostle plainly refers in the
forementioned Romans 4. 17. As it is written (says he) I have made thee a Father
of many Nations, before him whom he believed; according to that which was
spoken, so shall thy Seed be. For in this respect we are told, Genesis 15. 6. That
Abraham believed in the Lord, and he counted it to him for Righteousness.

. 4. And in respect of this Covenant it is, that the Apostle affirms, as
before, that the Promise is sure to all the Seed. For as herein was promised a
Blessing unto all the Spiritual Seed of Abraham; even the whole Family of the
Faithful throughout the World, whether Jews or Gentiles; of whom, through
Christ, he was to be Father (whereas there is no such Promise contained in the
Covenant of Circumcision:) So the tenor of it being purely Evangelical (which
the Covenant of Circumcision was not:) This therefore, and not the other, is
the Great Charter, and only Firm Deed of Gift, by which the Believing Gentiles
always did, and do claim Heaven and Earth, and all the Promises they have Title
to.

. 5. Besides, that the Promise that Abraham should be the Heir of the World,
cannot be understood of an Earthly Inheritance, but the call of the Gentiles;
and consequently has reference to his Universal Fatherhood to all sorts of
true Believers whatsoever, whether Jews or Gentiles; is yet further evident
from what the same Apostle tells us, Romans 1^. 11, 12, 13. Have they stumbled
(says he, speaking of the Jews) that they should fall? God forbid: But rather
through their fall Salvation is come unto the Gentiles. Now if the Fall of them
be the Riches of the World, and the Diminishing of them the Riches of the
Gentiles; How much more their Fullness? And so likewise verse. 15. If the Casting
away of them, be the Reconciling of the World, what shall the Receiving of them
be, but Life from the Dead? Where the same expression is made use of in
reference to the Call of the Gentiles, as had been before made use of Chap. 4.
13. concerning Abraham's Heirship: For as Abraham by Promise was to be the Heir
of the World; so the Call of the Gentiles is here said to be the Riches of the
World. The same expression we have likewise in reference to Christ, 1 John 2.
2. And he is the Propitiation for our sins; and not for ours only, but also for
the sins of the whole World. Not for ours only; that is, not only for us Jews,
but for the sins of the whole World; that is, both Jews and Gentiles; because
the Partition Wall between Jew and Gentile was now broken down. In the same
sense therefore, that Christ is here said to be the Propitiation for the sins
of the whole World. In the same sense is Abraham said to be the Heir of the
whole World; that is, he was constituted or appointed to be an Universal Father
unto all them that Believe, not only Jews but Gentiles also. And indeed, as the
Blessing of Abraham is hereby said to come upon the Gentiles, through Jesus
Christ, Gal. 3. 14. So had it not been for this Gospel Promise, the poor
Gentiles had still remained without hope of Relief, or ground of Comfort;
strangers to the Covenants of Promise, and without God in the World; there
being no ground of Relief, or hope of Comfort at all afforded unto them, from
the Covenant of Circumcision.

. 6. And in this respect therefore, whereas the Apostle tells us in the
forementioned Romans 4. 13. That the Promise that Abraham should be the Heir of
the World, was not to him, or to his Seed [through the Law] but through the
Righteousness of Faith. It is yet further observeble, that the Law he here
speaks of, and which he does so manifestly contradistinguish or oppose unto the
Righteousness of Faith; cannot be understood concerning the Law given by Moses
to that People in the Wilderness 400 years after Abraham's time (though it was
of the same nature:) But it must of necessity be understood concerning the Law,
or Covenant of Circumcision, which God made with Abraham himself, and his
Natural Posterity; which was extant in his own time. And that this is the Law
which the Apostle here intends, will evidently appear, if we duly attend unto
the scope of the Apostie in the foregoing part of this fourth to the Romans:
which was to show, that Abraham himself was not justified by Works; no not by
his Circumcision, but by Faith, which he had long before he was Circumcised.
For thus he begins, verse. 1. 2. What shall we say then, that Abraham our
Father, as pertaining to the Flesh, has found? For if Abraham were justified
by Works, he has whereof to glory, but not before God. For what says the
Scripture? Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for Righteousness.
So then Abraham was not justified by Works before God, but by Faith alone. But
how does that appear? Why, thus it, appears, verse. 9. 10. Because Faith was not
reckoned to him for Righteousness, when he was in Circumcision, but in
Uncircumcision. And so verse. 11, 12. He received (says he) the Sign of
Circumcision, a Seal of the Righteousness of the Faith which he had, yet being
Uncircumcised, that he might be the Father of all them that believe, etc. For
(says he) verse. 13. the Promise that he should be the Heir of the World (or as
he had said just before, that he should be the Father of all them that believe)
was not to Abraham, or to his Seed through the Law; (which must needs therefore
be understood of the Law of Circumcision) but through the Righteousness of
Faith. From whence, as it has been already made evident, the Promise he here
speaks of, was not derived unto Abraham, or to his Seed, through the Covenant
of Circumcision; there being no such Promise at all to be found in that
Covenant: So it is as manifest that the Covenant of Circumcision was not a
Covenant of Faith; since it is here so plainly contradistinguished, or opposed
thereunto.

SECT. V.
ANd therefore, whereas the Apostle tells us of Abraham in the formentioned,
Romans 4. 11. That he received the Sign of Circumcision, a Seal of the
Righteousness of the Faith which he had, yet being Uncircumcised. From thence
to infer, that the Covenant of Circumcision was a Covenant of Faith; would be
point blank to contradict the whole scope and design of the Apostle in the
foregoing passages of that Chapter; which (as has been already shown) as it was
in general to prove, that Abraham was not justified by Works, but by Faith
only, verse. 2. 3, 4, 5. So in particular to assure us; that Faith was not
reckoned to him for Righteousness, when he was in Circumcision, but in
Uncircumcision, verse. 9, 10. And what more convincing Testimony or Evidence can
we desire, that the Covenant of Circumcision was not a Covenant of Faith? The
Sign of Circumcision was indeed a Seal unto Abraham of the Faith which he had,
in respect of the Promises made him, yet being Uncircumcised: But it does not
therefore follow, that the Promises, Genesis 17. 7, 8, 9. that God would be a God
unto him, and his Seed after him in their Generations, etc. upon Condition,
that he and his were Circumcised; were any part of the Covenant of Faith: For
otherwise the Apostle would never have told us as he does; that Faith was not
reckoned to him for Righteousness, when he was in Circumcision, but in
Uncircumcision. The Argument hence resulting therefore is Irresistible: That
Covenant in which Faith was not reckoned to Abraham for Righteousness, could
never be a Covenant of Faith: But the Scripture is express, that Faith was not
reckoned to Abraham for Righteousness, when he was in Circumcision, but in
Uncircumcision; therefore the Covenant of Circumcision could never be a
Covenant of Faith. Besides it is evident, that long before his Circumcision,
God had promised Abraham to bless him; to make his Name Great; that he should
be a Blessing; that in him should all the Families of the Earth be Blessed;
that he should be the Father of many Nations, according to that which was
spoken, so shall thy Seed be. Genesis 12. 2, 3. Genesis 15. 5. And it is evident that
these were the Promises; upon the account whereof we are told, that he believed
in the Lord, and he counted it to him for Righteousness, Genesis 15. 6.
Circumcision therefore was a Seal only unto Abraham; and that of the
Righteousness of the Faith which he had in respect of the Promises made him,
long before his Circumcision; and that for this very purpose, that he might be
the Father of all them that believe; which was his Prerogative alone: For none
besides him had ever before their Circumcision, such a Faith which entitled
them to such singular Promises.

. 2. Upon the whole; though it must be acknowledged that the Objection seems at
first very Plausible; How can it be but that the Covenant of Circumcision must
needs be a Covenant of Faith, since Abraham is said to have received the Sign
of Circumcision, a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith? Yet we see when it comes
to be duly examined, there appears no such matter: For the only Argument fairly
resulting from Romans 4. 11. can be no other than this. That Covenant, or those
Promises, in respect of which Abraham is said to have received the Sign of
Circumcision, a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, must needs be a Covenant of
Faith: But the Scripture is express, that Abraham received the Sign of
Circumcision, a Seal of the Righteousness of the Faith which he had, yet being
Uncircumcised: (which must of necessity be understood in respect of the
forementioned Promises, that had been made him long before his Circumcision,
and upon the account of which we are expressly told, that he believed in the
Lord, and he counted it to him for Righteousness, Genesis 15. 6.) Therefore that
Covenant, or those Promises, must needs be a Covenant of Faith. But then, as
has been already observed, it follows not, that the Promises made unto him,
and his Seed after him, in their Generations; upon Condition of his, and their
Circumcision, mentioned Genesis 17. 7, 8, 9, 10. were any part of the Covenant of
Faith; since the Apostle is express, that Faith was not reckoned to him for
Righteousness, when he was in Circumcision, but in Uncircumcision.

. 3. Circumcision therefore (as we have said) was a Seal only to Abraham; and
that in respect of the Promises, made him, yet being Uncircumcised; whereby he
was Confirmed in the Assurance of that Peculiar Prerogative that had been
before conferred on him; and which the Apostle here expressly mentions. He
received (says he) the Sign of Circumcision, a Seal of the Righteousness of
the Faith which he had, yet being Uncircumcised, that he might be the Father of
all them that believe. In respect whereof it is evident, that Circumcision was
that to the Father of the Faithful, in its Extraordinary Institution, and in
his Extraordinary Circumstances, that it could not be to any of his Natural
Progeny in its Ordinary Use. It was indeed appointed as a Sign or Token of the
Covenant, Genesis 17. 7, 8, 9. and that both unto Abraham himself, and the rest
that were under it; and so the Spirit of God himself expressly styles it, verse.
11. Whereby they were obliged unto a Perfect and Universal Obedience to the
whole revealed Will and Law of God, Gal. 5. 3. For I testify to every man that
is Circumcised, that he is a Debtor to do the whole Law; and hereof it is true,
it was a Sign or Token: It being no other than the Restipulation of the
Covenant on their part, Genesis 17. 9. 10. Thou shall keep my Covenant therefore,
thou and thy Seed after thee in their Generations; this is my Covenant which ye
shall keep. -- Every man-child among you shall be Circumcised. But it does not
therefore follow, that because it was a Token of that Covenant on their part,
in respect of their Duty; that it was also intended as a Seal unto them of the
same Covenant on God's part, in respect of God's Promise: It being a Seal only
unto Abraham; and that in respect of those Peculiar Promises made him in
Uncircumcision. Nor was every ones Circumcision, so much as a Token to him of
his Right to any of the Promises therein contained; as is evident in Ishmael
and others, the Servants born and bred in Abraham's Family, and Strangers
bought with Money, who were all to be Circumcised; to whom yet nevertheless,
none of the Promises in that Covenant were made; as is plain from Genesis 17. 7,
8, 20, 21, 23, 27. whereby it is clear, that the true Reason why any were
Circumcised, was the Command, not Interest in the Covenant. Much less was
Circumcision a Seal to all that received it of their interest in the
Righteousness of that Faith that Abraham had. And it is equally absurd to say,
that Circumcision was a Seal unto all its Subjects of the Righteousness of
Faith, which they had while Uncircumcised; (since many of them were never
Possessors of that saying Grace, neither before or after) as to affirm that it
was the Seal of a Paternal Relation to all Believers, unto every one that
received it; this being Abraham's Peculiar Prerogative, and Incommunicable to
any else. And indeed Circumcision was so far from being a Seal of the Gospel
Covenant, or of their Interest in the Righteousness of Faith, to the rest that
were under it, that it was rather* Token unto them of Servitude and Bondage;
and such a Yoke, that as the Apostles tell them, neither they nor their Fathers
were able to bear it, Acts 15. 10, 24. Gal. 5. 2. 3. Which yet it had not been,
had it been to them a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith, or of the Gospel
Covenant: For that brings with it true Christian Liberty and Freedom, Gal. 5. 1.

SECT. VI.
AND therefore when the Apostle tells us, Gal. 3. 16. that to Abraham and his
Seed were the Promises made; He says not unto Seeds as of many, but as of one;
and to thy Seed, which is Christ. He could not have the Covenant of
Circumcision in his Eye (as it is generally concluded he had:) For as has been
plainly proved, that was no other than a Covenant of Works, or a Legal
Covenant, obliging all that were under it to a perfect Obedience to the whole
Law, Gal. 5. 3. And therefore as the Promise that Abraham should be the Heir of
the World, was not derived unto him or to his Seed through the Righteousness of
that Covenant: So neither was Christ the Mediator of it: He having obtained a
more Excellent Ministry; by how much also he is the Mediator of a better
Covenant, which is established upon better Promises, Heb. 8. 6. Better
Promises, not for the Substance of them, in themselves considered. For as God
promised to be a God unto that People in the Covenant of Works, made at Mount
Sinai; and to take them for his Peculiar People, upon Condition of their
Obedience to the Law: So in the Covenant of Circumcision; I will be a God to
thee and to thy Seed; And I will give to thee and to thy Seed the Land of
Canaan, etc. upon the same condition of Obedience. Thou shall keep my Covenant
therefore, thou and thy Seed after thee in their Generations. In both which the
Promises themselves, are as large and as full as can be desired; And that with
Respect to the Blessings of this Life, as also of that which is to come: So
that the Promises of the Gospel Covenant it self cannot be better than were
those under the Law, for the substance of them, or in themselves considered:
For what does the Gospel promise more? The betterness therefore of this
Evangelical Covenant (whereof Christ is the only Mediator and Surety) must of
necessity consist in the terms of it; the Promises thereof being free and
Absolute; and only to be Received by Faith; (which the forementioned Covenants
were not) And therefore called the Word of Faith which we Preach, Romans 10. 6,
7, 8. That if thou shall Confess with thy Mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall
believe in thine Heart that God raised him from the Dead thou shall be saved.
He had told us before that Moses describes the Righteousness of the Law, that
the Man which does these things shall live by them: But (says he) the
Righteousness which is of Faith speaks on this wise, etc. So likewise Gal. 3.
21, 22. If there had been a Law which could have given Life, verily
Righteousness should have been by the Law: But the Scripture has Concluded all
under Sin, that the Promise by Faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them
that Believe. So also Romans 4. 14. If they which are of the Law be Heirs, Faith
is made void, and the promise made of none effect. Therefore it is of Faith,
that it might be by Grace, that the Promise might be sure to all the Seed. The
Gospel Covenant therefore we see is free and Absolute; Proclaiming Liberty to
the Captives, etc. Isa, 61. 1, 2. And declares that to him that works not,
but believes on him that Justifies the ungodly, his Faith shall be counted to
him for Righteousness, Romans 4. 4, 5. Whereas the Covenant at Sinai, and that of
Circumcision, was clogged with conditions of perfect Obedience unto the whole
Law of God; and therefore Impossible to be performed. For the faultiness of
both which in that respect, they are therefore now Abollished. So that Christ
was not the Mediator of either of these; but of this better Covenant which is
Established upon these better Promises.

. 2. Besides, when the Apostle tells us; That to Abraham and his Seed were the
Promises made; he says not unto Seeds as of many; but as of one; and to thy
Seed which is Christ. He could not have the Covenant of Circumcision in his
Eye: Because the Promises of that Covenant were expressly made unto Seeds as of
many Genesis 17. 7, 8. 9. I will Establish my Covenant between me and thee, and
thy Seed after thee in their Generations, plainly and expressly Plural. And I
will give to thee and to thy Seed after thee the Land wherein thou art a
stranger, and I will be their God, still expressly in the Plural, and not in the
Singular Number. And so runs the Obligation also. Thou shall keep my Covenant
therefore thou and thy Seed after thee in their Generations. Those words of the
Apostle therefore Gal. 3. 16. cannot possibly refer to the Promises contained
in the Covenant of Circumcision; (as it has been generally though mistakingly
imagined they do) But must of necessity refer to that Evangelical Covenant,
first Recorded Genesis 12. 2, 3. I will make of thee (says God to Abraham there)
a Great Nation, and I will Bless thee, and make thy Name Great, and thou shall
be a Blessing. And I will bless them that Bless thee, and Curse him that
Curses thee; And in thee shall all Families of the Earth be Blessed. Which
latter Promise is afterward more fully Explained Genesis 22. 18. And in thy Seed
shall all the Nations of the Earth be Blessed. In which respect well might the
Apostle say that to Abraham and his Seed were the Promises made; he says not
unto Seeds as of many; but as of one; and to thy Seed which is Christ: For
those Gospel Promises can be understood in no other Sense; but as of one: For
it is plain that it is Christ alone that is the Promised Seed there spoken of;
In whom God there promises that all the Nations of the Earth should be
Blessed. To him therefore all the Promises of the Gospel were first made, Psalm.
89. 27, 28, 29. In him they are all, yea and Amen, 2 Cor. 1. 20. And from him
alone are they to be Communicated to all his Members, Isa. 49. 6, 8, 9. Jo. 1.
16. Jo. 6. 27. Gal. 3. 29. Some refer Gal. 3. 16. to Genesis 17. 7. But I conceive
the Apostle has here a direct and special Eye to that Promise, Genesis 22. 18. In
thy Seed shall all the Families of the Earth be blessed, which runs directly
parallel both in Terms and Sense with the Promise given to Abraham, Genesis 12. 3.
which was before pleaded by him, Gal. 3. 8. -- And if it be Objected, that the
Promise there is made of or concerning Abraham's Seed, and not to his Seed; Let
it be minded that all the Promises made of this Seed (viz. Christ) in one
respect, may be said to be made to this Seed in another, because they are
Originally Established in the Everlasting Covenant of Redemption, that was
between the Father and him. Mr. Cox in his Discourse of the Covenants, page 77.
78, 79.

SECT. VII.
AND in this respect it is yet further Observable, That as God promises
Abraham, Genesis 22. 18. That in his Seed should all the Nations of the Earth be
blessed; plainly speaking of Christ the Promised Seed: So in the words just
before he was also Expressly told; And thy Seed shall Possess the Gate of his
Enemies: Not their Enemies, but his Enemies; expressly in the Singular, whereas
the Promises of the Covenant of Circumcision were all his Expressly in the
Plural Number: So that as the Apostle might justly say in Reference to this
Gospel Covenant, that to Abraham and his Seed were the Promises made; not a
single Promise only, but the Promises: So it is as evident that Seed, there,
must of necessity be understood in the Singular Number: For as it is by Christ's
Single Prowess, that both his and his Peoples Enemies are vanquished, Isa. 63.
3. John 16. ult. In which respect Abraham was told, And thy Seed shall Possess
the Gate of his Enemies: So it is as evident that the following Promise, And in
thy Seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be blessed; The Seed there spoken
of must of necessity also be understood in the Singular, and cannot be
understood in the Plural Number, as having any Reference to Abraham's Natural
Posterity (nor indeed to any other sort of Seed) That as well as the foregoing
Promise having a Single Reference unto Christ, the Promised Seed, to whom alone
the Promises were made. And therefore the Apostle having said, Gal. 3. 16. Now
to Abraham and his Seed were the Promises made; he says not, And to Seeds, as
of many; but as of one, And to thy Seed, which is Christ. To give a convincing
Evidence that he meant it of Christ Personal, and not Mystical (as some have
Dreamed) he does sufficiently explain his meaning in this Respect, Verse. 19.
where he tells us, that the Law was added because of Transgression, till the
Seed should come to whom the Promise was made. Where it is observable that the
Law (that is the Mosaical Administration) is said to have been before the Seed
was come, and was to have its Period then. Now if by the Seed, Christ be not to
be understood Personally, but Mystically, for the Visible or Invisible Church
(take which you will) then the Law could not have been before the Seed: For God
had his Church in the World from the Beginning of it; and more especially in
Abraham's Family, Four Hundred Years at least before the Law was given by Moses,
of which Christ was the head, and they his Mystical Body. And so by this
Interpretation the Seed should have been before the Law; contrary to the
Apostle, who makes the Law to have been before the Seed, and to have its Period
when the Seed to whom the Promise was made was come. Some do Interpret this
Text in Gallatians of Christ Mystical, because of the Order of the Words. The
Promise is made first unto Abraham, then unto his Seed; Therefore (say they) it
is such a Seed as comes to have Right in the Promise Second to Abraham, and as
his Children. But I should rather apply them to Christ as Personally
Considered; For the Seed to whom the Promise is made, is the same in whom all
the Nations of the Earth are Blessed, Genesis 22. 18. Now although all Believers
being the Seed of Abraham are blessed with Faithful Abraham; yet they are not
that Seed in whom all Nations are Blessed; but the Nations who are blessed in
this Seed. And in the very next Verse, the Covenant is said to be Established
of God, (...) in or unto Christ, (...) is the same Seed, spoken of in the
Preceding Verse. Now the Covenant is Confirmed in Christ Personal, not in
Christ Mystical. Hence Pareus Concludes it is to be understood, Individue de
uno Christo ex quo omnis Spiritualis Benedictio in fideles diffluit. But this
also is to be observed, That Christ is given for a Covenant of the People, Isa.
42. 6. And therefore the Covenant is Established in him, and with him for all
Believers. Mr. Cox in his Discourse of the Covenants, page 79, 80.

. 2. And indeed throughout this whole Chapter of Gal. 3. where Christ is spoken
of, it cannot be understood of Christ Mystical, but of Christ Personal only:
For so Verse. 13. Christ (says he) has Redeemed us from the Curse of the Law,
being made a Curse for us. Is this to be understood of Christ Mystical, or
Christ Personal only? Did Christ Mystical Redeem us from the Curse of the Law?
So likewise Verse. 14. That the Blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles
through Jesus Christ. Is it through Christ Mystical that the Blessing of
Abraham is there said to come on the Gentiles? Surely that cannot be the Sense;
but through Christ Personal only. In like manner therefore are we to
understand him, Verse. 16. where he tells us, that to Abraham and his Seed were
the Promises made; he says not unto Seeds, as of many; but as of one, And to
thy Seed, which is Christ. Which is further plain from the very next following
words, Verse. 17. And this I say, that the Covenant that was Confirmed before of
God in Christ, etc. Which must of necessity be understood of Christ Personal
only: For as it is Christ alone that is given for a Covenant of the People: So
it is by his Blood alone that all the Promises of the Gospel Covenant are
Confirmed unto us. It is evident therefore that the Promises of the Gospel
Covenant do all of them run to Christ the Inheriting Seed; to him they are
made; In him do they all Center; And by him alone are they to be Communicated
to all his Members. So that those words of the Apostle Gal. 3. 16. are unfitly
applied to Genesis 17. 7, 8. For as there is no Promise, nor the least hint of any
Promise at all to Christ the Promised Seed, there mentioned or Recorded; And as
that Covenant has been plainly proved to be no other than a Covenant of Works,
or a Legal Covenant, whereof Christ was not the Mediator: So it is as evident
that those words of the Apostle have a direct and proper Reference to the
Gospel Covenant, before mentioned, which had been long before made with
Abraham, Genesis 12. 2, 3. And which afterward was Solemnly Renewed and Confirmed
unto him, Genesis 22. 17, 18. Whereof as Christ is the alone and only Mediator:
So he is the only Seed therein spoken of, to whom the Promises are made, and
in and by whom alone all the Families of the Earth are Blessed.

SECT. VIII.
THE Doctor indeed also tells us, That the Promise to Abraham, mentioned Genesis
17. 7, 8. I will be a God to thee, and to thy Seed, etc. is a Ratified
Covenant, Confirmed by two Immutable things, by Word and Oath, in which it is
Impossible for God to lie; and therefore cannot be dis-annulled. And if it be
not dis-annulled (says he) it is still in Being. And in being it is, or we do
but beat the Air, and are at a loss; Our Hope is in vain, and our Rejoicing in
vain; which God forbid.

To this we Answer; That it is true, The Apostle tells us Heb. 6. 13. 14. That
when God made Promise to Abraham, because he could Swear by no greater he Swear
by himself; Saying, Surely, in Blessing I will Bless thee, and Multiplying, I
will Multiply thee; wherein (says he) Verse. 17. God willing more abundantly to
show unto the Heirs of Promise the Immutability of his Counsel, Confirmed it by
an Oath, that by two Immutable things, wherein it is Impossible for God to lie,
we might have strong Consolation, etc. But what Promise is it that the Apostle
here speaks of, which was thus Confirmed both by word and Oath? Was it the
Promise or the Promises of the Covenant of Circumcision, mentioned Genesis 17. 7,
8. I will be a God to thee and to thy Seed, etc. By no means: For that as has
been already proved was a Legal Covenant, and is therefore now done away. And
besides we do not find any Oath at all affixed, or annexed thereunto for the
Confirmation thereof; As neither had the Legal Covenant at Mount Sinai, for the
Confirmation of that. But the Promise which the Apostle here speaks of, has a
plain Reference unto the Evangelical Covenant before mentioned; which was first
made with Abraham before his Removal out of his own Country, Genesis 12. 2, 3.
which was afterward Repeated and Confirmed unto him by an Oath, Genesis 22. where
God tells him, Verse. 16. 17, 18. By my self have I Sworn (says the Lord) that
in Blessing I will Bless thee (the same words the Apostle uses) and in
Multiplying I will Multiply thy Seed as the Stars of Heaven, and as the Sand
which is upon the Sea Shore. And thy Seed shall Possess the Gate of his
Enemies. And in thy Seed shall All the Nations of the Earth be blessed; which
is a full and a plain Repetition of the Covenant which God first made with
Abraham Genesis 12. 2, 3. Saying, I will make of thee a great Nation, and I will
Bless thee, and make thy Name great, and thou shall be a Blessing. And I will
Bless them that Bless thee, and Curse him that Curses thee; And in thee shall
all the Families of the Earth be Blessed. In both which Scriptures we have a
fair and full Recital of that truly Evangelical or Gospel Covenant, which God
made with Abraham; And upon which all the Hope and Comfort of Believing
Gentiles is firmly built and founded. And it is plain that this is the only
Covenant, which the Apostle speaks of, and as it were points with his Finger
unto it, Reciting the very words and expressions of it (without taking any
notice at all of the Covenant of Circumcision, or of any Expressions therein
contained) as having been Confirmed before of God in Christ, Gal. 3. 17. And
that as he here tells the Hebrews, both by word and Oath, that by two Immutable
things in which it is impossible for God to lie, there might be strong
Consolation afforded unto all the Heirs of Promise.

. 2. No wonder therefore, that the Apostle tells us as he does, Gal. 3. 16. Now
to Abraham and his Seed were [the Promises made] not a single Promise only,
but the Promises: For as it is evident that there is a Plurality of Promises
and Blessing^ contained in this Gospel Covenant, in reference to Abraham; The
like we cannot but observe in reference to Christ himself the Promised Seed:
Unto whom God does not only here Promise, That in him should all the Nations
of the Earth be blessed: But also, That he should Possess the Gate of his
Enemies. Both which are most full and Comprehensive Promises; And that as well
in respect of the Blessings of this World, as of that which is to come. Upon
which account it is highly observable, That as all the Promises, both of the
one sort as well as of the other, do all run unto Christ the Inheriting Seed;
so from and by him alone they are to be Communicated to all his Members:
Forasmuch as he needs them not for himself. And therefore when God told
Abraham, That in his Seed should all the Nations of the Earth be Blessed, as he
does therein promise to be our God, through Christ the Mediator; And by him to
bless us with all Spiritual Blessings, by giving unto us an Inheritance
incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not away, which is reserved in
Heaven for us: So in like manner; When God tells Abraham, That his Seed should
Possess the Gate of his Enemies, God does herein Promise to give unto us,
through Christ, the Blessings, even of this World also: For so it is Explained
in Reference to Christ himself, Psalm. 2. 1, 6, 7, 8. Why do the Heathen rage?
etc. Yet have I set my King upon my Holy Hill of Sion. I will declare the
Decree: The Lord has said unto me, Thou art my Son, this Day have I begotten
thee. Ask of me, and I shall give thee the Heathen for thine Inheritance, and
the uttermost parts of the Earth for thy Possession. To which same purpose we
are also told, Rev. 11. 15. That upon the Sounding of the Seventh Angel, there
were Great Voices in Heaven, saying, The Kingdoms of this World are become the
Kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ, and he shall Reign for ever and ever.
From both which we may clearly discern the meaning of that Promise, That Christ
should Possess the Gate of his Enemies; Even that the Actual Sovereignty of the
whole World should at length be Committed unto him, as King of Kings, and Lord
of Lords. For which very purpose he now sits at the Right Hand of God, from
henceforth expecting till his Enemies be made his Footstool, Heb. 10. 12, 13.
which Promise; as it is plainly made unto Christ himself, so it is of mighty
Consequence unto his People also; Since upon the foot of this Promise depends
all their happiness in this World; As upon the other, their happiness in that
that is to come. For if Christ be Exalted in this World, so shall his People
also. And if the Kingdoms of this World are to become The Kingdoms of our Lord
and of his Christ, so also shall the Kingdom and Dominion, and the greatness of
the Kingdom and Dominion under the whole Heaven, be given to the People of the
Saints of the most High, Dan. 7. 27. So that since Christ is here promised,
that he shall Possess the Gate of his Enemies; upon the same bottom, have his
People sufficient ground to expect that they shall Possess the Gate of theirs
also: Forasmuch as the same Blessedness that i^ Conferred upon the Head, shall
in due Season be derived to all his Members. And indeed for this Reason are all
the Promises first made unto Christ himself, that he might have the single
Honor, in the Distribution of the Blessings therein Contained, among his
Servants and followers, Rev. 5. 9, 10, 11, 12. They sung a New Song; Saying,
Thou art Worthy to take the Book, and to open the Seals thereof: For thou wast
Slain, and have Redeemed us to God by thy Blood, out of every Kindred, and
Tongue, and People, and Nation. And have made us unto our God, Kings and
Priests; And we shall Reign upon the Earth. Therefore Worthy is the Lamb that
was Slain, to receive Power, and Riches, and Wisdom, and Strength, and Honor,
and Glory, and Blessing.

SECT. IX.
MOreover, That the Gospel Covenant before mentioned, and that alone, is the
great Charter of the Gentiles hope, is yet further evident, from Gal. 3. For
the Scripture foreseeing (says the Apostle, Verse. 8) that God would Justify
the Heathen through Faith, Preached before the Gospel unto Abraham. The Gospel?
What Gospel? Was it the Promises contained in the Covenant of Circumcision,
wherein God promised Abraham that he would be a God unto him, and to his Seed
after him in their Generations? By no means; For that was plainly a Covenant of
Works, and concerned only Abraham, and his Natural Posterity; which could
yield no Comfort therefore to the Heathen. But (says the Apostle) the
Scripture foreseeing that God would Justify the Heathen through Faith (that
is, freely, and without the Works of the Law) Preached before the Gospel unto
Abraham; Saying, In thee shall all Nations be Blessed; that is, in Christ, the
Promised Seed. And this was indeed plain Gospel; A pure Evangelical Covenant;
wholly free and Absolute; containing glad Tidings even unto the Gentiles also,
as well as to the Jews; And is the very Language of the Gospel Covenant before
Rehearsed out of Genesis 12. 2, 3. and Genesis 22. 17, 18. And not a word or Syllable
of the Expression or terms of the Covenant of Circumcision; That being plainly
a Legal Covenant, and the Promises therein Contained, bounded with Conditions
impossible to be performed. And in this respect it is, that he speaks as he
does in what follows. So then (says he, Verse. 9.) they which are of Faith, are
Blessed with Faithful Abraham; still the Language of the Gospel Covenant. They
which are of Faith (says he) are Blessed. But how are they Blessed? Why they
are Blessed a^ Faithful Abraham was Blessed: And how was that? Was it in the
way of Faith or Works? In the way of Doing or Believing? Not in the Way of
Doing; but in the way of Believing. And accordingly the Apostle tells us, Romans
4. 13. That the Promise that he should be the Hear of the World, was not to
him, or to his Seed, through the Law; but through the Righteousness of Faith:
For (says he, Verse. 14.) If they which are of the Law, be Heirs, Faith is made
void, and the Promise made of none Effect -- Therefore it is of Faith, that it
might be by Grace, to the end the promise might be sure to all the Seed. To
which same purpose the Apostle further adds, Verse. 13, 14. of Gal. 3. That as
many as are of the Works of the Law, are under the Curse: For it is Written,
Cursed is every one that Continues not in all things that are Written in the
Book of the Law, to do them: But Christ has Redeemed us from the Curse of the
Law, being made a Curse for us; That the Blessing of Abraham might come on the
Gentiles through Jesus Christ. The Reason of which last Clause. through Jesus
Christ, He renders Verse. 16. to be, forasmuch as all the Promises of the Gospel
Covenant, were first made unto Christ the Inheriting Seed, by and through whom
alone they are to be Communicated to all his Members. Now (says he) to
Abraham, and his Seed were the Promises made: He says not, Unto Seeds, as of
many; but as of one, And to thy Seed, which is Christ. In all which we have the
very words and Language, the Tenor and Terms (not of the Covenant of
Circumcision; I will be a God to thee, and to thy Seed after thee in their
Generations; as it is there plainly expressed in the Plural Number; and
restrained only to Abraham's Natural Posterity; and that upon Condition of
Obedience impossible to be performed; which was the Tenor of that Covenant:
But) of the Gospel Covenant, before mentioned; which as it was every way free
and Absolute, and therefore sure and certain to all the Seed therein concerned,
Romans 4. 13, 14, 15, 16. So it was as Universally Extensible through Christ the
Promised Seed; taking in both Jews and Gentiles: For in thy Seed (says God to
Abraham) shall all the Nations of the Earth be Blessed. Wherein as Gods Heart
and Mouth seems to be filled with Blessings through Christ, toward both Abraham
himself, and all the Seed therein concerned: So does the Apostle Recite the
very same Expressions of Blessing, and Blessedness, over and over again, and
that in the same Evangelical Style, pointing out unto us as with his Finger,
what was that Covenant from whence all the Blessedness he speaks of, was to
descend upon the Gentiles; which therefore is Represented unto us as the great
Charter of the Gentiles hope; and which being Confirmed as it is, and that both
by Word and Oath, shall therefore never be dis-annulled.

. 2. It Is true, the Covenant of Circumcision is called also an Everlasting
Covenant: But that can be understood in no other sense, than that wherein the
Priesthood of Aaron and his Sons, under the Law, was called an Everlasting
Priesthood, Exodus 40. 15. which yet we know to be now Abollished. And as
likewise the Covenant made with Phineas was called the Covenant of an
Everlasting Priesthood, Numb. 25. 13. which yet is now also done away; being
only intended during the Continuance of the then present Administration. [For
as Mr. Pool tells us, the word Olam, rendered for ever, does not always
signify Eternity: But a long Continuance; as is evident (says he) from Genesis
17. 13. and Exodus 21. 16.] And thus was it in respect of the Covenant of
Circumcision; which forasmuch as it was not Confirmed both by Word and Oath, as
the Gospel Covenant made with Abraham was; and forasmuch as Circumcision it
self, which was the very Sign and Token of it, is now Repealed; and more
especially forasmuch as though God did indeed promise to Establish his Covenant
between him and them, for an Everlasting Covenant; yet still it was, provided
they kept his Covenant, and fulfilled the Condition thereof on their part; in
which respect it was as much a Covenant of Works, as any of the other Covenants
were, that have been before Discoursed of: From hence it inevitably follows,
that it is now revoked and done away, Acts 15. 24. Col. 2. 14. Heb. 8. 7, 13.
whereas the Gospel Covenant, being every way Free and Absolute, it is therefore
unchangeably sure and certain, to all the Seed thereunto belonging, as it is
expressly affirmed by the Apostle, Romans 4. 13, 14, 15, 16. And as it had been
for the same Reason before asserted by the Prophet David, 2 Samuel 23. 5. and by
God himself, Isa. 55. 1, 3.

SECT. X.
BUT whereas we are told That it must needs have occasioned many clamours
among, the Jews, and have been a great Bar against their Reception of the
Gospel; had they been told that the Covenant they so much trusted in was now
repealed, and their Seed cast out of the Church. It is manifest to those whose
Eyes are open, that the Repeal of the Covenant of Circumcision (which the Jews
could not but sufficiently understand by the Removal of the very Sign and Token
of it) did indeed occasion no small Dissatisfaction unto them; as is evident
from sundry places in the Acts, as well as also in the Epistle to the
Galatians. More particularly, Acts 21. 20, 21. where James and the rest of the
Elders present, tell Paul; That many thousands of the Jews which believed, and
were all zealous of the Law, had been informed of him, that he had taught all
the Jews which were among the Gentiles to forsake Moses, saying, That they
ought not to Circumcise their Children, neither to walk after the Customs. And
it is plain, that he had taught this Doctrine unto them, which had occasioned
no small Dissension among them. For to this same purpose he expressly tells the
Galatians, Chap. 5. 2, 3, 4. Behold, I Paul, say unto you, That if you be
Circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing: For I testify again, to every
man that is Circumcised, That he is a Debtor to do the whole Law; Christ is
become of no Effect unto you: whosoever of you are justified by the Law, you
are fallen from Grace. From whence, as we may clearly discern the Nature of the
Covenant of Circumcision; that it was no other than a Covenant of Works, or a
Legal Covenant, which he does herein so plainly declare unto them to be now
Repealed: So it does as plainly appear, that from hence it came to pass, that
Christ became so great an Offense unto the Jews, and the Gospel so sore a Stone
of Stumbling, and Rock of Offense unto them all; yea to many of them after they
had submitted to the Gospel: Yea, the Gentile-Churches themselves, were scarce,
if at all, preserved from stumbling hereat with the Jews, (as appears from what
the Apostle writes to the Galatians upon this Subject;) though all this loss
and change of State and Privileges which they so much repined at, well
considered, would amount to no more than what befalls a man, who from the
Privileges of a Servant, is Invested into the Privileges of a Son. And this
was the very Case, Gal. 4. 4. God has sent forth his Son, etc. verse. 5. to
Redeem them that were under the Law, that we might receive the Adoption of
Sons: verse. 7. Wherefore thou art no more a Servant, but a Son; as has been
before at large explained. Neither indeed does the present Alteration, or
Change of State* occasion any Real or Substantial Loss unto the Children of
Believers, any more than to themselves; but much of Spiritual Advantage rather
to both, as has been already discovered in the foregoing part of this
Discourse.

. 2. And indeed, what needed the Jews to have been so much startled, or
offended at the Abollishing of Circumcision, as they were; if they had not
plainly discerned that it touched their Main Copy hold, or the Covenant it self,
they so much Gloried in, and Boasted of, Mat. 3. 9. Joh. 8. 33. to which
Circumcision was annexed; and that the taking away of the One, was a plain Sign
of the Abrogation of the Other also? Else they had no Pretense, or Shadow of
Reason to make the Clamours they did: For if they had understood, that the
Covenant it self had remained entire, and only the Signs changed: Or had Paul
told them, their Children should be Baptized, and that Baptism was come into
the room of Circumcision; (which had been absolutely necessary if it had been
so) In all likelihood, they had quietly submitted to the present Alteration:
But this was plainly therefore the ground of their Quarrel; for that the
Covenant it self was now broken down; which they could not but understand by
the Removal of the very Sign and Token thereof; from whence they could not but
conclude, that their so long enjoyed Privilege of Church Membership for
themselves and Children also, upon the bare account that Abraham was their
Father, was now Abollished, Mat. 3. 9.

SECT. XI.
MOreover, That the Gospel Covenant before mentioned, Genesis 12. 2, 3. and Genesis
22. 16, 17, 18. is the only ground of the Gentiles hope, and indeed of the Jews
also: The Apostle Peter likewise does plainly declare unto us; when he tells
the Jews that were pricked in their Hearts, for their Crucifying of Christ, as
he does, Acts 2. 38, 39. Repent and be Baptized, every one of you, in the Name
of Jesus Christ, for the Remission of Sins, and you shall Receive the Gift of
the Holy Ghost. For the Promise is unto you, and to your Children, and to all
that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God sholl call. Where by the
Promise unto them, and to their Children; we are not to understand the Covenant
of Circumcision: For though God did therein promise to be a God to Abraham, and
to his Seed; which was indeed a most Blessed and Comfortable Promise in it self
considered, and contains in it the Sum of all our Blessedness: But how should
they come at it? It is senced about with a Flaming Sword, or a Fiery Burning
Law, that turns every Way, to keep the Way to the Tree of Life. To insist
therefore upon that Covenant, or that Promise, as it is thus Bounded, will
afford no Relief: For according to that Covenant they must be Circumcised, and
keep the Whole Law, Act. 15. 1. 5. Gal. 5. 3. which is impossible to be
performed, Gal. 3. 10, 11, 12. And therefore how Sweet, or Full, or Glorious
soever, the Promise is, in it self Considered; yet it is impossible (bounded as
it is) that ever they should come to obtain the Benefit of it: Which therefore
could be no Proper Remedy for the Ease of their present Misery, or the Removal
of their present Perplexity. And therefore instead of directing them to that
Covenant; he plainly directs them to another, full of Grace and Truth, even the
Gospel Covenant beforementioned: For the Promise (says he) is unto you, and to
your Children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God
shall call. Plainly pointing to the Covenant which God made with Abraham, Genesis
12. 2, 3. long before the Covenant of Circumcision was in being; and which was
afterward renewed unto him, Genesis 22. 16, 17, 18. Even that Ratified Covenant;
That Free and Absolute Covenant, which had been confirmed both by Word and
Oath; that by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to lie;
there might be strong Consolation afforded unto all the Heirs of Promise. And
that this is the Covenant that he directs them to, and not the Covenant of
Circumcision, is evident from the words themselves: For the Promise he speaks
of, was not only unto them, and to their Children: But unto all that are afar
off (as Paul tells the Ephesians, Chap. 2. 12.) Even unto the Gentiles also, as
many as the Lord our God shall call. Which Promise unto the Gentiles, is not to
be found in the Covenant of Circumcision: For that was made unto Abraham, and
his Natural* Posterity only; whereby they were Obliged unto Circumcision, and
to keep the whole Law; and not a word of the Gentiles there: For it is plain,
that as God there promises to be a God unto Abraham, and to his Seed: So the
same Seed that are concerned in the Promises there mentioned, were also
Commanded to be Circumcised. Thou shall keep my Covenant therefore, thou and
thy Seed after thee in their Generations, verse. 9. This is my Covenant which ye
shall keep between me and you, and thy Seed after thee: Every man-child among
you shall be Circumcised, Genesis 17. 10. The same Seed therefore that is the
Subject of the Promises, verse. 7, 8. is the Subject of the Obligation, verse. 9,
10. So that it is evident, that the Gentiles are not at all concerned in that
Covenant, as being no way concerned in Circumcision; the Condition thereof. The
Promise therefore that Peter intends, must needs be the Free Promise, or the
Gospel Covenant before mentioned: Whereof as Christ is the Alone, and Only
Mediator: So he is also the only Seed therein immediately concerned: From, and
by whom all Gospel Blessings must be derived unto all his Spiritual Offspring.
And in this Covenant the Gentiles are indeed concerned as well as the Jews: For
therein all the Kindreds, Families, and Nations of the Earth, are promised to
be Blessed; even in Christ the Promised Seed. And therefore well might the
Apostle tell them as he does, That the Promise he now spoke of to them, was not
only to them, and to their Children, but to all that were afar off also; even
as many as the Lord our God shall call. For so Paul tells the Galatians also;
That Christ has Redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, that the Blessing of
Abraham might come on the Gentiles, through Jesus Christ, Gal. 3. 13, 14. Not
upon the Jews only, but the Gentiles also.

. 2. And that this is the Gospel Covenant that Peter here Preaches unto these
Bleeding Jews, is yet further evident, from what he tells them in Chap. 3. 25,
26. You (says he there) are the Children of the Prophets, and of the Covenant
which God made with our Fathers; saying unto Abraham, And in thy Seed shall all
the Kindreds of the Earth be blessed; unto you first, God having raised up his
Son Jesus, sent him to bless you, in turning away every one of you from his
iniquities. Where we have the very Words and Terms of the Gospel Covenant
recited, as it was at first made with Abraham, Genesis 12. 2, 3. and Genesis 22. 16,
17, 18. You (says he) are the Children of the Covenant. What Covenant? Does he
mean the Covenant of Circumcision, in which God Promised Abraham; saying, I
will be a God to thee, and to thy Seed after thee, upon Condition, that thou
and they be Circumcised. etc. No, says Peter, I do not mean that Covenant; but
the Covenant which God made with our Fathers; saying unto Abraham, And in thy
Seed shall all the Kindreds of the Earth be Blessed. The Covenant of
Circumcision concerned your selves alone, and was plainly Conditional, and
therefore failable. But the Covenant that I speak to you of, is a Free
Covenant, Sure and Certain; and that which concerns not you alone, but all the
Kindreds of the Earth. Wherein we are duly to observe, that instead of
directing them to the Covenant of Circumcision made with Abraham, Genesis 17. 7,
8. (whereof there is not the least Word or Syllable expressed in Peter's present
words to the Jews, nor in all the New Testament besides; that being no other
than a Bondage Covenant, Gal. 5. 1, 2, 3, 4 Acts 15. 1, 5, 10. as the Covenant
at Sinai was; and so no Proper Remedy for the Removal of their Present
Misery;) he rather directs them to that most Comfortable Promise, first
mentioned, Genesis 12. 2, 3. And afterward by Solemn Oath Confirmed, Genesis 22. 16,
17, 18. That in Abraham's Seed should all the Kindreds of the Earth be Blessed.
And this was home to the Point; it being bot^ a free and a full Promise; and
therefore an Answerable Remedy for their present Malady: For if God has freely
promised that in Christ (who is Abraham's Seed) all the Kindreds of the Earth
shall be Blessed: Why then there is ground of hope for you; even for you also,
though you have been the Betrayers and Murderers of the Lord of Glory: And not
only is there ground of hope for you, but even for your Children also, on whom,
as well as on your selves, you have wished his Blood to be: And accordingly he
Preaches Christ unto them in the very next words; Unto you first, God having
raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless you, in turning away every one of
you from his iniquities; wherein we are to note, That as the Gospel Covenant is
a Covenant of Blessing; full of Blessings; Heaps upon Heaps of Blessings;
Innumerable Blessings, I will Bless thee, (says God to Abraham) and thou shall
be a Blessing: I will Bless them, that Bless thee: And again, Surely, in
Blessing, I will Bless thee; and in thy Seed shall all the Nations of the Earth
be Blessed: So in pursuance of the same Evangelical Promise, and Covenant of
Blessing (says Peter here) God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to
Bless you, in turning away every one of you from his iniquities: Wherein that
which was required before as a Condition, is now become a Main Branch of the
Promised Blessing: For before the Promise was unto them that turn from
Transgression in Jacob: But God (says he) has sent his Son Jesus to Bless
you, by turning away ungodliness fom Jacob; even in turning away every one of
you from his iniquities.

. 3. It is undeniaby evident therefore, that Peter, instead of directing them
to the Covenant of Circumcision, for their present Relief, He rather directs
both them and theirs to have recourse to that Evangelical Covenant, which God
had made with their Fathers; saying unto Abraham, And in thy Seed shall all the
Kindreds of the Earth be Blessed: For this, as it was every way full and
extensive; so it was as free and absolute: And therefore the most Proper Remedy
for the Relief of their Wounded Spirits: Whereas had he directed them to the
Promises contained in the Covenant of Circumcision, that had left them still in
Despair; for that obliged them to Perfect Obedience, as the Condition of
obtaining the Mercies therein Promised, which was impossible to be Performed.
To tell them therefore of the Promises contained in that Covenant, was
altogether beside his present Design; which was to give I ^elief to their
Wounded Spirits, which the Promises of that Covenant, thus Bounded as they
were, could never Accomplish.

SECT. XII.
AND whereas Peter tells the Jews, That the Promise was unto them, and to their
Children. We are not to understand it, as if the Gospel Covenant that Believers
are now under, was at all made with Abraham, and his Natural Seed; and
consequently with them and their Natural Seed: Or that any of the Promises
thereof were immediately made unto him, as the Promises contained in the
Covenant of Circumcision were. In which respect it is highly observable, that
a^ the Spirit of God himself does plainly inform us of a twofold Covenant made
with Abraham; the one a Covenant of Grace, and the other of Works: So he is
pleased accordingly also to make a plain distinction between them, as to the
Persons, or Parties, therein respectively concerned. For if we look into Genesis
12. We shall there find, that the former is made between God and Abraham only;
and that with respect unto his Seed Christ, and his Spiritual Offering: Whereas
the latter is plainly made between God and Abraham and his Natural Posterity.
The first account which the Scripture gives us of the former, we meet with (as
has been before noted) Genesis 12. 2, 3. Where the Lord is pleased to enter into
a Solemn Covenant with Abraham; saying, I will make of thee a great Nation; and
I will Bless thee, and make thy Name great; and thou shall be a Blessing: And I
will Bless them that Bless thee, and I will Curse him that Curses thee: And in
thee shall all the Families of the Earth be Blessed. To the same purpose also
the Lord tells Abraham, Genesis 17. 2. I will make my Covenant between me and
thee, and will multiply thee exceedingly; verse. 3. And Abraham fell on his
Face, and God talked with him, saying, As for me, behold my Covenant is with
thee, and thou shall be a Father of many Nations; neither shall thy Name any
more be called Abram, but thy Name shall be called Abraham: For a Father of
many Nations have I made thee. And I will make thee exceeding fruitful, and I
will make Nations of thee, and Kings shall come out of thee. Which is a plain
Transcript, or Rehearsal of the several Free Promises of the Gospel Covenant,
that God had before made with Abraham, Genesis 12. 2, 3. Genesis 15. 5, 6. which are
here gathered up together, and plainly Represented unto him, under the
denomination of a Covenant, and such a Covenant as God had made with Abraham
himself alone, not with his Natural Offspring. For says God, verse. 2. I will
make my Covenant between me and thee: And verse. 4. As for me, behold my
Covenant is with thee, and thou shall be a Father of many Nations; neither
shall thy Name any more be called Abram, but Abraham, for a Father of many
Nationt have I made thee. So that this Covenant could have relation to no
other; it being no way applicable to any other Person whatsoever, whether Isaac
or Jacob, or any else of his Natural Offspring, to be Father of many Nations;
or as the Apostle explains it, The Father of all them that Believe, as Abraham
was; his Prerogative herein being singular, and incommunicable to any else.
Whereas the Covenant of Circumcision was as plainly made between God and
Abraham, and his Natural Seed also; as Genesis 17. 7, 8, 9. declare. And (says
God, verse. 7. Or, Moreover, as it is in the Old Translation, as proceeding to
speak of another Covenant, than what he had been before insisting on) I will
establish my Covenant between me and thee, and thy Seed after thee, in their
Generations, for an everlasting Covenant; to be a God unto thee, and to thy
Seed after thee: verse. 8. And I will give unto thee, and to thy Seed after
thee, the Land wherein thou art a Stranger; all the Land of Canaan for an
Everlasting Possession; and I will be their God: verse. 9. Thou shall keep my
Covenant therefore, thou and thy Seed after thee, in their Generations: verse.
10. This is my Covenant which ye shall keep between me and you, and thy Seed
after thee; every Manchild among you shall be Circumcised.

. 2. So that though the Promises of the Covenant of Circumcision were indeed
made unto Abraham, and his Natural Seed also; yet the Promises of the Gospel
Covenant, we see were not, and the Apostle expressly disowns it, Gal. 3. 16. Now
to Abraham, and his Seed were the Promises made; he says not, And to Seeds, as
of many; but as of one, And to thy Seed, which is Christ. For though God does
indeed tell Abraham, Genesis 12. 7. Unto thy Seed will I give this Land: And Genesis
13. 15. All the Land which thou see, to thee will I give it, and to thy Seed
for ever: And Genesis 15. 18. In that same day the Lord made a Covenant with
Abraham; saying, Unto thy Seed, have I given this Land, from the River of
Egypt, unto the Great River, the River Euphrates. Which are all plainly Gospel
Promises, and made unto Abraham long before the Covenant of Circumcision was
made with him, and therefore a part of the free Promise, or the Covenant of
Promise, which the Apostle speaks of, Gal. 3. 17, 18. Yet by Seed, in all these
Promises, we are plainly to understand no other than Christ himself: For so it
is explained to our hands, not only in Gal. 3. 16. but also Genesis 22. 16, 17. By
my self have I sworn (says the Lord) that in Blessing, I will Bless thee; and
in Multiplying, I will multiply thy Seed as the Stars of the Heaven, and as the
Sand which is upon the Sea shore: And thy Seed shall possess the Gate of his
Enemies: Expressly in the singular number; not the Gate of their Enemies, but
the Gate of his Enemies. And accordingly it follows, verse. 18. And in thy Seed
shall all the Nations of the Earth be Blessed; Which must of necessity be
understood of Christ alone. And whereas Christ is here Promised, That he shall
Possess the Gate of his Enemies; It is plainly Synonimous, or of the same
signification with the forementioned Promises; Unto thy Seed will I give this
Land, Genesis 12. 6. And all the Land which thou see, unto thee will I give it,
and to thy Seed for ever, Genesis 13. 15. For to Abraham and his Seed (says the
Apostle) were the Promises made: He says not, And to Seeds, as of many; but as
of one; And to thy Seed, which is Christ. And so again, Genesis 15. 18. Unto thy
Seed have I given this Land, from the River of Egypt, unto the Great River, the
River Euphrates: Which is by the Psalmist most plainly applied to Christ, in
the Person of Solomon, Psalm. 72. 8, 9. He shall have Dominion also from S^a to
Sea, and from the River unto the ends of the Earth. They that dwell in the
Wilderness shall bow before him, and his Enemies shall lick the Dust. The Kings
of Tarshish, and of the Isles, shall bring Presents. The Kings of Sheba and
Seba shall offer Gifts; yea, all Kings shall fall down before him; all Nations
shall serve him. Where we have a clear Paraphrase upon the Promises made to
Abraham and to his Seed; when he was told, All the Land which thou see, to
thee will I give it, and to thy Seed for ever: And thy Seed shall Possess the
Gate of his Enemies. For as much as God has by Promise given both unto
Abraham, and unto his Seed Christ also, all those Countries now possessed by
his Enemies; which we see is by the Psalmist interpreted, not only as having
relation to Canaan, but unto his Universal Dominion over all the Earth. For
Christ is here promised, not only that he shall have Dominion from Sea to Sea
(or as God told Abraham, from the River of Egypt, to the Great River, the River
Euphrates) but from the River to the ends of the Earth: That they that dwell in
the Wilderness shall bow before him, and his Enemies shall lick the Dust: That
the Kings of Tarshish, and of the Isles, shall bring Presents: The Kings of
Sheba, and Seba shall offer Gifts; yea, all Kings shall fall down before him,
and all Nations shall serve him. And accordingly he concludes, verse. 18, 19.
Blessed be the Lord God, the God of Israel, who only does wondrous things; and
blessed be his Glorious Name for ever: And let the whole Earth be filled with
his Glory; Amen and Amen.

. 3. The Promises of the Gospel Covenant made with Abraham, therefore, we see,
do all of them run directly to Christ the inheriting Seed: To him they are
made: In him do they Center: And from him alone, all the Blessings in Promise
are derived unto all his Spiritual Offspring, Gal. 3. 29. If ye be Christ's,
then are ye Abraham's Seed, and Heirs according to the Promise. And therefore
though God does indeed Promise in this Gospel Covenant, to multiply Abraham's
Seed as the Stars of Heaven, and as the Sand which is upon the Sea shore, Genesis
22. 17. (which we are to understand, no doubt, in reference to Abraham's
Natural Offspring, as well as of those Multitudes, that in all Nations were to
become his Spiritual Seed by believing, Genesis 15. 5. Romans 4. 17, 18. In which
respect Peter tells the Jews, Act. 3. 25. Ye are the Children of the Prophets,
and of the Covenant which God made with our Fathers; saying unto Abraham, And
in thy Seed shall all the Kindreds of the Earth be blessed.) Yet there is not a
word of blessing therein immediately Pronounced; either upon Abraham's Natural
Offspring; or those that in all Nations were to become his Seed by Believing:
All the Blessings being reserved for the Firstborn among many Brethren, Psalm.
89. 27, 28, 29. Romans 8. 29. who is therefore represented unto us as the Hear of
all things, Heb. 1. 2. Even Christ the Promised Seed, Gal. 3. 18, 19. To whom
the Promises were made, Gal. 3. 16. And who must therefore have the single
Honor and Prerogative concerning the Distribution of all the Blessings therein
Promised, among his Members, Children, and Brethren, Isa. 49. 6, 8, 9. Joh. 1.
16, 17. Joh. 6. 27. Gal. 3. 29.

. 4. It Is true, God pronounced a Blessing upon Isaac, and upon Jacob also, who
were Abraham's Natural Offspring, as well as his Spiritual Seed, by Believing.
And accordingly we find God speaking to Isaac, Genesis 26. 3, 4. Sojourn in this
Land, and I will be with thee, and will Bless thee: For unto thee, and unto thy
Seed will I give those Countries: And I will perform the Oath which I swear
unto Abraham thy Father: And I will make thy Seed to multiply as the Stars of
Heaven. And I will give unto thy Seed all these Countries: And in thy Seed
shall all the Nations of the Earth be Blessed. I will Bless thee (says God to
Isaac,) But how? No otherwise than as the Gentiles are Blessed; that is,
through Christ the Promised Seed, in whom all the Nations of the Earth are
Blessed, Gal. 3. 8, 14. For it cannot be imagined that the Gospel Blessing
should be derived to any of Abraham's Natural Offspring one-way, and to
Believing Gentiles another: But they must all, both the one as well as the
other, be beholding to Christ for the Blessing, if ever they have it: For if
all the Nations of the Earth are Blessed in Christ; then the Jews as well as
the Gentiles, must all of them, if at all, be Blessed that way also, Gal. 3. 29.

. 5. In the Covenant of Circumcision indeed God promises Abraham, to be a God,
not only to him, but to his Seed after him, in their Generations; meaning his
Natural Offspring; wherein a Blessing is immediately pronounced upon them all:
But that was only upon Condition of their Obedience: As was also that at Sinai;
which Covenant they brake, they Continued not in it, and God regarded them not,
Heb. 8. 8, 9* And both being of the same Stamp made with the same People, and
making up one and the same Old Covenant; it is therefore now Abolished, Heb. 7.
18. Heb. 8. 13. Coll. 2. 14. So that that could not be the Promise that Peter
speaks of. How are we then to understand those words of Peter before mentioned,
The Promise is unto you, and to your Children? Why, plainly thus, Though the
Conditional Covenant of Circumcision is now done away: So that you have no
further pretense, or Plea of that kind left you: And though the Promses of the
Gospel Covenant do all of them run directly to Christ, the Promised Seed; yet
still he might justly enough assure them that the Promise was to them, and to
their Children also: Because God had therein promised that in Abraham 's Seed,
that is, in Christ, All the Families of the Earth should be Blessed. And upon
this Bottom there was sufficient ground of Comfort, not only for the Jews, and
their Children; But for the Gentiles also, that were afar off; even as many as
the Lord our God shall call: this being a most full and comprehensive Promise;
every way free and absolute; and therefore Ministering Suitable Relief, even
unto the Jews themselves, that had been the Betrayers and Murderers of the Lord
of Glory; yea and unto their Children also, on whom, as well as on themselves,
they had wished his Blood to be: And therefore though the Original Grant, or
Promise was not made unto them, or their Children; or to any others
immediately; yet at Second-hand Rate, at least, it did sufficiently appertain
both unto them and their Children also: For, says he, Acts 3. 26. God having
raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to Bless you, in turning away every one of
you from his iniquities. Which he does immediately subjoyn upon his Rehearsal
of the forementioned General Promise, that in Abraham 's Seed should all the
Kindreds of the Earth be Blessed; Unto you first, God having raised up his Son
Jesus, sent him to Bless you, etc. Whereby as Peter does sufficiently intimate,
that the Promise was both unto them and their Children also; so that God would
no longer deal with them immediately, as he had done in the Covenant of
Circumcision, and in the Legal Covenant made with their Fathers at Sinai; or by
any merely Humane Mediator whatsoever, as then: But they must expect all their
Blessings now at the hand of Christ: For (says he) God has sent him to Bless
you, etc And so likewise, Act. 5. 31. Him has God exalted with his own Right
hand to be Prince and a Savior, for to give Repentance unto Israel, and the
forgiveness of Sins. Hands off therefore from the Old Covenant; whether that in
Moses his time, or the Covenant of Circumcision in Abraham's time: For God is a
Consuming Fire, and there is no dealing with him at that Rate any longer; but
through the Mediation of Christ alone; who has obtained a more Excellent
Ministry, by how much also he is the Mediator of a Better Covenant which is
established upon better Promises.

SECT. XIII.
FOR a Conclusion therefore of the present Point; It is observable, that as the
forementioned Covenants, both that mentioned Genesis 17. 7, 8, 9. as well as those
mentioned, Genesis 2. Exodus 19. Exodus 20. and Deuteronomy. 29. were all Conditional, and
therefore Legal Covenants; requiring strict and perfect Obedience, as the
Condition propounded, in order to the Enjoyment of the Mercies Contained in
them: Which are all of them therefore done away in Christ. So on the other
hand, we see that the Covenant that God made with Abraham, Genesis 12. 2, 3. Genesis
17. 2, 3, 4. and Genesis 22. 16, 17, 18. was wholly Free, and Absolute, and
therefore purely Evangelical, and that which never shall be disannulled, being
Confirmed both by Word and Oath; and consequently sure to all the Seed therein
concerned. For as therein God has Absolutely promised, that in Christ the
Promised Seed all the Nations of the Earth shall be Blessed (which according to
the whole Current of the Scriptures must of necessity be limited to the Elect,
or the true Believers of all Nations, that all that shall be blessed, shall be
blessed by this means, and no other way:) So lest it should be suspected that
any Condition should start up, whereby they might either be hindered from
obtaining the Promised Blessing, or forfeit it when in Possession thereof; we
are therefore also told, that God having raised up his Son Jesus, has sent him
to Bless us by turning away every one of us from his Iniquities. And it is as
plain that of the same Nature and Tenor is ^he Covenant mentioned, Deuteronomy. 30. 6.
As was also the Covenant which God made with Noah, Genesis 9. 9, 10, 11. As also
those mentioned, Jer. 31. 31, 32, 33. Jer. 32. 38, 39, 40. Ezekiel. 36. 25, 26,
27. Heb. 8. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. For as God Promises to the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 30.
6. That he will Circumcise their Heart, and the Heart of their Seed to Love the
Lord their God with all their Heart, and with all their Soul, that thy
mightlive: So in Jer. 31. Jer. 32. and Heb. 8. the Lord there also promises
unto the House of Israel, and to the House of Judah, after those Days, to put
his Law in their Inward parts, and to Write it in their Hearts; and that as he
will not turn away from them to do them good, so neither shall they depart from
him, etc. Wherein, as well as in the Gospel Covenant before mentioned, which
the Believing Gentiles are now under; the terms are not Conditional or
failable; I will, if ye will: But Absolute and Sovereign; I will, and ye shall.
So that that which God had before required, as the Condition of the Covenant of
Works, and was not before Promised; is now become a main Branch of the Covenant
of Promise it self.

. 2. And therefore, when the Apostle tells us, Gal. 3. 21. That if there had
been a Law given, that could have given Life, verily Righteousness should have
been by the Law; from hence it appears; that the Gospel Covenant does more for
us, than the Legal did: For it gives Life, and then Enables to the performance
of that which it requires of us; whereas from what the Apostle there tells us,
it appears that the Legal Covenant did not give Life, and that it failed
because it was Conditional. The Law indeed shows us our Duty, but gives no
strength to perform it. The Gospel Covenant does both, by Writing the Law in
the Heart. Hence it is truly and properly a Covenant of Grace, as not
depending at all upon Works: For if it be of Works, then it is no more Grace;
otherwise Work is no more Work, Romans 11. 6. And if by Grace, then it is no more
of Works: Otherwise Grace is no more Grace. And therefore Christ is said to
have obtained a more Excellent Ministry than that of Moses, by how much also he
is the Mediator of a better Covenant, which is Established upon better
Promises, Heb. 8. 6. It Is true the Promises for the Substance of them (as has
been before observed) are the same as before; I will be their God, and they
shall be my People. But now the terms are altered: For whereas before it
depended upon the Works of our Obedience; Now Faith alone is required in order
to the receiving; and consequently in order to our participation of them. Thus
Paul directs the Jailer. Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be
saved, Acts 16. 31. So Romans 4. 5. To him that works not, but believes on him
that Justifies the ungodly, his Faith is Counted for Righteousness. And in
like manner the Apostle tells us, Gal. 3. 22. That the Scripture has Concluded
all under Sin, that the Promise by Faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them
that Believe. Not that Believing is the Condition of the Promise, (as it is
generally Asserted) but a Designation rather of the Persons to whom the Promise
is given; that is, to Believers; or a Declaration of the Way, in which the
Promise is given, that is in a way of Believing. For indeed Faith is not the
Condition, but the Fruit of the Promise: For if it be the Condition; either it
must be wrought by us of our selves; Or it must be given us of God. If it be to
be wrought by our selves; Then is the Promise of Grace worse and harder than
the Covenant of Works which God made with our First Parent: For though it was
required of Adam to do and live; yet he had then a Power of Doing; But so have
not we of Believing: Yea no more was required of him than was put into his
Nature: For the Covenant of Works was Written in his Nature; but so is not
Faith in ours. If it be given us of God (as the Scripture does plainly affirm
it is, Ephesians. 2. 8. For by Grace are ye saved through Faith, and that not of your
selves, it is the Gift of God) then it is given by virtue of some Promise: For
God gives nothing but by virtue of some Promise; which Promise can be no other
than the Free Promise, the Promise of Grace: From whence it plainly follows,
that the Covenant of Grace is wholly free and Absolute; Since Faith it self is
the Fruit, and therefore cannot be the Condition thereof.

. 3. So that the Material Difference between the Covenant of Grace and that of
Works, Consists in the Different Terms of either: The one being Conditional,
the other free and Absolute. Not that we are therefore discharged from Duty
under the Gospel: For as the Apostle tells us by way of Answer to the same
Objection, Romans 3. 31. Do we then make void the Law through Faith? God forbid,
yea we Establish the Law. Because that Obedience which was before, the
Obedience of Servants, and Slaves, is now become Filial, or Son like; Not for
Life, as under the Legal Covenant: but from a Principle of Life already
received, which Powerfully Constrains, and Effectually Enableth unto the
Love, and Service of God, 2 Cor. 5. 14. 15. Tit. 2. 11, 12. Tit. 3. 8. It is
certain therefore, that Working is required under the Covenant of Grace, as
much as under the Covenant of Works it self: But not for the same purpose, nor
from the same Principle. Not for the same Purpose; forasmuch as no Works of any
kind whatsoever, as done or Performable by us, are at all designed as the
matter of our Justification before Gods Presence, under the Gospel Covenant,
Romans 3. 20. Tit. 3. 5. though they were so propounded under the Legal, Romans 10.
5. Nor from the same Principle: Forasmuch as Good Works are not Previous to
Faith, but the Consequent of it: That being the only Principle from whence all
true Gospel Obedience flows, Heb. 11. 4* 5, 6, etc.

SECT. XIV.
. 1. HAving therefore, we hope, Substantially proved that the Covenant of
Circumcision, which God made with Abraham, and his Natural Posterity, mentioned
Genesis 17. 7, 8. 9, 10. was no other than a Covenant of Works; As also that the
Covenant mentioned Deuteronomy. 29. wherein the Jews and their little ones were
Concerned, was of the same stamp; as well as that made at Mount Sinai,
mentioned Exodus 19. 5. and Exodus 20. All which were but several Repetitons of
the Covenant of Works made with our First Parent; And therefore called the Old,
or the First Covenant, Heb. 8. 7, 13. And forasmuch as it is as plain and
evident, that they are all of them done away in Christ, as has been already
proved: From hence therefore, it unavoidably follows, that all the Arguments
for the Support of Infants Church Membership and Baptism under the Gospel,
which are founded upon the like Privileges granted unto the Natural Posterity
of Abraham, under the former Administration; do of themselves fall to the
ground: Forasmuch as the Covenants themselves, which those Privileges were
then Bottomed upon, are now Repealed. Neither is there any Room left for any
other or further Argument from either of those forementioned Covenants, to
Infer the Baptism of Infants: The Obligation upon Believers Concerning the
Gospel Sign, being wholly left unto the time of its Institution; which
determines both the Duties and the Subjects thereof, to the Exclusion of
Infants; as has been before abundantly proved.

. 2. But whereas it is Objected; That since according to the Scope of the
foregoing Discourse, every Conditional Covenant is a Covenant of Works: From
whence it is Inferred, that such was the Nature of all the three forementioned
Covenants; both that at Sinai; that in the Land of Moab; and that made with
Abraham also, Genesis 17. 7, 8, 9. And Consequently, that they are all of them now
Repealed: The Absurdity of this Conclusion (say they) is manifest; Forasmuch as
the Gospel Covenant it self that we are now under, is a Conditional Covenant:
Since Faith and Repentance are therein plainly required as the Conditions of
Life.

. 3. To this we Reply; First, Let the true state of the Case be duly
Considered, and it cannot justly be denied, but that every Conditional Covenant
is a Covenant of Works; that is, if Faith, Repentance, and Good Works must be
Required as the Conditions thereof: Since it is not the greatness, or goodness
of the Promises, that are the Substance of the Covenant, or wherewith even the
Gospel Covenant it self is Replenished, that Excuse it from being a Covenant of
Works, if Works must be the Condition of Obtaining the Mercies therein
promised. For let Men distinguish as they please, betwixt Perfect Works, and
those of Sincere Obedience only, though Imperfect, which we are told the
Gospel now Requires as the Conditions of Life: This is Certain: that to Impose
New Conditions of Obedience, though never so mild; is a New Covenant of Works
with some Mercy; but not a Covenant of Grace, properly so called, or a Gospel
Covenant. For this was that wherein the very Essence of the Covenant of Works
Consisted. It required Obedience with a Promise of Life Annexed; where Man
should have but his Wages for his Work, and Perish if he failed of Obedience.
Or thus; The Covenant of Works Consisted in this: That upon our Personal
Obedience, according unto the Law and the Rule of it, we should be Accepted
with God and Rewarded by him. And indeed what else makes, or wherein else
Consists the true Form or Nature of a Covenant of Works, but that Works be
the Condition of it? This was the whole entire Nature of the First Covenant,
which alone renders it Essentially or Specifically different from the Promise
of Grace or the Gospel Covenant. And what ever Covenant proceeds on these
terms, or has the Nature of them in it, however it may be varied, or lenified
with milder Conditions of Obedience than the first was; so long as this Rule is
retained; Do this and live: It is the same Covenant still, and not another, for
the Substance or Essence of it. If (says the Apostle, Romans 11. 6.) it be by
Grace, then is it no more of Works; Otherwise Grace is no more Grace: But if it
be of Works, then is it no more Grace; Otherwise Work is no more Work. Works
are Works still, and Obedience is Obedience still, whether Perfect or
Imperfect; And therefore if Imperfect Obedience will be Accepted of God, as the
Condition of Life, the Covenant is to be denominated, and has it is Form from
the Condition. Perfection, or Imperfection of Obedience, are but Circumstances.
If then a Man be Justified by Gospel Obedience, which is Sincere, though
Imperfect, as the Complete Condition of the Covenant; then this Covenant is a
Covenant of Works as well as the other; Only that of Perfect, this of
Imperfect Works. Which being allowed, though it seems more easy; yet it does
indeed render our Condition, and the Gospel Covenant we are now under (as has
been before observed) worse and harder than that made with Adam himself: Since
we have now no Strength to Obey, nor Power to fulfill this Condition of
Imperfect Obedience, though in the least or lowest degree; No not so much as to
a thought: Whereas our First Parent was furnished with a Capacity sufficient
for the discharge of the most Perfect Obedience.

. 4. And if you say, that God requires nothing of us, but what he gives
Strength and Grace to perform, having to this purpose Promised to put his Laws
in our Hearts, and his fear in our Inward parts: This does but so much the more
clearly evince the Freeness, or Absoluteness of the Gospel Covenant; since this
Gospel Promise can depend on no Condition on our part: For whatever is
Antecedent thereunto, being only a Work or Act of Corrupted Nature, can be no
Condition whereon the Dispersation of Spiritual Grace is supperadded. From
whence it plainly follows, that the Covenant of Grace is wholly free and
Absolute: Forasmuch as there is nothing that can be supposed as the Condition
thereof, whether it be Faith, Repentance, or New Obedience, which is not
therein Absolutely Promised.

. 5. But whatever may be Alleged for or against, in these Respects, as to the
Gospel Covenant we are now under: This is evident, and cannot with any shadow
of pretense be justly Contradicted; That that Covenant that requires Perfect
and Universal Obedience to the whole Revealed Will and Law of God; and
Pronounces a Curse upon the least. Transgression or Dis-obedience, must needs
be a Covenant of Works, or else there was never any such thing Extant in the
World. And of this Nature we have already proved the forementioned Covenants to
be, viz. that made with Israel at Mount Sinai, that in the Land of Moab, and
that made with Abraham also, Genesis 17. 7, 8, 9. Our present Question therefore
(whereon the Main Hinge of the Paedo-baptismal Controversy does depend, and
which we would therefore drive to an Issue) is only this: Whether that
Covenant that will not admit of a Partial, though Sincere Obedience; but
strictly requires that which is Perfect, and Universal, as the Condition of
Salvation; be not a plain Covenant of Works? If so, then it cannot be justly
denied, but that the several forementioned Covenants are such; And Consequently
they are all of them now Repealed, as has been already proved. From whence it
plainly follows that no Just Argument can be drawn from either of these
Covenants for the Establishment or Regulation of Gospel Worship: For since the
Law it self is changed, and dis-annulled, as the Scriptures do plainly affirm
it is, Heb. 7. 12, 18. Chap. 8. 7, 13. there follows of necessity a change of
the whole Fabric and Constitution of the Ordinances thereunto once belonging:
For so the Apostle himself Reasons, Heb. 7. 12. The Priesthood (says he) being
changed, there is made of necessity a change also of the Law. And if the Law is
changed, there follows with an equal necessity a change also of the Ordinances,
thereon depending, and that news ones take place suitable to the Nature of the
Gospel Covenant that Succeeds it. And Consequently the Plea for Infants
Baptism, as founded on either of those forementioned Covenants, must of
necessity fail: Forasmuch as what ever Right Infants had to the Ordinance of
Circumcision, which you say was Analogous therewith, the Right they then had
was only by virtue of those forementioned Covenants; which being now Repealed,
it unavoidably follows, that all the Arguments thence deduced for the
Establishment of Infants Church Member-ship and Baptism under the Gospel, must
of necessity also vanish.

SECT. XV.
. 1. AS to what Concerns the Covenant of Grace, or the Gospel Covenant before
Insisted on; We are told indeed by some that to affirm, that it is wholly free
and Absolute; and to make that the Covenant of Grace, properly so called, which
God made with Christ; is to destroy the whole Tenor of the Gospel, and to lay
the Foundation of all Libertinism, and Looseness of Conversation. In Reference
whereunto, we shall take leave to Insert a Passage or two of the late Worthy
Dr. Owen, in his Third Volumn upon the Epistle to the Hebrews, page 15. It
cannot be denied (says he) but that some Men may, and it is justly to be
feared, that some Men do abuse the Doctrine of the Gospel, to Countenance
themselves in a vain Expectation of Mercy and Pardon, whilst they willingly
live in a Course of Sin: But as this in their Management is the principal means
of their Ruin; So in the Righteous Judgment of God, it will be the greatest
Aggravation of their Condemnation. And whereas some have charged the Preachers
of Gospel Grace, as those who thereby give Countenance unto this Presumption;
It is an Accusation that has more of the Hatred of Grace in it, than of the
Love of Holiness: For none do, or can press the Relinquishment of Sin, and
Repentance of it, upon such Assured Grounds, and with such Cogent Arguments, as
those by whom the Grace of Jesus Christ in the Gospel, is fully opened, and
declared.

. 2. And as to what concerns the freeness, or Absoluteness of the Gospel
Covenant; The Doctor (in his-Exposition of the 12th Verse of Heb. 8. For I will
be Merciful to their Unrighteousness; and their Sins and Iniquities will I
Remember no more, page 290. of his forementioned Discourse) Observes; That free
and Sovereign, and undeserved Grace in the Pardon of Sin, is the Original
Spring and Foundation of all New Covenant Mercies, and Blessings. Hereby (says
he) and hereby alone, is the Glory of God and the safety of the Church provided
for. And those who like not Gods Covenant on those Terms, will Eternally fall
short of the Grace of it. Hereby all Glorying, and all Boasting in our selves,
is Excluded; which was that which God aimed at in the contrivance and
Establishment of this Covenant, Romans 3. 27. 1 Cor. 1. 29, 30, 31. For this
could not be, if the Fundamental Grace of it did depend on any Condition, or
Qualification in our selves. -- Some speak of an Universal Conditional Covenant
made with all Mankind. If there be any such thing, it is not that here
Intended: For they are all actually Pardoned, with whom this Covenant is made.
And the Indefinite Declaration of the Nature and Terms of the Covenant, is not
the making a Covenant with any. And what should be the Condition of this Grace
here promised of the Pardon of Sin? It is, say they, that Men Repent, and
Believe, and turn to God, and yield Obedience unto the Gospel. If so, then Men
must do all these things, before they Receive the Remission of Sins: Yes. Then
must they do them whilst they are under the Law and the Curse of it: For so are
all Men whose Sins are not Pardoned. This is to make Obedience unto the Law,
and that to be performed by Men whilst under the Curse of it, to be the
Condition of Gospel Mercy; which is to overthrow both the Law and Gospel.

But then on the other hand it will follow, they say; that Men are Pardoned
before they do Believe. -- But then it must be considered. (1.) That the
Communication and Donation of Faith unto us, is an Effect of the same Grace
whereby our Sins are Pardoned, and they are both bestowed on us by virtue of
the same Covenant. (2.) That though the Application of Pardoning Mercy unto our
Souls, is in order of Nature consequent unto Believing; yet in time they go
together (3.) That Faith is not required unto the Procuring of the Pardon of
our Sins, but unto the Receiving of it.

. 3. To the same purpose He also speaks, page 223. 224. of the same Discourse.
The Promises of the Covenant of Grace (says he) are better than those of any
other Covenant, as for many other Resons, so especially because the Grace of
them prevents any Condition, or Qualification on our part. I do not say, the
Covenant of Grace is Absolute without Conditions; if by Conditions we intend
the Duties of Obedience, which God requires of us in and by virtue of that
Covenant: But this I say, the Principal Promises thereof, are not in the first
place Remunerative of our Obedience in the Covenant; but Efficaciously
Assumptive of us into Covenant, and Establishing or Confirming in the Covenant.
The Covenant of Works had its Promises; but they were all Remunerative,
respecting an Antecedent Obedience in us; (so were all those which were
peculiar unto the Covenant of Sinai) they were indeed also of Grace, in that
the Reward did infinitely exceed the Merit of our Obedience: But yet they all
supposed it, and the Subject of them was formally Reward only. In the Covenant
of Grace it is not so: For sundry of the Promises thereof, are the means of our
being taken into Covenant, of our entering into Covenant with God. The First
Covenant Absolute was Established on Promises, in that when Men were actually
taken into it, they were encouraged unto Obedience by the Promise of a future
Reward: But these Promises, namely, of the Pardon of Sin, and Writing of the
Law in our Hearts, which the Apostle expressly Insisteth on, as the Peculiar
Promises of this New Covenant, do take place and are Effectual Antecedently
unto our Covenant Obedience. For although Faith be required in order of Nature,
Antecedently unto our actual Receiving of the Pardon of Sin; yet is that Faith
it self wrought in us by the Grace of the Promise; and so its Precedence to
Pardon, respects only the Order that God has Appointed in the Communion of
the Benefits of the Covenant, and intends not that the Pardon of Sin i^ the
Reward of our Faith.

. 4. We shall Conclude what concerns this Subject, with another Passage of the
Doctors to the same purpose with the former, in his Acurate and Judicious
Discourse, Entitled, The Doctrine of Justification, through the Imputation of
the Righteousness of Christ, Explained, Confirmed, and Vindicated, page 156. It
is commonly said (says he) that Faith and New Obedience are the Condition of
the New Covenant. But yet because of the Ambiguous Signification, and various
use of that Term (Condition) we cannot certainly understand what is Intended in
the Assertion. If no more be Intended, but that these things, though promised
in the Covenant, and wrought in us by the Grace of God, are yet Duties
indispensibly required of us, in order unto the Participation and Enjoyment of
the full end of the Covenant in Glory, it is unquestionably true. But, if it be
intended, that they are such a Condition of the Covenant, as to be by us
performed Antecedently unto the Participation of any Grace, Mercy, or
Privilege of it, so as that they should be the Consideration, and Procuring
Causes of them, that they should be all of them, as some speak, the Reward of
our Faith and Obedience; it is most false, and not only contrary to Express
Testimonies of Scripture, but destructive of the Nature of the Covenant it self.

SECT. XVI.
. 1. LAstly, Whereas we do affirm, That though according to the Law of
Circumcision, Infants were Admitted and Reckoned as Members of the Jewish
Church; yet that Old Constitution being now pulled down, and all the
Appurtenances and Privileges thereunto belonging, being now Repealed; a New
Church State according to the Nature of the Gospel Administration, is now
Erected, into which none are Admitted a^ Members, but Professing Believers
only. By way of Reply hereunto we are told, That Infants Relation to the
Covenant; and the Universal Church as Members, was not Repealed by Christ,
because it was not founded only on the Law of Moses, which if it had (say you)
it were as such Repealed: But Infant Church Membership taking place as an
Ordinance of God, before Circumcision was Enjoined, or the Ceremonial Law
Instituted, why then should it cease with it? To the same purpose we are also
further told, That it was no part of the Typical Administration, but a Moral
Institution of God, even from the Beginning of the World: God ever having made
a distinction between the Seed of the Faithful, and the Seed of the Wicked, as
Visibly belonging to the several Kingdoms of God and of Satan.

. 2. To this we Reply; First, That this Notion of Infants Church Membership,
before the Law of Circumcision, is but a bare Affirmation, without Proof: For
if it be so, that Infant Church Membership did indeed take place as an
Ordinance of God, before Circumcision, where is that Ordinance? Why, are we not
directed to some place of Scripture where we may find it? Has God Revealed it
to some, and to none else? Or in what Ancient Father shall we find it? Did any
one ever say so before now? Therefore with what Confidence soever we are now
told, That it was no part of the Typical Administration, but a Moral
Institution of God, even from the Beginning of the World, unless we are
directed where to find that Institution, whatever others do, we dare not
presume to be Wise above what is Written: Mal. 2. 15. is indeed alleged. And
wherefore one? That he might seek a Godly Seed. But that can be understood of
no other than a Legitimate Seed, in opposition to a Spurious Offspring. And
thus the Assembly do in their Annotations, carry the Sense of the place. As
likewise does Calvin, Camer* and diverse others.

. 3. Secondly, Whereas we are told, That God ever made a Distinction between
the Seed of the Faithful, and the Seed of the Wicked; What Distinction is it
that is Intended? Did God single them out, and Separate them by any Visible
Sign, or Character, before the Law of Circumcision? It is evident he did not;
Or did God distinguish them by his Providential Care of them, or Provision for
them more than others? The Scripture is silent as to this also. Or did God Love
them with a saving Love, more than the Children of Unbelievers, as visibly
belonging to the several Kingdoms of God and of Satan; so as that all the
Children of Believers from Adam to Abraham, belonged to the Kingdom of God; and
all the Children of Unbelievers belonged unto the Kingdom of Satan? This is
indeed suggested by you, but not proved. But then if this was always the state
of the Case between Believers and Unbelievers, as to their Respective Seeds,
and that both before and since the Flood, and that it so continues: Then
according to this Rule, woe unto all the Children of Unbelievers, most
deplorable and desperate i^ their State, without any ground of Comfort, or Hope
of Relief; contrary to the Experience of all Ages, whilst we are assured that
Grace is now Extended to the Gentiles, who were not the Children of Believers,
whilst the Natural Branches, the Children of Believing Abraham, are cut off.
But then we would willingly know, when the Sons of God took the Daughters of
Men, and all Flesh had Corrupted it is way, To what Kingdom did the Children of
Believers belong then? Did not the Seed of Believers grow profane and wicked
as well as others? That is undeniable. And did not the Seed of Unbelievers,
some of them prove Pious and Godly? This also appears, even in Abraham himself,
whose Father was an Idolater, as is probably supposed; he himself being bred up
in Idolatry.

. 4. Thirdly, Whereas it is suggested, that there was always from the
beginning, a Lineal Successive Conveyance of Grace from the Parent to the
Child. If so, it is strange that all Flesh should so soon have corrupted its
way, that God saw Cause to bring the Flood upon the World of the Ungodly. And
surely if there had been any such Covenant Holiness, as is imagined before the
Flood; there would have been some Godly Society, some greater Number of
Believers to have been preserved, beside Noah and his Family: Who were not all
Godly neither; there was a Cham, even among them; which would not have been, if
there had been such a Lineal Conveyance of Grace and Covenant Holiness, from
the Father to the Son, as is affirmed.

. 5. Fourthly, Though Infant Church Membership did indeed take place, as an
Ordinance of God before the Ceremonial Law was instituted: It does not
therefore follow, that it was a Moral Institution, and therefore not to be
Repealed: For so did Sacrifices also, and the building of Altars for the
Worship of God, as is evident in what is related concerning Abel, and Noah; and
yet there is none but take it for granted, that they are now abolished. Nay
even Circumcision it self was in use in the Church of God 400 years before the
Proclaiming of the Law to that People in the Wilderness; and yet there is none
that reckons it therefore to be a Moral Institution, or that questions the
Repeal thereof, together with the rest of those Ceremonies which were imposed
on them till the time of Reformation.

. And whereas we are told, that if Infant Church Membership be Repealed; it
must be either in Justice or in Mercy. It may be neither in Judiciary Justice,
nor in Favorable Mercy; but from a pure Act of God's Sovereignty, who, as he
is highest Lord of all, may do with his own what he lists; having an
Unlimitted and Boundless Right to Bestow or Revoke what he pleases, according
to the Counsel of his own Will. For though the Gifts and Callings of God are
without Repentance, in respect of Inward and Spiritual Blessings; yet not so in
respect of outward Privileges. But that the Repeal in question is not to the
Loss, but rather to the Spiritual Advantage of Parents and Children; and
consequently in Mercy to both; has been already sufficiently manifested in the
foregoing parts of this Discourse.

. 7. So that it clearly appears, that the Novel Opinion which has been lately
started concerning the Morality of Infants Church Membership, has no Scripture
Foundation for the support thereof; it being evident that as it came in with
the Law of Circumcision; so it went out and was Repealed with it. For the
Priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a change also of the Law,
Heb. 7. 12. Which must needs include Circumcision, with all the Appurtenances
and Privileges thereunto belonging; as has been before abundantly proved.

SECT. XVII.
. 1. FOR a Conclusion therefore, unto the whole of what has been offered on
this Subject, in this and the foregoing parts of this Discourse: It is now at
last with all Humility presented unto God's People, to consider whether it be
not their high Concernment, Speedily and Effectually to endeavor a through
Reformation of so great an Abuse in the Divine Service, as the Practice of
Infant-Sprinkling has been now proved to be: It being no other than the Change
of a Divine Institution; and that not only in respect of the Subject, Infants
being substituted in the Room of Professed Repenting Believers: But also in
respect of the due Form, or Manner of its Administration; Sprinkling being used
instead of Dipping: And so in both Respects making void the Commandment of
Christ. It was the Commendation that Paul gave the Corinthians, 1 Corinthians. 11.
1, 2. That they had kept the Ordinances, as they were delivered unto them.
Certainly Jesus Christ is very Punctual in things of this Nature; and he will
one day call men to an account for their Deviations in matters of such
importance. If men are careful to see that their Laws be strictly obeyed,
without which they reckon their Authority slighted; What may we think of the
Laws of the Great King? And whether or no will he not reckon his Authority
slighted in our present case, when he comes to make Inquisition concerning
such as have not demeaned themselves according to the Divine Prescript? We know
with what severity God proceeded against Nadab and Abihu, for their presuming
to Change his Ordinance of Old, by Offering up Strange Fire, which he had not
Commanded, Lev. 10. 1, 2. We know also what befell David, and the People of
Israel, who had made a New Cart for the Carriage of the Ark, which was to have
been born on the Priests shoulders only. They might have pleaded as well as
you, that this was not expressly forbidden: But yet nevertheless, For this Cause
the Lord made a Breach upon them, for that they did not seek him after the due
Order, 1 Chronicles. 15. 13. In reference whereunto let that Scripture also be duly
considered, Isa. 24. 5, 6. Because they have transgressed the Laws, changed the
Ordinance, broken the Everlasting Covenant; therefore has the Curse devoured
the Earth, and they that dwell therein are desolate; therefore the Inhabitants
of the Earth are burned, and few men left.

. 2. That Infants Baptism has no Footing, nor Foundation at all in the Word of
God, has been already at large demonstrated. And that it is made use of to the
Justling out, and making void the Commandment of Christ, in reference to the
Baptism of Believers, has been also evinced; and all the most Material
Arguments, which are usually urged for the support thereof, have been with
Scripture Evidence, Refuted. The Lord grant a hearing Ear, and an understanding
Heart, and an obedient Mind, that the present Testimony rise not up at last as
a Witness against you: For the Lord, the God of gods, even the Lord, the God of
gods, he knows, and Israel at length also shall know, if it be in Rebellion,
or if it be in Transgression against the Lord, that the present Witness is
born; and if it has not rather been done with his Approbation, and at his
Commandment, in order to the stirring up all that truly love and fear God's
Name, to a sincere endeavor after the Primitive Purity; and that both in
respect of Doctrine and Worship.

. 3. Certain it is, that these things will be found at length to have been of
Highest concernment unto us; and must therefore be our most Serious Practice,
and Faithful Endeavor, as (...)

BOOKS Printed for John Harris, at the Harrow against the Church in the
Poultrey.
(1.) A Discourse of Divine Providence, 1. In General; That there is a
Providence Exercised by GOD in the World. 2. In Particular: How all Gods
Providence in the World, are in order to the good of his People. By the late
Learned Divine Stephen Charnock, B. D. sometimes Fellow of New College in
Oxon. Price Bound Three Shillings.

(2.) THe Balm of the Covenant Applied to the Bleeding Wounds of Afflicted
Saints. First Composed for the Relief of a Pious Worthy Family, Mourning over
the Deaths of their Hopeful Children; and now made Public for the Support of
all Christians, Sorrowing on the same, or any other Account. To which is added,
a Sermon Preached for the Funeral of that Excellent and Religious Gentleman
John Vpton of Lupton, Esquire By John Flavel, Preacher of the Gospel at Dartmouth
in Devon. Price Bound One Shilling.

(3.) A Confession of Faith, put forth by the Elders and Brethren of many
Congregations of Christians, (Baptized upon Profession of their Faith) in
London and the Country. With an Appendix concerning Baptism. Price Bound One
Shilling.

(4.) THe Conviction of Worldly Vanity: Or, The Wandering Prodigal, and his
Return: in Two Parts.

PART I.

Containing his Debate with himself about his setting forward in search of the
Palace of Worldly Felicity; His Harkening to the Advice of Folly, and
submitting himself to her Conduct; the manner of her furnishing him out; of the
Progress he made, and the various Adventures he met with by the way: As also
the Entertainment he found at his Arrival, and his Riotous Living there; with
his Description of the Vices Reigning therein.

PART II.

Giving a Full Account of his Miraculous Escape from the Palace of Worldly
Felicity. Of the Glorious Prospect he had of the Celestial City; and of the
Progress he made toward it, under the Conduct of Divine Grace: With the manner
of his Proceeding, (...) the several Occurrences he met with by the way: His
Arrival (...) Palace of Virtue and True Felicity, and his joyful Reception
there: His Excellent Description thereof, and of the Divine and Moral Virtues
which he found therein; both Pleasant and Profitable. Delivered under the
Similitude of A Wandering Youth. Illustrated with Proper Cutts. Price Bound One
Shilling.

(5.) INstructions for Children: Or, The Child's and Youth's Delight. Teaching
an easy way to Spell and Read True English. Containing the Father's Godly
Advice: Directing Parents in a right and spiritual manner to Educate their
Children. With a Scripture Catechism, wherein all the Chief Principles of True
Christianity are clearly opened. Together with many other things both Pleasant
and Useful for the Education of Children. Written by B. Keach, Author of War
with the Devil. Recommended to the Use of all Parents and Schoolmasters, by H.
Knollys. Price Six Pence.

(6.) ENgland's Jests Refined and Improved; Being a choice Collection of the
Merriest Jests, Smartest Repartees, Wittiest Sayings, and most Notable Bulls,
dispersed through the several Tracts on those Subjects: With many new Ones,
never before Printed. To which are Added, Fourteen Ingenious Characters, drawn
to the Life. The whole Work compiled with great Care and Exactness: And may
serve as the Witty-man's Companion, the Busie-man's Diversion, and the
Melancholy-man's Physic and Recreation. The Second Edition, with Additions of
several Jests, Witty Sayings, Bulls, and Two New Characters. Calculated for the
Innocent Spending of the Winter Evenings, by H. C. Price Bound One Shilling.

(7.) A Present for Ladies. The Nymphs of Diana: Or, The Excellencies of
Women-kind, described as well in their External Beauty, as Internal Virtue;
being an Advocate for the Fair Sex; Comprised in an Illustrious History of it.
Represented not only in Lively and Pathetical Discourses grounded upon Reason,
but in sundry rare Examples of Virtuous Love, Piety, Prudence, Modesty,
Chastity, Patience, Humility, Temperance, Conduct, Constancy, and Firmness of
Mind; with what else in the like Nature is necessary to the Accomplishment of
the most Celebrated Beauties. With other Examples of Women, skilled in the most
curious Arts and Sciences. To which are Added, the Examples of Warlike Women,
their Noble Exploits and Victories: With the Prophecies and Predictions of the
Sybils, in Relation to our Savior Christ, etc. And as an Appendix, The
Character of a Virtuous Woman in all (...) Capacities, viz. of a Virgin, of a
Wife, and of a Widow; Wherein is showed the happiness that accrues to Man, in
the possession of so great a Blessing, as a Virtuous Woman; with the Reasons,
why Man's Happiness is not Complete on Earth, without the Charming Creature
Woman. The whole Work Enriched and Intermixed with Curious Poetry and Delicate
Fancies, suitable to so Charming a Subject. Price Bound One Shilling.

(8.) THe True Fortune Tellers: Or, Guide to Knowledge. Discovering the whole
Art of Chyromancy, Physiognomy, Metoposcopy and Astrology. Containing, 1. A
Description of the Planets, their Power and Influence over the Bodies of Men,
Women, and Children. 2. Of the several Lines, Mounts, Marks, Angles, and Sacred
Characters in the Hand and Wrist; and by what Planets they are Governed as to
good and bad Fortune. 3. Of Physiognomy. 4. Observations on the Eyes, Eyebrows,
Nose, Chin, Neck, Hair, Beard and Face. 5. Metoposcopy, or the signification of
the Lines in the Face. 6. Of Moles and their significations. 7. Of Dreams, and
their Interpretations. 8. Of Nativities, and their Calculation. 9. Of the Rod,
by which hidden Treasure is found. 10. Of Marriages, and at what time any
Person shall be Married. 11. Rules to know the danger of Death. 12. Of good and
bad Days. 13. The manner of resolving doubtful Questions, as to Friends,
Marriages, places of Abode, Health, Prosperity or Adversity, Love or Business.
14. Of Pythagoras his Wheel of Fortune. 15. Of the good and days in each Month
relating to Health. To which are Added, Aristotle's Observations on the Heavens,
their Motion. Of Fiery Meteors, Thunder, Lightning, Eclipses, Comets,
Earthquakes and Whirl-winds. Illustrated with several Proper Figures. The
Second Edition. Price Bound One shilling.

(9) A Pleasant and Compendious History of the first Inventers and Instituters
of the most Famous Arts, Mysteries, Laws, Customs and Manners in the whole
WORLD. Together, with many other Rarities and Remarkable things, Rarely known,
and never before made public. To which is added Several Curious Inventions,
peculiarly Attributed to England and Englishmen. The whole Work Alphabetically
Digested, and very helpful to the Readers of History. Price Bound One Shilling.

FINIS.

