portrait of Timothy Cruso Vera Effigies TIMOTHEI CRUSO. Aetat. 40. 1697.
T. Forster delin. N. White scu^lp.


TWENTY-FOUR SERMONS Preached at the MERCHANTS-LECTURE AT Pinners Hall.

By the late Reverend Mr. TIMOTHY CRVSO.

LONDON: Printed by S. Bridge, for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three
Crowns, in Cheapside, MDCXCIX.

TO THE READER.
THese Sermons are some of the Relics of one who is gone to receive the Fruit
of his Labors, who has left Sowing for the sake of the Harvest, wherein he is
now reaping. Though this is a Posthumous Piece, yet it speaks out the living
Praise of the dead Author, whose it was without any Alteration or Addition,
being Printed from his own Notes.

If I may use the Phrase in Fashion, he lived too fast; not as too many do, who
shorten their Days by their Debaucheries, and sinful Excesses, but as a Taper
which wastes it self to give Light to others. His Bodily Constitution was too
weak to undergo the Service his Soul put it to, in constant Studies and hard
Labor, that he might Answer the Restlesness of his Mind, which was always
aspiring to greater Knowledge and higher Seize, whereby he laid greater
load upon his Flesh than its weakness could bear, and so sinking under the
burden, he died in the midst of his Days.

There is no need of my Epistle to Midwife these Excellent Discourses into the
World, nor had I had any hand in it, had it not been to answer the Desires of
some Relations of his, to whom my Obligations will not allow me to deny any
thing; And also to take this occasion to Vindicate what I spoke and published
in his Funeral Sermon about the Union of the Spirit of Christ with the Dead
Body of a Saint, which has by some been greatly stumbled at, and called in
question as a new Doctrine, I therefore thought it Charity to such to remove
this stumbling Block, not by any Arguments. further than what I have therein
already urged, but by calling in the Judgment of others in this matter, and I
shall look no farther back, than to the Learned Men of our own Times.

Mr. Rutherford speaking of the Covenant of Grace, Treatise of the Covenant of
Grace, p. 216.
says, It is thus Eternal, in that the dead Parties, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob
are still in the Covenant of Grace, and there remains a Covenant Union between
Christ and their rotten Flesh sleeping in the Dust.

Mr. Calamy says, Morning Exercise of Giles in Fields, Ser. 24. p. 548.
The Bodies of the Saints shall be raised by virtue of their Union with Christ;
for the Body of a Saint, even while it is in the Grave, is united to Christ,
and is asleep in Jesus, and shall be raised by virtue of this Union. And in p.
557. If thou gettest into Christ while thou live, thou shall die in Christ,
and sleep in Christ, and be raised by Christ into Eternal Happiness.

Mr. Case speaking of the Union between Christ and Believers, Case his Mount
Pisgah, first Part, p. 38.
says, Not only in Death, but even after Death this Union holds; the Saints are
said to sleep in Jesus; that part of the Saints which is capable of sleep, is
not capable of Separation from Christ: While their more noble Part is united to
Christ in Heaven, among the Spirits of Just Men made perfect; Christ is united
to their inferior, and more ignoble Part in the Grave, their very Dust; they
sleep in Jesus.

Mr. Stedman says, Stedman's Mystical Union of Believers with Christ p. 191.
Death it self shall not separate Believers from Jesus Christ, but still they
are entirely in him even when they are dead. As it was in the death of Christ
himself, though it made Separation between his Body and Soul, yet it did not
separate the Humane Body from the Divine: So it is in the death of the Saints,
though it rend the Spirit from the Flesh, yet it can part neither from the Son
of God. The very Bodies of Believers are united to Jesus when they are dead.

Dr. Collings on those words of our Lord, Pool 's Annotations on John 11.26.
He that believes on me shall never die, says, Though his Body shall die
because of sin, yet his Spirit shall live because of Righteousness, and God
shall in the great Day quicken again his Mortal Body, through the Holy Spirit
which dwells in him, and is united to him.

Dr. Thomas Goodwin: Dr. Goodwin 's first Fol. on Ephesians. 1.14. p. ^^1.
Does the Spirit dwell in you now? When you are laid in the Grave, that Spirit
dwells in you, as he did in the Body of Christ. I do not say, in the same
manner. The Spirit of God did dwell in the Body of Christ in the Grave, and
raised it up, he never left him. Though his Body was a dead Carcass without a
Soul, yet that Body was Hypostatically united to the Godhead, therefore it was
called Holy One; My Holy One shall not see Corruption. Now the Comparison is,
If we have the Spirit of Christ, and if he dwell in us, the same Spirit shall
never leave our Bodies till he has raised us up also. Nay, while thy Body is
dead and rotten in the Grave, the Holy Ghost dwells in it.

And hear what a great Man of the Church of England in his Day, says; Christ's
Deity was united to his dead Body, -- his Resurrection was performed by the
Power and Spirit of the Father. God reached out his hand to him, and raised him
up. Here then is our Comfort; the same Spirit of God is communicable to us, the
same Arm of Power may be reached out to us. -- He will employ the same power
for us as he did for Christ, Ephesians. 1.19.

And again in p. 210. His Spirit dwells in you. The Inhabitation of God's
Spirit, that is the Ground of our Resurrection, because it is Vinculum unionis,
the Spirit is the Bond of our Union and Conjunction with Christ. By it we are
Incorporated into his Body, and made Members of it. Now then, if our Head rise,
all the Members must rise with it; if the Head be in Heaven, the Members shall
not for ever perish in the Grave. This Union by the Spirit is like the touch of
a Lodestone, it will attract and draw us to him, that where he is, we shall be
also. It is spoken of his Hypostatical, but it is true also of his Mystical
Union, Quod semel assumpsit nunquam deposuit. Christ will part with none of his
Members. Bishop Brownrig, 2d Vol. p. 204.
And again in the same Page. Our Bodies by this Inhabitation are Consecrated to
be a Possession of the Holy Ghost, and the Temple of God must not be destroyed.
-- God's Spirit takes Pleasure not only in these living Temples, but owns them
when they are dead; takes Pleasure in the dead Bones, and Favors the Dust of
them.

I could multiply Testimonies of elder Date, to prove the Truth of this
Doctrine, and that it is no new Notion; but there needs no Proof from Humane
Testimony, when it is so plainly confirmed by the Word of God, as I have
elsewhere showed. If we receive the Witness of Men, the Witness of God is
greater. And there needs no greater Vindication of any Doctrine, than the
Testimony of God to the truth of it.

The Author of these Discourses was a Person whose Worth was well known in this
City; he was a Person of a sound Mind and Judgment in the great Doctrines of
the Gospel, and held fast the Form of sound Words, carefully shunning the Paths
of those By-way Men, who please themselves with the fond Thoughts of such
Opinions, wherein they choose to walk by themselves apart from the Community of
the Saints, and Churches of God.

None who knew him, and love the Interest of Christ, and the Souls of Men, but
must bewail the loss of such an Eminent Servant in the Lord's Work, especially
in such a day as this is wherein the Harvest is so great, and Faithful,
Laborers so few.

But why stand I in the Door-way which leads to the Discourse it self? I shall
therefore no longer hinder thy Entrance, than by begging a Blessing upon the
Work, that it may be sanctified to thy Understanding for Knowledge, to thy
Judgment for Establishment, to thy Conscience for Peace, and for Joy and
Gladness to thy whole Soul. So Prays

Thy Servant in the Lord's Work, And for his Sake, Matthew. Mead.
Febr. 2d. 1699.
ERRATA.
PAge 18. Line 9. read Duties: P. 25. l. 21. r. it is: P. 28. l. 27. r. not: P.
31. l. 28. r. asked: P. 51. l. 15. r. Fortifies: P. 52. l. 15. r. the: P. 77. l.
16. r. knew: P. 79. l. 21. r. of: P. 104. l. 11. r. Law: P. 144: l. 1. dele
that, l. 27. r. hardened: P. 193. l. 12. dele when we are so: P. 213. l. 17. r.
but: P. 256. l. 4. r. are: P. 257. l. 12. r. Comparison: P. 274. l. 13. dele
and: P. 315. l. 25. r. bounds: P. 330. l. 6. r. Thyatira's: P. 335. l. 11. r.
Equivalent: P. 362. l. 26. r. Scope.

THE TEXTS.
Matthew. XVI. 17. AND Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou Simon
Bar-jona; for Flesh and Blood has not revealed it to thee, but my Father which
is in Heaven Page 1 Psalm XXVI. 3. For thy loving kindness is before mine eyes:
and I have walked in thy Truth p. 36 2 Corinthians. I. 20. For all the Promises of
God in him are yea, and in him Amen, unto the Glory of God by us p. 67 Psalm
LXXX. 17. and 18. former part. Let thy hand be upon the Man of thy right hand,
upon the Son of Man whom thou made strong for thy self. 18. So will not we go
back from thee, p. 95 Judges XVI. 20. last Clause. And he wist not that the
Lord was departed from him, p. 125 Acts V. 32. latter part. And so is also the
Holy Ghost, whom God has given to them that obey him, p. 156 Mark X. 26, 27.
And they were astonished out of measure, saying among themselves, Who then can
be saved? And Jesus looking upon them, says, With Men it is impossible, but not
with God: for with God all things are possible, p. 186 Psalm LXIX. 4. last
Clause. Then I restored that which I took not away p. 217 Gallat. IV. 6. And
because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your
Hearts, crying, Abba, Father, p. 247 Ephesians. IV. 7. But unto every one of us is
given Grace, according to the measure of the Gift of Christ, p. 279 Deuteronomy
XXXIV. 5. So Moses the Servant of the Lord died there in the Land of Moab,
according to the word of the Lord, p. 311 Hebr. VII. 25. Wherefore he is able
also to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever
lives to make Intercession for them p. 340.
SERMON I.
April 23. 1695.
MATTHEW XVI. xvii. And Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou
Simon Bar-jona: For Flesh and Blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my
Father which is in Heaven.


TO understand the occasion of these Words, we must look back as far as ver.
13. of this Chapter, where our Lord, having a mind to clear and confirm his
Disciples in the Knowledge of himself, makes way for it, by the proposing of
such Questions, as would draw forth suitable Answers. Accordingly

1. He asks them, what was the Opinion of others concerning him. Whom do Men
say, that I the Son of Man am? Christ usually styled himself thus, Son of Man,
not only as an Expression of his Humility, but to show that he was the promised
Seed, the Person foretold under that Character in the Old Testament, Psalm.
8.4.80.17. Dan. 7.13. And perhaps also to try the Faith of his Hearers, whether
they had an Eye to any more than his Humanity; therefore says he here, what
does that World which you Converse with, think of me, what kind of Person do
they take me to be? The Answer is, ver. 14. Some say, that thou art John the
Baptist, some Elias, and others Jeremias, or one of the Prophets. Here was a
diversity of Opinions about Christ, and none of them right, but all false and
fabulous, the Products of vain Imagination. That Christ was John the Baptist,
risen from the Dead, was Herod's Opinion, Chap. 14.2. That he was Elias, was the
Opinion of many among the Jews, who had a mistaken Notion that Elias must first
come before the Appearance of Christ, Chap. 17.10. And again another sort of
them thought, that he was the Soul of some eminent Deceased Prophet in a new
Body; which was one of the wild Conceits of that dark, erroneous Age.

But 2. Christ asks them, what was their own Opinion? ver. 15. Whom say ye,
that I am? Do you concur with this blind and ignorant World, or have you any
better Apprehensions of me different from theirs? It Is meet, that you who are
my little Flock, should give me some account of your particular Belief; and
it is also meet, that seeing you are to Preach me unto others, you should first
make some Confession of me your selves. The Answer to this, and the Person
answering, we have ver. 16. Which, because it has an immediate Coherence with
the Words now before us, ought to be distinctly considered. And

1. We may begin with the less considerable Part, the Person speaking, [Simon
Peter answered and said.] It Is probable, that he spoke as the Mouth of the
Apostles, in the Name of all, and that the rest agreed to this Testimony, and
believed as he said. Not that he had any real Precedence, or Superiority above
the rest (for then, why should they enquire, who was the greatest, etc. Chap.
18.1.) but because he was one of the first called to the Apostleship, and of
the more esteem among them, as he was of so long a standing; and because he was
of a very warm and forward Spirit, as is evident by many other Passages.

2. Here is the Thing spoken, which is the main Subject of our Consideration.
[Thou art Christ the Son of the Living God.] The same good Confession was made
once before by Peter, John 6.69. And now repeated, to evidence his firm
Establishment in this grand Article of Faith. In which our Lord is described
two Ways, both by his Office, and his Essence.

1. Christ is a Name of Office, of the same Signification with the Messiah, as
the Holy Ghost himself Interprets it. John 1.41. The anointed of the Lord; he
to whom the Prophets witness't, he that should come into the World; as John
11.27. He whose Work and Business was to be a Savior, not a Temporal, but an
Eternal one, a Savior from Sin and Wrath, from the drudgery of the Devil, and
the Prison of Hell.

2. The Son of God is a Name, which respects his Essence and Being; a Son, not
by Adoption and Grace, as the Baptist, and Elias, and Jeremy, and the other
Prophets were, but a Son by Nature; a Son whose Generation is ineffable, for he
is infinitely Equal with the Father; for he is true God, as well as Son of God;
the Father has that Title of the Living God, in Opposition to false Gods, Jer.
10.10. Acts 14.15. And the very same Title is likewise given to the Son, Heb.
3.12. Jesus is true Jehovah, and (according to the true Import of that Word) he
has Life in himself, as the Father has, John 5.26. Well; Christ's
Commendation of this Confession, is set down in the Text, Jesus answered and
said unto him, etc. Where we may take Notice of three Things.

1. The Name which Christ calls this Apostle by. Simon Bar-jonai, or Simon, Son
of Jona, as the Word signifies. Peter was the Name that Christ gave to him,
ver. 18. As God gave the Name of Israel to Jacob, Genesis 32.28. But here Christ
puts him in Mind of the meanness of his Extraction, and of what he was
originally; as he does again after his fall, no less than three Times over,
John 21.15, 16, 17 What change soever is made upon us by the Favor and Mercy
of God, it is good to reflect sometimes upon our Primitive Vileness and
Wretchedness, to look to the Rock whence we are hewn, and the hole of the Pit,
whence we are dug.

2. The Happy State which Christ pronounced him to be in. Blessed art thou.
Christ had Authority to pronounce Persons blessed, for he had Power to make
them so, Acts 3.26. God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless you.
He can really and effectually do it; what Palak said falsely of Balaam, is true
of Christ, The Man whom he blesses, is blessed ( Numb. 22.6.) If he blesses, we
shall be blessed for ever, as David said to God, 1 Chronicles. 17.27. Such is the
Blessedness which Christ speaks of here; both Perfect and Perpetual, without
Defect and without Decay.

3. The Reason assigned to back this comfortable Sentence, which refers to the
Way and Means of the discovery of that Truth which Peter had now confessed; and
this is laid down both Negatively and Affirmatively.

1. Negatively, For Flesh and Blood has not revealed it unto Thee. Flesh and
Blood are variously taken in Scripture.

1. Sometimes for the humane Nature, consisting of Soul and Body; so Heb. 2.14.

2. Sometimes for the natural Body, accompanied with its present Infirmities,
in Opposition to a spiritual glorified Body. So 1 Cor. 15.50.

3. Sometimes for humane Instruction, so Gal. 1.16. Paul says, that he
conferred not with Flesh and Blood, which is the same Thing, with not receiving
the Gospel which he Preached, of Man, ver. 12.

4. Sometimes for humane Opposition, so Ephesians. 6.12. We wrestle not with Flesh
and Blood, etc. i. e. we have not only to do with persecuting Men, but raging
Devils.

5. Sometimes for natural Reason; our own Judgments and Understanding. And this
I take to be the principal Sense of the Phrase here; q. d. Thou do not owe
this Revelation to thy self, or to any discerning Faculty in thee above other
Men.

2. Affirmatively, But my Father which is in Heaven. Four Things seem to be
intimated by this.

1. That there is a mysterious Order in all Divine Operations, according to
which God the Father is to be looked upon as the Fountain. The Father Works, and
the Son and Spirit Works conjunctly; there is no Inequality or Subordination
among the Persons, and yet we are led by the Gospel to Eye the first Person as
the spring of all. When our Lord speaks of sending the Comforter, it is from the
Father, John 15.26. And when the Spirit of the Son is sent forth into our
Hearts, God is said to do it, which is plainly meant of God the Father, Gal.
4.6.

2. That in all the Works of Grace toward lost Creatures, God acts as the
Father of Christ, Ephesians. 1.3. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual Blessings in him. Out of Christ
we can expect only the Curse of God, as a revenging Judge, but we can expect
nothing from him as a Father, in a way of Love and Mercy.

3. Acquaintance with the only begotten Son of God must flow from him that
begat him. No Man knows the Son, but the Father, as no Man knows the Father
but the Son, Mat. 11.27. Therefore they mutually manifest and declare each
other, which none else is capable of doing. Who should lay open the Secrets of
one Man to another, but himself? And who should reveal the glorious Persons in
the Godhead, but themselves? See 1 Cor. 2.11.

4. If therefore we look for Light, we must look upwards. As the Sun over our
Heads is the visible Cause of natural Illumination, so spiritual Illumination
is from an Infinite Being above the Sun. It Is one of the gracious Issues which
belong to our Father in Heaven. The dark Places of the Earth, unanimously say,
it is not in us. Every good and perfect Gift is from above, and comes down
from the Father of Lights. James 1.17. The Words thus opened, come to this
Point.

Obs. There is a certain Blessedness annexed to the Knowledge of those Truths,
which humane Reason does not discover, but God himself. Here 1. Show, That
there are some Truths necessary to be believed, which humane Reason neither
does nor can discover. 2. How such Truths are discovered by God. 3. What kind
of Knowledge is the Effect of this discovery. 4. Wherein lies the Blessedness
annexed to that Knowledge. 5. Why it is so. 6. Use.


1. To show, That there are some Truths necessary to be believed, which humane
Reason cannot discover. The peculiar Doctrines of the Gospel are as deep, as
the Commands of the Law are broad. But I will confine my self to the instance
mentioned in the Context, the Godhead of Jesus Christ. Every one is bound to
believe this, and every Man that calls himself a Christian, professes the
Belief of it; without such a Profession, his Christianity is void, and without
such a Belief, his Profession is vain. To take upon us the Christian Name, and
deny the Deity of Christ, is a lying to Men, and an outward acknowledgment of
this, where there is not an Hearty Consent, is lying to God. Now that this is
not discoverable by humane Reason, is no difficult Matter to prove. Let us
consider a little these two Things.

1. Reason could never have found out this Truth, of the Godhead of Christ. The
Existence of a God is a natural Impression upon the Minds of Men, and therefore
almost universally owned; but a Trinity of Persons in Unity of Essence, and
such an Order among the Persons, as makes Jesus Christ the Second
determinately, not the First or Third, is one of the great Mysteries of Faith.
By those common remainders of Light, which every Man has, that comes into the
World, every Age has brought forth some new Inventions and Discoveries of
Things that have been truly ingenious and useful in their kind, but still they
have been Things within the proper Compass and sphaere of Nature. Jesus Christ
would have been for ever the unknown God, if Reason had been left to make the
search. For,

1. How many parts of the World are there, utterly destitute of the Knowledge
of this Truth! Though the Nations of them that are saved walk in the Light of
it, yet there are several other Nations of Men that have natural Sagacity
enough, who sit in gross Darkness as to these Things. Multitudes, Multitudes,
in the Wilderness of the Heathen, whom God has not yet brought into the Valley
of Vision, that never heard whether there be a Christ or no. He that should
tell the uncalled Gentiles of such a Person, would be a Barbarian to them,
though he had learnt to speak in their own Tongue.

2. The Notions of some of the Learned Heathens which look a little this way,
were both borrowed and depraved. What was true in them, was not their own, but
learnt by Tradition from the Jews, who were instructed out of the Law; all the
rest was wretchedly corrupt, and dishonorable to Christ, and injurious to
Religion. Therefore the Apostle gives that Caution, Col. 2.8. Beware lest any
Man spoil you through Philosophy and vain Deceit, etc. And therefore he passes
that Censure, Romans 1.22. Professing themselves to be wise, they become Fools.

3. Those Signatures and Prints of this Truth which some fancy to be upon the
visible Creation, are too obscure to Collect so great a Doctrine from. There
may be some little dim resemblances of a Trinity in some of the Works of God,
but as they are too weak to confirm our Faith of it by, so we may safely
conclude, that no Man in the World, would ever have spelt a Trinity out of
them, if he had not heard of it before. But as Knowledge is easy to him that
understands, Prove. 14 6. So we fancy many Evidences of those Things, of which
we are convinced already.

2. Reason cannot find out this Truth to Perfection, though the Scripture has
brought it to Light; now it is revealed to us another Way, Reason is puzzled
with it. For

1. Things of an Infinite Nature must needs be Eternal Riddles to Finites Minds
God would not be God, if Men or Angels could comprehend him; he must cease to
be what he is, if we could fully know what he is. Uncreated Excellency and
Glory cannot be taken in to such shallow and scanty Thoughts. We can understand
the Relation which is between Creatures like our selves, we can explain it, and
give a satisfactory Account of it one to another; but how the Divine Persons,
our Everlasting Creators (as the Spirit sometimes expresses it) are mutually
related, is not to be perfectly unfolded. How the same Person should be Man and
yet God, how the same God should be a Son, and yet never begin to be, will be
matter of endless Admiration.

2. Reason Objects so many Difficulties against this Truth, of the Sonship of
Jesus Christ, as make us very slow in receiving it. The manner of it is so
inexplicable, that therefore the thing it self seems to be incredible; for
naturally we affect to be satisfied how every thing is, which we allow to be.
The carnal Mind is Enmity in this Case, and instead of promoting, opposes,
therefore the Apostle speaks of casting down Imaginations, or Reasonings
((...)) by the Ministry of the Gospel, 2 Cor. 10.5. As there is a natural
Popery, so a natural Socinianism, which exalts it self against the Knowledge of
God and Christ.

3. The Faith of these Things which is wrought in us, is not built upon the
Evidence of Reason, but the Authority of God. There is indeed a Reason of
Faith; it is reasonable that we should believe whatsoever God reveals, and it is
reasonable we should be assured, that this or that is his Revelation; so far
Reason is subservient to Faith in the general; but to believe a particular
Truth because it may be retionally demonstrated, is not the Faith of the
Gospel; we are to believe, because it is Divinely Revealed; this is Faith.
Otherwise in believing, we do not set our Seal to the Truth of God, but the
Reason of the Thing. So that if it were possible to bring other Proofs as well
as Scriptural of the Deity of our Lord Jesus (which it is not, for it is a
Matter of pure Revelation) yet the Faith of a Christian, as such, could not
rest upon them.

2. How are such Truths as these discovered to us by God. In short, it is the
special Work of the Spirit to reveal Christ to us, to direct our Minds into the
Knowledge of his Person, and to take of his Things and to spread them before us
with convincing Light. Eye has not seen, etc. The Things which God has
prepared, etc. But God has revealed them to us by his Spirit, for the Spirit
searches all Things, etc. 1 Cor. 2.9, 10. But as to the Way and Manner of this
Revelation of Divine Things by the Spirit of God, I would offer these
Particulars.

1. It is not in the neglect and disuse of outward Means. God will not
countenance our Contempt of what is required and appointed by himself. He has
commanded us privately to search the Scriptures which testify of Christ, and
to attend the Public Preaching of Christ in Worshipping Assemblies; and so in
and by the Word, as a fit vehicle of spiritual Light, he is pleased to convey
the Knowledge of himself, and of his Son. The Scriptures and Ordinances cannot
enlighten us without the Spirit, and ordinarily the Spirit does it not without
them, Ministers are styled Instructors in Christ, 1 Cor. 4.15. And they are so
by Virtue of the Institution of Christ, and the Spirit of Christ imploys and
make use of them to serve the Purposes and Ends of his own Grace.

Obj. Does not the Holy Ghost say, They shall not teach every Man his
Neighbor, and his Brother, saying, Know the Lord, etc. Heb. 8.11. And you need
not that any Man teach you, 1 John 2.27.

Ans. 1. It Is most evident, that these Places do not intend the advancing of
immediate Illumination, in defiance to instituted Means; the teaching of God
are not to be opposed to the teachings of Men; for even in the New Testament
the teachings of Men are often mentioned as subordinate to the teachings of
God. He that hears you, says Christ to his Apostles, hears me, Luke 10.16.
And though Men are Ambassadors for Christ, it is as though God did beseech you
by them, 2 Cor. 5.20.

2. The sense of these Places therefore must be, that the Effusion of the
Spirit under the Gospel would be so plentiful, not as to exclude humane
Teaching, or render it unnecessary, but so as vastly to exceed and outdo it,
that in comparison it should be as no Teaching; for Believers that are taught
of God, though they despise not external Ministrations, yet may say to their
Ministers, as the Samaritans to the Woman, John 4.42. Now we believe, not
because of thy saying, for we have heard him our selves, and know that this is
indeed the Christ, etc.

2. Though it be in the use of outward Means, yet it is an internal discovery;
there is an Application not only of Words to the Eye, or Ear, but of Conviction
to the Mind. God who commanded the Light to shine out of Darkness, has shined
in our Hearts, etc. 2 Cor. 4.6. So Paul says of himself, with respect to the
Time of his Conversion; When it pleased God to reveal his Son in me, Gal. 1.15,
16. This inward Revelation is of a perfectly different kind from the bare
revealing of Christ to us in the Letter of the Gospel, though it be the same
Christ, who is revealed both to us, and in us; for in the Work of Faith God
inspires the Soul with new Perceptions of Divine Objects, so that there is
communicated and imprinted another Sense and sight of those very Things, of
which we had formerly heard. The Spirit secretly suggests that which we never
knew, concerning that which we did slightly and superficially know. All the
great Transactions of God which accompany Salvation, are within us, unseen and
unknown to any but our selves. It Is the inward Man which is transformed and
renewed in Knowledge; and the Spirit who does all this for us, is said to be
dwelling in us.

3. The Spirit Works freely in making this discovery. Though we are tied to use
the Means, he is not obliged to work by them always, upon every one that does
enjoy them. He divides his Gifts and Graces to this and that Person, severally
as he will, 1 Cor. 12.11. He is compared to the Wind which blows where it
lists, John 3.8. It Is not in vain, that the Spirit and the Wind have the same
Name in the Original Languages of the Scriptures, and in that extraordinary
pouring out of the Spirit, Acts 2.2. There came a sound from Heaven, as of a
rushing mighty Wind, which filled the House; because as the Wind is not at the
command of any Creature, with reference to its moving or ceasing, blowing one
way or another, so the Spirit of God is a free Agent in all his Operations; he
is under no necessity of enlightening those whom he does enlighten; he does it
for one, and not for another, in the hearing of the same Word, to show that he
Acts with the highest Liberty, Mat. 13.11. It is given to you to know the
Mysteries, etc. but to them it is not given.

4. The Spirit Works effectually in these Discoveries. He makes dead Letters to
become lively Oracles. There is an Excellency of Power which goes along with
the Word, when he causes it to be received. According to his working, which
works in me mightily, Col. 1.29. The thick scales of Ignorance and Infidelity
(like those of the Leviathan, Job 41.17.) stick so close, that it must be a
strong Hand which removes and separates them from our Understandings. There
never was any saving Revelation of Gospel Truths, to any Sinner in the World
from the very beginning of it, without a Revelation of the Arm of the Lord,
Isa. 53.1. But wheresoever this Arm of God is revealed, the Report of the
Gospel is both understood and believed. This Omnipotent cause never fails of
producing its intended Effect. So Christ expressly says, John 6.45. Every Man
that has heard, and learned of the Father, comes unto me. Every Man without
one Exception.

5. The Spirit Works in this Case, suitably to the Nature of our Faculties; he
does not destroy or force them, but enlarge and improve them. He does not put
out the Eye of our Minds, but open it. Our foolish Hearts are naturally
darkened, and he does not impose upon them, but clear them. Every Believer can
testify this to the Honor of Christ, that his sight has not been taken away,
but restored; as he boldly said to the Pharisees, John 9.25. One thing I know,
that whereas I was blind, now I see. We were blind before, and thought that we
saw; now we really see, and know that we were blind. The Understanding of a Man
is the workmanship of God, and he does not overthrow that, when he makes us new
Creatures. The Demonstration of the Spirit is such as we cannot resist, and yet
it offers no Violence to us The Judgment is truly convinced, and we can say, We
know whom we have believed, 2 Timothy 1.12.

6. The Spirit in discovering of such Truths, Works alone, and by himself.
There is no Conjunction or proper Cooperation of second Causes with him. It is
here, as it was with those, in Mat 20.34. Jesus touched their Eyes, and
immediately they received sight. It Is the touch of Christ's Hand only which
recovers us from spiritual blindness. Nature contributes nothing to the
efficacious workings of Grace; and therefore it is observed, that many of the
Holy Women whom our Lord descended from, were barren, to show, that they
Conceived not by the strength of their own Womb, but by virtue of the Promise:
As Sarah, Rebeckah, Rachel, etc. So we are Light in the Lord, Ephesians. 5.8. But we
do not help toward the creating of it in our selves. We are merely Passive in
the first Reception of Divine Light, as the Eye of the Body is truly Passive in
the taking in of natural Light. All Light is brought into the Eye; so it
springs in from Heaven into the Mind, which is no better than a very Dungeon of
it self.

3. What kind of Knowledge is that which is the Effect and Fruit of this
discovery of saving Truth by God to the Soul. This is the rather to be insisted
on a little, because it may be of great Advantage to us in the Trial of our
State, that we may make a right Judgment of our selves, whether under the
Conduct of Flesh and Blood, or of the Father.

1. That Knowledge which proceeds from the special inward Revelation of Divine
Things, is a more assuring Knowledge than any other. The end of Luke's Writing
his Gospel to Theophilus, was, That he might know the certainty of those
things, wherein he had been instructed; Luke 1.4. This Effect the Spirit of God
has by his enlightening Operation beyond all humane Instructions whatsoever; we
are made to know the certainty of things, and more fully persuaded of the great
reality of what is spiritual. They are no longer doubtful, disputable Opinions
with us, but we come to such a firm Conclusion about them, that we can venture
our Eternity upon them. The Scripture hints this in many Places, John 17.8.
They have known surely that I came out from thee. So the Apostle speaks of the
Rich and full Assurance of Understanding, in the acknowledgment of the Mystery
of God, etc. Col. 2.2. And again, Our Gospel came not unto you in Word only,
but also in Power, and in the Holy Ghost, and in much Assurance; so that there
is no haesitation or wavering concerning it, 1 Thessalonians. 1.5.

2. That Knowledge which proceeds from such a Cause, is more affecting than any
other. The Heart is influenced to greater Love and Joy, and Admiration by what
it believes and knows. As the mind receives more solid Satisfaction with
respect to those Truths, so those Truths are more sweet and delightful, more
ravishing and transporting to the Soul. Paul speaks like a Man in an Ecstasy,
with more than ordinary Zeal and Fervor; Phil. 3.8. Yea, doubtless, I count
all things but loss for the excellency of the Knowledge of Christ Jesus my
Lord. His magnifying of the Excellency of this Knowledge, sprung from his deep
Sense of the Excellency of the Object: He saw so much worth in Christ, that he
would part with ten Thousand Worlds, if he had them, for his sake. The Doctrine
of Christ's Godhead, Incarnation, Satisfaction, etc. when they are only taken
into the Head as common Notions, are but dry Meat, but when they are impressed by
the Holy Ghost, we can feed upon them with Pleasure. The Things of God being so
revealed, that we taste the savor of them.

3. That Knowledge which is communicated by the Spirit, is always joined with
Experience. The Apprehensions which other Men have by common reasoning of
spiritual Things, are like those of a blind Man, when he hears a Discourse
concerning Light, which are very dark and imperfect in Comparison of his that
has Eyes to see the Sun. There is a vast difference between a Knowledge of
Christ by Report and Hearsay (as one calls it) and a Knowledge of Acquaintance,
which is gotten and improved by Communion with him. As the Queen of Sheba was
not told one half in her own Land of the greatness of Solomon's Wisdom, which
she afterward saw, and yet what she was told, seemed incredible to her, 2 Chronicles. 9.6. So Believers find so much in Christ, when they come to him, as does
not only justify the Report which Ministers gave to be very true, but
abundantly exceed it. We cannot tell you, what they feel whom Christ is formed
in, and who live every Day by the Faith of him. Where there is no spiritual
Sense, the Mind is yet carnal.

4. That Knowledge which the Spirit produces, does always issue in Obedience.
The Knowledge which Men attain unto by any other Ways, is barren and
unprofitable; as it does not reach the Heart, so it is of no use in the
ordering of the Conversation. But saving Knowledge governs the Life, and
regulates the Practice; so as clearly to exemplify that Connection which God
has made between the Truths to be believed, and to be performed. When Paul
prays for his Colossians, That they might be filled with the Knowledge of God's
Will, in all Wisdom and spiritual Understanding, he does not stop there, but
shows whither this tends, That ye might walk worthy of the Lord unto all
pleasing, etc. Col. 1.9, 10. He that is truly nourisht up in the words of Faith
and good Doctrine will evidence it by fruitfulness in good Works, 1 John 2.3.
Hereby we do know that we know him (Jesus Christ) if we keep his Commandments.
They have not learned Christ as they ought, that do not live to him; for if we
be acquainted with his Person, we shall submit to his Rule.

SERMON II.
May 7. 1695.
MATTHEW XVI. xvii. And Jesus answered and said unto him, Blessed art thou
Simon Bar-jona: For Flesh and Blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my
Father which is in Heaven.


IV. WHerein lies the Blessedness which is annexed to this kind of Knowledge?
Some bless themselves, without Reason, too many against Scripture bless
themselves, when they hear the Words of God's Curse, though yet without Christ,
who can only redeem them from that Curse; thousands of presuming Sinners call
themselves happy, when they are almost in the very depths of Misery, having but
a short step, the thin Partition of an earthly House, betwixt them and Hell;
they think their Condition to be safe and good, and applaud and please
themselves in it as such, when it is as dangerous and as bad, as it can be, on
this side of Everlasting Destruction. But however mistaken and deceived such
Men are, we know that Christ is true, and what says he here? Blessed art thou
Simon, etc. for my Father has revealed this unto thee, which Flesh and Blood
has not, q. d. Thou art infallibly blessed upon this account, this is an
undoubted Evidence and means of thy being so. Where then is the blessedness
which the Text speaks of? What does it consist in, and how does it appear?

1. It Is a blessed discovery which God makes, and a blessed Knowledge, which it
produces, because it is always accompanied with pardoning Grace. If there be a
blessed Man in the World, without Controversy it is the pardoned Sinner.
Afflictions may remain, without injuring our blessedness, so long as Sin does
not remain, which is the only Thing, that can separate from the Love of Christ,
and how can this separate, when God has put it away, and removed it from us?
Who will not say, Amen therefore to what David says, Psalm 32.1. Blessed is the
Man whose Transgression is forgiven, etc. Sin lays the Foundation of the
Creatures Misery, consequently in the forgiveness of Sin, the Foundation of our
Misery is destroyed. Now this is always done, where Jesus Christ is savingly
made known. This is plain, Heb. 10.16, 17. This is the Covenant which I will
make with them, etc. I will put my Laws into their Hearts, and in their Minds
will I write them; and (immediately it follows) Their Sins and Iniquities will
I remember no more. When there is this promised writing within us, we may be
sure, there is a blotting out of the handwriting against us. Where Sin is
uncovered, the Heart is hid from Understanding; but where the sealed Book of
Gospel-Mystery is open d, it is past all question that the Debt-book is crossed.

2. It Is always attended with a perfect justifying Righteousness. This is
absolutely necessary, in order to blessedness; for there must be a Restitution
of our lost Title, before there can be a restoring to our forfeited
Inheritance. It Is not possible that any one should reign in Life, that does not
receive of this Gift by Jesus Christ, Romans 5.17, 18, 21. On the other hand
blessedness is certainly entailed hereupon; Chap. 4.6. Even as David describes
the blessedness of the Man to whom God imputes Righteousness without Works.
Nothing can be more manifest, than that the Justification of a Sinner is by the
Imputation of the Obedience of Christ, without any respect to Works performed
by the Sinner himself, and that the Sinner so justified, is truly blessed. Now
it is as manifest, that every one who is Divinely and Spiritually illuminated,
is thus blessed. God never gave the Armor of Light to one Soul, but what he
also clothed with this Robe of Righteousness. As the same Soul is always both
blind and naked, so the Eye Salve and the white Raiment, which Christ Counsels
to buy of him, go together, Rev. 3.17, 18. Indeed we are justified by the
Knowledge of Christ instrumentally, Isa. 53.11. For Faith which applies his
Righteousness includes such a Knowledge.

3. It has always the Privilege of Adoption going along with it. All
blessedness is enclosed within the Family of God; strangers have nothing of it,
but Children only. Every Man and Woman in the World, is a most wretched undone
Creature, as He and She is a Son and Daughter of Adam; there can be no relief
for us, but by the Contracting of a new Relation; they which be of Faith, are
blessed with faithful Abrabam; Gal. 3.9. How blessed? Ye are all the Children
of God by Faith in Christ Jesus, ver. 26. Here comes in the recovery of our
Blessedness, by being made the Children of God, adopted into the Household of
Faith. Now, to whom does Christ give Power to become the Sons of God, but to as
many as receive him? John 1.12. and who are they that receive Christ, but they
that are brought by God to know him? For the World that received him not, knew
him not, ver. 10, 11. The Devil blinds the minds of them that believe not, 2
Cor. 4.4. Natural blindness is the Cause of your Unbelief, as Judicial blindess
is the Consequent. Wherever there is the sound Knowledge of Christ, there will
be holy Trust in him, and where this is, there is honorable Sonship. Every
Child of Light is a Child of God; if he has visited you with the Dayspring,
you may boldly call him Father.

4. Divine Purity is chained to this blessed discovery. The filth of Sin makes
the Soul miserable, as well as the guilt of it. The Remnants of Corruption made
Paul cry out of his being a wretched Man, Romans 7.24. They make us wretched in
Part, as long as we are here, though called to be Saints; but the Sinner who
continues all over polluted, is only wretched. Darkness and defilement are
inseparable; while Men are groping in their natural State, they wallow in the
Mire. But Purity of Heart gives a claim to blessedness, Mat. 5.8. And wherever
God shines into the Mind, he purisies the Heart. The Sun of Righteousness has
cleansing, as well as healing in his Wings. It Is an amazing Consideration, what
dirt is carried out of the Soul, when Light springs into it. Our Lord's Prayer
speaks home to this Purpose, John 17.17. Sanctify them through thy Truth, etc.
Error, as well as Ignorance is a Minister of Sin; but every Truth in Jesus
tends to sanctify, and is actually serviceable in the Sanctification of those
to whom it is revealed. Beholding the Glory of the Lord, changes us into his
spotless Image, 2 Cor. 3.18. The Information which is given concerning Christ,
has a transforming influence upon those that are Christ's.

5. Spiritual Liberty follows this blessed discovery. How much of the Happiness
of humane Life is generally esteemed to consist in outward Liberty! How irksome
is Confinement and Restraint to all! How is a poor Vassal and Slave looked upon,
with a disdainful Eye by the most, with a compassionate Eye by the best! How do
Men hug themselves in the little Immunities and Freedoms of this World? But
what a blessed Thing is it (how much more blessed) to be rescued from the
servitude of the Devil, and delivered from the bondage of Corruption! The
darkness of a sinful State has its Chains, as well as the darkness of Hell, 2
Pet. 2.4. When Sampson's Eyes were put out, he was bound with Fetters of Brass,
Judge. 16.21. So it is with every unenlightened Sinner; he is under the
Arbitrary command of Lust, and taken Captive by Satan at his Will; the Powers
of darkness are his Keepers, and he has no way of escape out of their Hands.
But Light and Liberty come together by Christ, deliverance to the Captives, and
recovering of sight to the Blind, Luke 4.18. When he opens our Eyes, he opens
our Prisons; John 8.32. You shall know the Truth, and the Truth shall make you
free.

6. This kind of Knowledge, flowing from the special discoveries which God
makes to the Soul, is no less than Eternal Life; which is the sum, the
complement, the top-stone of a Creatures blessedness. We cannot be more blessed
than this makes us. To lay hold upon Eternal Life, is our utmost aim, and our
highest Attainment. Now, this is Life Eternal to know God, and Jesus Christ
whom he has sent, John 17.3. It was said of old, by those that had visible
Divine Appearances, We shall surely dye, because we have seen God, Judge. 13.22.
On the contrary, where these inward Manifestations are, we may cry out, we
shall surely Live, because we have seen God in the Face of Christ. He that eats
of this Tree of Knowledge, lives for ever, the present Fruit of this Tree, is
the first Fruits of Heaven; it is Eternal Life in the Seed, and in the Blossom;
it is the City of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem coming down from God
into the Soul. When the Understanding is opened to take in the Things of
Christ, it is a true opening of the Heavens to us. Ephesians. 1.17, 18. That the God
of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of Glory, may give unto you the Spirit of
Wisdom and Revelation, in the Knowledge of him, etc. That you may know what is
the hope of his Calling, and what the Riches of the Glory of his Inheritance in
the Saints.

V. Why is blessedness annexed to such Knowledge as this? Why is it limited to
the Father's revealing of those Things, which Flesh and Blood cannot, and more
particularly this Truth of the Godhead; which is not discoverable by Reason,
but by him alone.

1. Blessedness is not attainable by the mere Principles of natural Religion,
however, clearly known, and firmly believed. They that go no further than
Nature will carry them, must needs come short of the Glory of God. The
Knowledge of natural Truths, is as insufficient as the performance of Moral
Duties; and supernatural Instruction is as indispensibly needful, as
Evangelical Obedience. The World is as unable to know God to any Purpose by
their own Wisdom, as to serve him with Acceptance by their own Strength, 1 Cor.
1.21. The Light of Nature may leave Men without excuse, but yet it leaves them
also, without the effectual Remedy; it discovers so much as will aggravate
Men's Ruin, but not so much as will procure their Relief. There must be the
Faith of Things above Reason, for no other Faith will save. Reason, as now
maimed and corrupted, is a fallen Star, which instead of leading unto Christ,
will plunge the Souls, that are under his Conduct, into outer Darkness. If a
Man had all the Knowledge which it is possible for Flesh and Blood to arrive to,
he would be as far from the Kingdom of God, as the most illiterate Person in
the World. It Is Light from Heaven which prevents our falling into the Fire of
Hell. If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost, 2 Cor. 4.3. The
Understanding of all other Mysteries will avail us nothing, if we be ignorant
of this.

2. The Godhead of Jesus Christ is an Article of peculiar importance to the
Everlasting welfare of Souls. It Is a fundamental Truth, and they that would
subvert our Faith in this particular, seem to say as those Edomites did, in
Jerusalem's desolating Day, Raze it, raze it to the Foundvtion thereof, Psalm
137.7. It Is the Cornerstone in our Religion, upon which the Building stands.
It was the very first Doctrine that we hear of from the Mouth of Paul after his
Conversion, Acts 9.20. Straightway he Preached Christ in the Synagogues, that
he is the Son of God. The whole New Testament Church is obliged to have a
special regard to this Confession of Peter, in the Words before the Text; for
in the Words immediately following the Text, our Lord says, Upon this Rock will
I Build my Church, ver. 18. It is therefore a most important Article; but this
will further appear, if we consider these Four Things.

1. We can have no hope of Salvation, but by Christ, as the Son of the Living
God. If he were but a Man, we might justly put the Question, How shall this Man
save us? How can Israel be saved with an Everlasting Salvation, but in the
Lord? in Jehovah, Isa. 45.17. How is it true, that he would save them by the
Lord their God, Hos. 1.7. If there be not Salvation in any other, but Christ,
he therefore must be the Lord our God.

2. We can have no access to God, or Communion with him, but by a Mediator, who
is God. How should one Creature introduce another into the Presence of such a
terrible Majesty, who is at an infinite distance from all Creatures? The
Fellowship which we have with the Father, is through the Son; and therefore the
Holy Ghost is pleased to link the greatest intimacy with God, to a sincere
Confession of the Deity of Christ, 1 John 4.15.

3. We can look for no Victory over the Devil, if we do not look to Christ as
God. How is the Accuser of the Brethren cast down, but by the coming of the
Kingdom of our God, and the Power of his Christ? Rev. 12.10. He must be the
Christ of God, who has Power enough to subdue and conquer such an Adversary.
It Is the Lord that must rebuke him, a created Angel cannot, Jude 9.

4. The World it self will be too hard for us, if we are not helped to encounter
it by Christ as God, 1 John 5.5. Who is he that overcomes the World, but he
that believes that Jesus is the Son of God? It Is in the Strength of this Faith
that we must make successful Opposition; we are Conquerors by Virtue of his
Conquest, John 16.33. And this Conquest supposes his Godhead; for a mere Man is
as incapable of overcoming the World, as of invading Heaven.

There is an Objection lying against all this, in the very Chapter, where the
Text is; ver. 20. If the Knowledge and Belief of what Peter had now confessed
be so essential to Blessedness, why should Christ charge his Disciples, at the
very close of this Discourse, That they should tell no Man that Jesus was the
Christ? Was he unwilling that the necessary means of Salvation should be
afforded to that Age? Was he resolved to Conceal that from them, the
Concealment whereof must needs be Mortal?

Ans. 1. That unbelieving Generation were willingly, yea, wilfully Ignorant,
and therefore justly given up to be so, Mat. 13.13. Therefore spoke Jesus to
them in Parables, because they seeing, see not, and hearing, they hear not,
etc. They shut their Eyes, stopped their Ears, put away the Word from them, and
therefore why should it be offered or proposed to them?

2. The personal Doctrine and Miracles of Christ were sufficient to have
convinced them of this Truth, if they had given heed to them; therefore why
should the Apostles Preach the same thing? He spoke as never Man spoke; John
7.46. He did the Works, which no Man ever did, Chap. 15.14. So that in Effect
he told them himself, but they would not believe.

3. There might be a prudential Reason in it; Christ would not by such a
Publication hasten his own Death. Some think on the contrary, he forbad their
telling of this, that it might not hinder his Death; Because if they had known,
they would not have Crucified, etc. 1 Cor. 2.8. But this seems much the more
probable Reason; he would not draw upon him the Odium and Malice of the Jews
before the Time; so Luke 9.21, 22. He straightly commanded them to t ll no Man
that thing; saying, the Son of Man must suffer many Things, etc. q. d. This
will provoke their Rage against me, which I must and will undergo, when my hour
comes, but till then I design to avoid it. The Jews had a bloody Intention in
urging him to tell them plainly, If he was the Christ, John 10.24. That they
might accuse him of Treason and Blasphemy; and therefore he would answer them
as they desired; but when his Time was come, he owned this in express Terms to
the High Priest, Mat. 26.63, 64. I adjure thee by the Living God, that thou
tells us, etc. Jesus says unto him, Thou have said.

4. The great Proof of his Godhead was yet to come; viz. his Resurrection; so
the Apostles were to defer their Declaration of this Truth, till they could
back it with this Argument, Romans 1.4. He was declared to be the Son of God with
Power, according to the Spirit of Holiness, by the Resurrection from the Dead.
By the Spirit of Holiness here, is to be understood, his Divine Nature, which
is put in Opposition to the Flesh, his humane Nature, ver. 3. And the like
Opposition we meet with, 1 Timothy 3.16. 1 Pet. 3.18. Now this Deity of Christ was
most powerfully demonstrated by his rising from the Dead; for he raised and
revived himself, which a Creature could not do; he had Power to take his Life
again, after he had laid it down, which no Creature ever had, John 10.18. And
it was not possible that he should be held by the Bands of Death, of which
there is possibility enough as to any Creature, Acts 2.24.

VI. Use. This Doctrine will hint many things which are proper both for our
Learning, and Practice.

1. There are several Things which we have to Learn from hence. As 1. The
Contemners of Divine Revelation, are miserable forsakers of their own Mercies.
He that refuses Instruction, despises his own Soul, Prove. 15.32. This is most
true, of such as turn their backs with scorn upon the Gospel of Christ; and
such a sort of Men, there are at this Day in the World, that bid insolent
defiance to all revealed Religion. The Disciples at Antioch chose to be called
Christians, in Honor of their Lord, on whom they believed, but England and
London has bred a race of Monsters, that affect the differencing Name of
Deists. What will the end of such be? What can it be but Destruction, when
Faith founded on the Scripture, is the only saving Wisdom? 2 Timothy 3.15. From a
Child thou have known the Holy Scripture, which are able to, etc.

2. It ought to cause no Prejudice against real Christianity, that the
celebrated Men of Learning and Reason embrace it not. The Case is clear; our
heavenly Father reveals these Things to all that know them, and he thinks sit
to hide them from such, Mat. 11.25, 26. I thank thee, Oh Father, etc. Because
thou have hid these Things from the Wise and Prudent, and have revealed them
unto Babes; Even so, Father, for so it seemed good, etc. It Is no wonder
therefore that not many wise Men after the Flesh are called, 1 Cor 1.26. No
wonder that there are so few, who will in any wise believe, what the Gospel
declares; the Doctrine of Regeneration was mysterious nousense (as one says) to
Nicodemus, an eminent Pharisee, a Ruler of the Jews, a Master in Israel, so are
other Things of the like kind to other Men.

3. It is no recommending Character of any Doctrine, that it is pleasing and
suitable to Flesh and Blood. We have Reason to be Jealous that it is no
spiritual Truth, which the natural Man very readily receives. The Doctrines
which are promoted and countenanced by Flesh and Blood, have the suspicious
Mark upon them of accursed Doctrines. It Is no Argument why I should give Credit
to this or that Opinion, because it is grateful to Nature, but rather an
Argument against it. The swift progress of Error is owing very much to its
smooth Concurrence with the Stream of Nature. Nature leads all Men to build
upon self; but Christ will profit that Man nothing, who expects to profit by
any thing besides him. It Is ill judging after the Flesh; John 8.15. They judge
best and most wisely, that judge contrary to it.

4. Visible and nominal Christians may sit in darkness and the shadow of Death,
as well as perfect Pagans. It Is a Light within us (in a sober, not
Enthusiastic Sense) which is the true Light of Life. Men may live as much upon
the Borders of Hell, where the Light outwardly shines, as where it shines not.
The generality of the People in Judea received no more good by the Ministry of
Christ, than they in the remotest Parts of the World, that never had it, John
1.5. The Light shines in darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not. The
real Mystery of the Gospel may be as little understood by Multitudes of Persons
here, as it is in the wildest Places of America.

5. Christians are obliged to know, as well as do, more than others As we must
do all the good that other Men do, and more, so we must know all the
considerable Truths, that they know, and more. It Is said of Heathens, Romans
1.19. That which may be known of God, is manifest in them, for God has showed
it unto them. But there is a great deal more than this to be known by those
that Name the Name of Christ; or else, woe unto them. Thou believe that there
is one God, thou do well; but this is not enough. Do thou believe on the
Son of God? This is required, and this was first ask of that Excommunicate
Person by Christ, John 9.35. Unless thou know and believe more than all
the Men in the World can teach thee, or learn of themselves, thou art condemned
already.

6. It is both a fruitless and a needless Thing to intrude into what we have
not seen; as Persons that are vainly pufft up by their fleshly Minds, Col.
2.18. It becomes us to be fully satisfied in what God is pleased to reveal or
hide, and to pry no further, than Scripture Light Points out our way. This
should stop the curiosity of our enquiring Minds, that we may not demand any
account of Things, but what God sees good to give us. There is blessedness tied
to his discoveries, but we make our selves oftentimes more unhappy by our own.
He that increases Prophetical Knowledge particularly, increases Sorrow, 2
Kings 8.11, 12. The Man of God wept; and Hazael said, why, etc.

2. There are some Things which this does very fitly put us upon the Practice.
As

1. It speaks to Sinners, and shows what they should do.

1. See your Wretchedness. You cannot be blessed, till the Father gives you a
Revelation of his Son by his Spirit. Without this Knowledge, the Soul cannot be
good; all that perish are destroyed for lack of it. The external Form of
Knowledge which you have, will be insignificant to you. The Devils knew that he
was Christ, and proclaimed him to be the Son of God; but Christ rebuked them
and would not receive any Testimony from them; it was unacceptable to him, and
unserviceable to themselves, Luke 4.41. And an heartless Confession out of the
Mouth of an Hypocrite, is as bad as from the Mouth of a Devil.

2. Be earnest with God for the Cure of your Blindness. None can do it, but he;
he can and will, if you unfeignedly beg it of him. The Promise lies ready for
you to Plead, and he is ready to perform it, Prove. 2.3, 4, 5. If thou cryest
after Knowledge, and liftest up thy Voice for Understanding, etc. Then shall
thou understand the Fear of the Lord, and find the Knowledge of thy God. You
may ask saving Wisdom, so as not to be denied; if you ask it as Persons
sensible, that your Life is bound up in this Request, and if you ask it for
Christ's sake; for it was his Errand and End in coming into the World, That
they which see not, might see, John 9.39.

2. This speaks to Believers, and shows what they have to do.

2. Lift up your Heads and Hearts this Day with thankfulness to Heaven. This
good News to those that have heard Christ, and been taught by him, loudly calls
them to give Glory to God in the highest, Psalm 118.27. God is the Lord, who
has showed us Light (even lesus Christ who isspoken of, ver. 22. The great
Light of the World) bind the Sacrifice with Cords, etc. in Judah is God known,
Psalm 76.1. Judah signifies Praise; what Hearts should they have to Praise God,
that have Understandings given them to know him; If God has conferred this
Blessedness upon you, what a rebounding of Blessing should there be to him.

2. Value no Knowledge in Comparison of this. Remember the Words of Paul, 1
Cor. 2.2. This exceeds all other Knowledge in many respects, especially because
it discriminates the Friends of God from Enemies. It Is a distinguishing
Privilege allowed to none, but the beloved of the Lord. Though you have no
Reason to boast your selves against others, whom God makes you to differ from,
yet you have abundant Reason to prefer and magnify your own Lot. Mat. 13.15,
16. This People's Heart is waxed gross, and their Ears are dull, and their Eyes
closed, etc. But blessed are your Eyes for they see, etc.

3. Walk as Children of Light. Necessity is laid upon them, That are Light in
the Lord, to do so, Ephesians. 5.8. Give no occasion by disorderly steps, for others
to stumble and fall. As is said in another Case, Romans 14.16. Let not your good
be evil spoken of. Expose not the Doctrine of Christ to reproach by any unholy
Acts, as if it were not a Doctrine according to Godliness. Let all your
Observers be witnesses, that a renewed Mind will produce a reformed
Conversation. Else you will Cloud your own Light, and thicken the Darkness of
other Men.

4. Make Conscience of Praying for those whom you usually hear. Petition the
King on the behalf of his Ambassadors; and the more they have of his Presence,
the more are you like to get by their Labors. The more they have of the
guidance of the Spirit of Truth, the more useful will their Teachings be to
you. The ablest Minister of the New Testament is insufficient to think any
thing of himself, 2 Cor. 3.5, 6. Unwearied Studies will bring forth nothing but
wind without a Divine Influence. Pray therefore, that they may have Moses's
Advantage, of God's being with their Mouth, and Teaching them what they should
say, Exodus 4.12.

5. Depend still upon God for continued discoveries. Follow on the know the
Lord, and breath after further views of him. God has not yet showed you all
that he intends. The Work of Illumination is yet going on; The same anointing,
which has taught you, teaches you of all Things, 1 John 2.27. There are still
the deep Things of God, which the Spirit must search out for you. Holy David,
long after his first enlightening, beseeches God to Open his Eyes, that he
might behold wondrous things out of his Law, Psalm 119.18. There are always
fresh Wonders to be seen, which a fresh Unction from God must help us to
discern.

6. Look for the perfecting of these discoveries in a State of Glory. Say to
God, as the same David did, Psalm 36.9. In thy Light shall we see Light. It Is
but a kind of dim Twilight comparatively, which we enjoy here in this World;
while we are hid in this Prisonhouse, we can see but little; but our Fathers
House above, is full of Light; Then shall the Righteous shine forth as the Sun,
and Mat. 13.43. If the Day Star be irs'n in your Hearts, live in the pleasant
and cheerful Expectation of perfect Day. For we can ascend but a little way
into the Mysteries of the Kingdom, as long as we are upon the Footstool; and
we shall know vastly and unconceivably more in the first Moment after we come
to Heaven, then we are capable of attaining here throughout all our Days.

SERMON III.
July 16. 1695.
PSLAM XXVI. iii. For thy Loving Kindness is before mine Eyes: And I have
walked in thy Truth.


THE Time of composing this Psalm, seems to be, before David's coming to the
Kingdom, but after God had given him the right of Succession, when he was
maliciously persecuted by Saul, and as unjustly defamed by his flattering
Courtiers. And this was the probable occasion of his solemn Appeal here to the
Judgment of God, who knew not only the Righteousness of his Cause in this
particular Point, but also of his general Course. There are various Expressions
to this Purpose, ver. 1, 2. But the Reason and Ground of this Confidence, is
set forth in the Words of the Text; For thy Loving Kindness is before mine
Eyes, etc.

Here are Four Things which need a little Explication.

1. What we are to understand by the Loving Kindness of God? The Word
signifies, the Benignity, Mercy, Grace of God, and may be indisserently
rendered by any of these Terms, which do all amount to the same Thing. But

1. This Loving Kindness may be taken either for an essential Perfection in
God, or some external Dispensation of good from God; that which belongs to his
Nature, or that which he exercises toward his Creatures. One is to be looked
upon as the Principle, and the other as the Product; one as the Original Cause
and Spring, the other as the Effect which Streams and Issues from it. In the
former Sense, it may be understood, Psalm 51.1. and in the latter Sense, Psalm
42.8. And in both Senses here in this Place.

2. The Loving Kindness of God displays and exerts it self, in many Acts of
Providence, but most especially in Christ, and the vouchsafement of spiritual
and eternal Blessings by him. Several of God's dealings with us in Temporals,
are Instances and Tokens of his Favor; and if he were not as he is said to be,
Joel 2.13. Of great Kindness, he would deal much other wise even in those
Things; but the Kindness and Love of God (that which is most eminently and
distinguishingly so) appears in the Redeemer, Tit. 3.4. All the rest is as
nothing to this, and therefore this is chiefly understood here.

3. The Loving Kindness of God may be considered as respecting others, or our
selves; as the Elect of God in general are the Objects of it, or as he has
made us so more particularly. Now though it is true, that the Favor which God
bears to his People, deserves our notice and remembrance, yet we are mosT apt
to be affected with that which he shows to us. Paul speaks of Christ's loving
his Church, Ephesians. 5.25. But he Triumphs in Christ's loving him, Gal. 2.20. So
that when David says here, Thy Loving Kindness, he means, Thy Loving Kindness
to me.

2. What it is for God's Loving Kindness to be before our Eyes? It Is a way of
Expression which this Holy Man after God's Heart uses elsewhere; Psalm 16.8. I
have set the Lord always before me. And it implies these Four Things in it.

1. To have it before our Eyes, is duly to apprehend it. So David speaks of
Understanding the Loving Kindness of the Lord, Psalm 107. ult. If we have no
Knowledge of it, it can have no Influence upon us; and that which is hid from
our Eyes, in the Scripture style, we are said not to know, Luke 19.42.

2. To believe it, and be persuaded of it. Insidelity makes Men hide their
Faces from Christ, Isa. 53.3. They that give no Credit to him, and have no
Dependence on him, do not Care so much as to look toward him. But where Faith
is exercised, the Eye is fixed; and therefore Believing is very often expressed
in the New Testament by Seeing, John 8.56. Heb. 11.13.

3. To Esteem and Prize it. As the casting of the Word behind us, Psalm 50.17.
is an evidence of Contempt, so the keeping of our Eyes upon any Object,
intimates the value which we have for it. And indeed, who can take a view of
the height, and depth, and length, and breadth, those unmeasurable Dimensions,
of the Love of Christ, Ephesians. 3.18, 19. Without having his Heart raised to an
Holy Admiration? so as to cry out with David, How excellent is thy Loving
Kindness, Oh God! Psalm 36.7.

4. To consider it, and be seriously mindful of it. As the Fear of God being
before our Faces, Exodus, 20, 20. Is to stand in actual awe of him, and to have
the dread of his Majesty upon us; so to have the Love of God in our Eye, is to
have it impressed upon our Minds, to roll it in our Thoughts, and make it the
Matter of our frequent Meditation. As the Spouse says to Christ, We will
remember thy Love, etc. Song 1.4.

3. What is meant by God's Truth here? It is capable of a Threefold Sense.

1. The Truth of God may import his immutable faithfulness. So Psalm 89.49
91.4. And many other Places. God is a God of Truth, and all creatures compared
with him, are a Lie.

2. His Truth may signify his Word; which is called the Truth, Psalm 119.142.
And his Truth, John 17.17. As being given by his Inspiration, and containing in
it the Counsel of his Will.

3. His Truth may denote the Sincerity of those that belong to him. This,
though inhaerent in us, and acted by us, and therefore styled our Integrity,
Prove. 20.7. And our Uprightness, Isa. 57.2. Yet is the Truth of God, as it is
enjoined by him, Psalm 51.6. And implanted by him also; for all Truth is an
Emanation from him, and he is the fountain of it, as the Devil is the Father of
Lies.

4. What is it to walk in his Truth?

1. To Place our firm Reliance on the faithfulness of God. This may be taken in
as Part of the Sense; the trather because the Psalmist makes that Profession,
ver. 1. I have trusted in the Lord; and because Experience of God's Kindness
does embolden our Hope in his Truth; for indeed we can take no Comfort in the
faithfulness of God, except we have some Proofs of his Love. His Kindness and
Truth often go together, but his Kindness is put first, 2 Samuel 2.6. Psalm
40.10, 11. Now, as the Phrase of walking in God's Name is used by the Holy
Ghost, Micah 4.5. So his Truth being a Part of his Name, we may be said to walk
in that, when we confide in it.

2. To attend strictly to the Word of God; both as to the Doctrinal and
Practical Parts of it.

1. As to the Doctrinal Parts of the Word, which are the Truths, that the
Spirit leads into, John 16.13. Not barely into the Form of it, which is all
that Hypocrites have, Romans 2.20. But into the rooted Possession. Hence this
Truth is said to dwell in Believers, and be with them for ever, 2 John 2. So
that they shall not be turned aside, nor led away by contrary Errors.

2. As to the Practical Parts of the Word, which are the Rule of Life, and
called the way of Truth, Psalm. 119.30. And the Truth which is after Godliness,
Tit. 1.1. For all Sin is countenanced by falsehood. This is the Truth which must
be obeyed, Gal. 3.1. 1 Pet. 1.22. And which we are required to do, 1 John 1.6.
For it is as necessary to guide our Practice by Divine Commands, as to steer our
Judgments by Divine Revelation.

3. To be upright in our Way, in Opposition to that walking in craftiness, 2
Cor. 4.2. Which is the celebrated Policy of the Children of this World. This
seems to be aimed at by David here, because in the very next Words, ver. 4. He
protests against going in with Dissemblers. The Curse that God has pronounced
against Deceiver, should make us afraid of being tinctured with the Leaven of
Hypocrisy and Guile. Our walk is not as it should be, if the Law of Truth do
not govern our whole Conversation, as Persons whose Loins are girt about with
it, Ephesians. 6.14.

4. Perseverance in this Course, must also be added to fill up the Sense. How
is it a walking in the Truth, if it be only taking a step, or two, and not a
continued Motion? What less can it include, than a diligent Care to approve all
our Ways to God to the very End of our Lives? If we do not this, we imitate the
Devil, who abode not in the Truth, though he stood in it once, John 8.44. For
though the greatest Saints are too often guilty of sinful waverings and
startings in their walk with God, yet the least of them is never left finally
to depart from him, or to quit the Road of Duty, The Words thus opened, afford
us this Point to be insisted on.

Obs. A deep and constant Sense of the Love of God, does most powerfully engage
and quicken to steady and sincere Obedience. The Two Parts of this verse are to
be viewed in their Connection, and then we shall see how clearly this Results
from the whole. [Thy Loving Kindness is before mine Eyes] there is the
Antecedent; [And I have walked in thy Truth;] there is the Consequent. Here, I.
Lay down some Propositions for the explaining of this Doctrine. II. Offer some
Arguments for the Proof of it. III. Apply it.


I. To lay down some Propositions for the explaining of this Point.

1. All that pretend to an Interest in the Love of God, have not their Hearts
engaged to suitable Obedience, for by many this is falsely pretended. The Church
of Ephesus whom Christ wrote unto, Tried them which said they were Apostles,
and were not, and found them Liars, Rev. 2.2. So Multitudes that say, they are
the Friends and Favorites of God, really are not, but by their own Practices
discover themselves Liars. If they do not walk in God's Truth, it is most
certain that they have not his Loving Kindness before their Eyes. Wile carnal
Wretches too often delude themselves in this Case, and the Delusion is very
strong, though it be so gross and palpable. If any Man say, that he has found
Grace in the sight of God, who makes little or no Conscience of Duty to God, we
must say, as John does on a like occasion, The Truth is not in him, 1 John 2.4.
To say that I shall have Peace, though I have no regard to Holiness, and that
God will make me up among his brightest Jewels, tho I lie wallowing in the Mire
still, is impudently to give the Lie to the whole Bible, as if we kenew the
Mind of Christ better than himself. Such Imaginations as these are Oils that
break the Head, and sweetened Draughts that cast in to a dead sleep. Sinners
that Prophecy such smooth Things to themselves, Prophecy pernicious Deceits.
The Visions of their own Hearts will end in outer Darkness. They boast that God
is well pleased in them, though they take no delight in serving of him; and
they rejoice in this boasting; but their Foundation is in the Sand; they are
not true Men, but counterfeits.

2. All have not a full and uninterrupted Assurance of the Love of God, who do
never the less yield the most unfeigned Obedience. God does not always put
gladness into those Hearts, where he puts his fear; nor always make his Face to
shine, where he has restored his Image. Though every one that does right is
born of God, 1 John 2.29. Yet every such Person does not certainly know that
his Father's Heart is toward him. Some may live under his Frowns, that yet
live under his Authority; they may be too great Strangers to rejoicing in God,
and yet will not renounce their Subjection to God; though they want the Light
of his Countenance, yet his Law is a Lamp to their Feet. This is the Case of
those upright Souls, That walk trembling after the Lord, Hos. 11.10. They are
ready sometimes to suspect that God will have nothing to do with them, and yet
they are resolved to cleave to him; they walk so as to please him, though they
have not like Enoch, the Testimony of their pleasingness to him. God seems to
be angry, and covers himself with a Cloud, and they are tempted to put the
Question, whether God's tender Mercies be not quite shut up; but
notwithstanding all this, they remember to do the Part of Children, they will
perform the Duties of such a Relation, whether he own them or not. The
Generation of the Righteous make up but a very few, in Comparison of that
numerous World which lie in Wickedness, but we should make them a great deal
fewer then they are, if we shut out those, that are sometimes at least,
destitute of Divine Comfort. The Practice of universal Obedience is very Rare,
but a strong and unshaken Assurance of Faith is much more Rare.

3. The Natural Man that looks upon God as an implacable hater of him, can
never heartily obey him. The serving of enemies is threatened by God as a
punishment, Deuteronomy. 28.48. And it is that which Nature has a great reluctance
against, and will not be brought to submit to, but by force. Conscience of
Guilt, and fear of Wrath, do not promote our walking with God, but obstruct it.
Adam ran away from God as soon as he had sinned, and would never have returned
to perform any act of Allegiance to him any more, if God had not revealed
himself in Christ, and entered into a Covenant of Peace through a Mediator. When
a Sinner sees that God is against him, and concludes (as it is said in the case
of the Leviathan, Job 41.9.) that the hope of him is in vain, he will have no
respect to any Command of God. A Man in a desparate Condition, that thinks
there is no Remedy, will break all Rules and Measures; he will be tied to
nothing, because he is under such dismal Apprehensions that nothing can help
him. A Spirit of slavish fear, which all awakened Sinners are naturally
possessed with till God show them his Salvation, tends rather to plunge Men
headlong into Hell, than to make them choose the way to Heaven; it is far more
likely to harden them in their Rebellion, than to reduce them to their
Obedience, if there were nothing but the terror of the Lord to be known,
Conversion-Work would be impossible.

4. The warmer our sense is of Gods love to us, the livelier is our obedience
to him. There is some proportion between the vigor of our service, and our
hopeful prospect of his favor. Upon this account there is not only a
difference as to degrees of Holiness among Saints themselves (because though
they have all obtained like precious faith, they have not all obtained equal
measures of faith, 2 Pet. 1.1. compared with Romans 12.3.) but there is also a
difference in the same Saints at several seasons, according as they have more
or less of the comfortable apprehensions of the love of God (which is indeed a
variable thing, I mean not the love of God it self, but our apprehension of it)
they are more or less fervent in Spirit serving the Lord. Though Duty be not
intermitted (nor ever should be) for want of comfort, yet in the enjoyment of
comfort, Duty is performed in a more active and cheerful manner. Every Child of
God has his dark and gloomy, as well as his bright and pleasant days; and this
change, as to his spiritual joy, will produce some alteration in the exercise
of Grace. The less sensible Manifestations of God there are to the soul, the
more sensible deadness there is in holy Duties. Our Wings are clipped, and we
cannot mount up, as at other times; but when we receive the sight of a
reconciled God in Jesus Christ, this wonderfully enlarges the heart, and we can
not only walk in Gods Truths, but run in the way of his Commandments.

5. Though a sense of the love of God do quicken to obedience; yet there is a
necessity of obedience laid upon us by virtue of the Law; for the Law is not
made void through this faith, but established, Romans 3.31. The Law reveals what
we ought to do, and a discerned Interest in the Love of God gives us the
highest encouragement to the doing of it. We are not the less, but the more
obliged by this means, to walk according to rule, and that Rule is the Declared
Will of God. Though we are helped to obey upon Gospel Principles, yet we are
bound to obey on the account of the Precept. No Man more swayed and influenced
by Grace than Paul was, yet he professes that he was not without Law to God,
but under the Law to Christ, 1 Cor. 9.21. We owe a Debt of service to God,
though Christ has discharged the Debt of Sin. He has fulfilled the Law for
us, in order to our Justification, and yet we are to fulfill it our selves, for
the evidencing of our Sanctification. The Law is still in force, for our
direction in Duty; though Christ has so far abolisht it, as to free Believers
from the penalty, it retains its commanding power, though it has lost its
condemning power, in which respect it is said that the Law is not made for a
righteous man, but for the lawless and disohedient, for the ungodly, and for
sinners, 1 Timothy 1.3. The threatened Curse takes hold of Men out of Christ, the
Injunctions to be regarded by those in Christ.

6. A sense of the love of God is the chief motive to Obedience, though it be
not the only one. There are other Considerations, which have their Place and
Use, and ought to work upon us, but this more than any; they may and should
contribute to the same end, but this is most effectual. As

1. A Sense of God's absolute as well as relative Goodness. I mean, to consider
how good a Master he is in himself, should be an inducement to serve him; as
it is possible that some may be willing to do service to an extraordinary
Person, from a respect to his inherent Worth. The Matchless Excellencies of
God, whom none in Heaven or Earth can be likened to, should invite us to take a
pleasure in his work; it should be our meat and drink to do the Will of such an
one, for the sake of what he is; for the glorifying of him who is so glorious,
must needs be our own Glory.

2. A sense of God's Sovereignty and Dominion over us. Who can refuse to yield
himself to God, that is seriously convinced of his infinite Right to command
and govern him? He may challenge from us all that we can do; for both our Being
and active Power is from him. He has made us for himself; and we may as well
disown his being our Creator, as deny him to be our Ruler; but what kind of
Ruler do we make him, if we are not his servants to obey? Subjection follows
upon Dominion, or is implied in it: He is the Lord, and worship thou him, Psalm.
45.11.

3. The consideration of the purity of the precepts which God calls us to
observe. This made the Word of God so amiable to David, Psalm. 119.140. It
requires nothing of us but what highly becomes us, and behooves us; nothing but
what it is our Honor and Interest to comply with. The work of God is of the
noblest kind, such as none but a filthy depraved Creature would desire to be
exempted from. Paul therefore magnisies the Holiness, Justice, and Goodness of
the Law, Romans 7.12. And upon that score expresses his Consent to it, ver. 16.
And delight in it, ver. 22.

4. The Consideration of the Reward which we enjoy in Obedience at present, and
which is rescrv'd for us hereafter. These are proper encouraging Thoughts, and
should recommend our Duty to us. The Reward which attends our doing it is
great; the Reward which is laid up, till we have done it, is greater; and this
would not be so far revealed as it is, but that it might be a spur to us, Col.
3.23, 24. Whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, etc. knowing that of the Lord you
shall receive the Peward of the Inheritance, etc. He that has the Hope of such
a promised blessedness, should be excited by it to universal Holiness. And yet
the main Argument of all is the Love of God.

II. To offer some Proofs for the Demonstration of this Truth. As.

1. No Man has such a Sense of the Love of God, but the Elect Sinner upon his
return to God; he is the only Subject of it. And therefore it must needs very
powerfully engage to Obedience.

1. None but the Elect Sinner has a true Sense of the Love of God. This
Treasure is put only into chosen Vessels; this hidden Manna is only for God's
hidden ones, and consequently there is no danger of its corrupting, but it will
certainly nourish Grace, and strengthen to Duty. As none but they that are
written in the Lamb's Book enter into Heaven, Rev. 21. ult. So this Heaven upon
Earth does not enter into any others. There are a peculiar number whom God has
set his Love upon, and this peculiar number are the only Persons whom he
manifests it to; The aninting which teaches us all things, is Truth and no
Lie, 1 John 2.27. How then can they be taught the Knowledge of God's Love, whom
his Soul hates? And on the other Hand how can they turn this against the
Interest of Holiness, who are chosen that they might be Holy?

2. Elect Sinners have not such a Sense, but when they are upon their return to
God. When Christ is about to be formed in the Soul, those discoveries of the
Love of God do greatly promote and help it forward; if they have been Enemies
in their Minds, they shall not continue such; If they have done Iniquity, they
shall do no more; they shall not go on in their Trespasses, after the Grace of
God is so displayed in their Remission. The white Stone is too great a Jewel to
be cast before those filthy Swine, that will turn again and rend, or trample it
under their Feet. The chosen of God themselves have it not, till God is calling
them home to himself. The Time of Conversion is the Time of Love, Ezekiel. 16.8.
The Time not only of God's Exercising, but manifesting Love to the Sinner.

2. None can impress such a Sense of God's Love upon us, but the Spirit of God;
he is the only Author of it, and therefore it must needs quicken to Obedience.
False hopes and groundless Comforts, which do tend indeed to the Patronizing
and Encouraging of Sin, arise from our selves and from the Devil; but the
Consolations of God, which always produce Holiness to the Lord, are from the
Spirit, as he Works Love to God in us, so he witnesses Gods Love to us. As we
cannot see the Sun but by its own Light. So we cannot see the Face of God with
Joy, but by a beam from himself. We can no more know that God is at Peace with
us, merely by our own Understandings, than we can reconcile our selves to him
by the Power of our own Wills; our Hearts are naturally like an Hell; as there
is a burning Fire of insatiable Lust, so biting Worms of endless Fears. The
stupid Sinner is hard to be Convinced, and the Convinced Sinner refuses to be
Comforted. We are as far from the applying of Promises, as from hearkening to
Precepts; and as we cannot be subject to the Law, so we can get no relief by
the Gospel. But the blessed Spirit, he does both let us know the Things which
are freely given us of God; 1 Cor. 2.12. And also the Things which are
indispensibly required of us by God; we should never know that God is our
Father, without this Spirit of Adoption. The Love of God is shed abroad in our
Hearts by the Holy Ghost, Romans 5.5. And as he diffuses it there, so he improves
it to Holy Purposes; his sanctifying Operations are always befriended and
assisted by his Comforting Testimonies.

SERMON IV.
July 30. 1695.
PSALM XXVI. iii. For thy Loving Kindness is before mine Eyes: And I have
walked in thy Truth.


3. THE Promises which Declare and Confirm the Love of God to us, are special
means of working Holiness in us. As they assure our Deliverance from Wrath, so
they promote our Salvation from Sin. Divine Promises do not only tend to beget
us to a lively Hope, but they help to produce and maintain the Life of every
Grace; they are the spiritual Food of Souls, which does both nourish our Faith,
and strengthen us to Obedience. We do not obtain any Gospel Privilege by the
Performance of Duty, but Duty is effectually enforced by the Enjoyment of
Gospel Privileges. God brings us to take hold of hsi gracious Covenant, and
thereby fortify us against turning from the Holy Commandment. This is plainly
set forth as the Way and Method in which he first Works upon us, and enables us
to Work, 2 Cor. 7.1. Having therefore these Promises, let us cleanse our selves
from all filthiness both of Flesh and Spirit, etc. The Promise of God's being a
Father to us (which is mentioned in the last verse of the foregoing Chapter) is
a stronger Inducement to purify our selves and be Followers of him, than any
threatening of God's being a Revenger. So 2 Pet. 1.4. Exceeding great and
precious Promises are given unto us, that by these you might be Partakers of
the Dikvine Nature, etc. As the chief Thing communicated from God is the Divine
Nature, whereby we are made to resemble him, so the Promises of God set home
upon the Soul, are the means of Communication; they are to Milk and Honey of
the Scripture, which do not cherish the Old Man, but support the New; they are
not Pillows for sinful Sloth, but spurs to Holy Diligence. The Promises of
Grace animate the Soul to Duty; and when we thus see the goodness of the Lord,
it encourages our Subjection to his Government.

4. A Sense of the Love of God will create in us a more perfect hatred of Sin;
Divine Reconciliation to our Persons, breeds the most implacable Enmity against
our Lusts; when we know that God is pacified toward us, it makes us loath and
abhor our selves the more, in remembrance of the Evils we have done. If he
passes by Transgression, the pardoned Transgressor sixes his Eye upon it with
greater Indignation; as David's Sin was ever before him, though Nathan had told
him from God, that his Sin was put away, Psalm 51.3. compared with 2 Samuel
12.13. For the Title of that Psalm informs us, that it was penned after Nathan
the Prophet had come to David. A Sinner is never so odious in his own sight, as
when he is persuaded of his being precious in the sight of God. How does Paul
repeat and aggravate the foul Abominations of his natural Pharisaical State,
when he knew himself to be beloved of God, and establi shed in Christ; he
speaks of his persecuting and wasting the Church of God beyond measure, Gal.
1.13. So with Holy Confusikon he bewails what he once was, after he had
obtained Mercy, and after the Grace of our Lord Jesus had exceedingly abounded
toward him, 1 Timothy 1.13, 14. Though God had made him whiter than Snow in the
Lamb's Blood, yet he still sets out himself in his own black and filthy
Colors. We do not lose the Prospect of our own vileness, by having the
Kindness and Love of God before our Fyes, but we see it the better. His
gracious Absolution kindles the most flaming Zeal and Revenge in us against the
Sins from which we are absolved; consequently is a mighty furtherance of our
Obedience.

5. A Sense of the Love of God is most apt to beget an awful fear of Falling
under his displeasure. That I may not be mistaken, let it be considered,

1. That this awful Fear is not only distinct from dreadful Horror, but
opposite unto it. The trembling of a Devil, and the trembling of a Child are
real Contraries. Godly jealousy of our selves, and sinful Distrust of God, are
two things of most different Kinds. The fear of Caution (which I would
recommend) keeps us walking closely with God, the fear of Desperation (which I
would warn against) hurries us violently away from God.

2. That this displeasure of God, which Believers are liable to fall under, is
exercised only in this World, and not in the next. That Wrath which God
occasionally lets out against his own, is not the same with that which comes
upon the Children of disobedience, Ephesians. 5.6. We must not confound the temporary
hidings of God's Face, with Everlasting Destruction from God's Presence. He
that believes, is secured from sinal Condemnation, but nevertheless he is still
incident to sad Desertion. Now for the Soul to be kept under the awe of this,
is a great help to our Obedience; and where the Love of God is perceived by the
Soul, this awe will certainly prevail. God's sanctified ones can say it from
Experience, Psalm 130.4. There is forgiveness with thee, that thou may be
feared. Not only a readiness to forgive, but actual forgiveness is with God;
and as our Fear of God is the end of his granting it, so it is the effect and
issue of our receiving it.

Two Things will make this more evident,

1. This joyful Sense of the Love of God, supposes a sorrowful Sense of his
displeasure going before it. Ordinarily God does not thus set Men up on high,
till he has first brought them into the Depths; the does not make them glad
with his Countenance, till he had laid them (more or less) in the lowest Pit,
Psalm 88.6. How few are admitted to take the Cup of Salvation, without Drinking
for some time of the Cup of God's Fury! How few are called into this pleasant
Light, without passing through a scorching Fire? Sore Conflicts prepare the
way, for the most part, to ravishing Comforts; and the Heart knows a great deal
of bitterness, before it comes to taste how good the Lord is.

2. They that have been sensible of God's displeasure, and are sensible of his
Love, will take Care to avoid the one, and continue in the other. Who so likely
to be afraid of receiving a Spirit of Bondage again, as they that have felt it?
Who so far from provoking God to carry them back into an howling Wilderness, as
they who have been there before? Who so cautious of interrupting their sweet
Communion with God, as they that have enjoyed it? Who so capable of rightly
valuing that Privilege, as they that are possessed of it, and therefore who so
ready to endeavor the preserving of it by a circumspect Walk? Souls that are
thus favored of God, are most seriously convinced, That in his Favor is Life,
Psalm 30.5. Therefore when the Spirit of God has carried them up to this
Pinnacle, this height of Consolation, they are the more afraid of doing any
Thing to occasion their casting down.

6. The commonest and strongest Temptations to departing from God are best
overcome by a Sense of his Love; viz. The Temptations which arise both from the
flatteries and frowns of the World, the Love of Life, and Fears of Death. He
that has the Loving Kindness of God before his Eyes, is most able to make a
resolute and successful Resistance to all these. As particularly,

1. The Flatteries of the World do too often allure Men from their Obedience to
God; but they that have a Sense of God's Love upon their Hearts, are best armed
against this Temptation. Hereby the World, with all its gaudy Vanities, is
Crucified to us, and we unto the World; hereby all these Things are stripped of
their seeming Glory, as the Sun puts out the lesser Lights, and as the Works of
Nature spoil the Reputation of the Works of Art, Psalm 4.7. Thou have put
gladness in my Heart, more than in the Time when their Corn and Wine increased.
If we had more spiritual Delight in God, carnal Fruitions must needs be a less
powerful bait. It Is in vain for the Devil to entice that Soul with a few drops
of Pleasure that run through broken Cisterns, which partakes of satisfying
Refreshments from the Fountain of Life; these Things are only suited to the
Palates of those that never know the Joy of the Lord. Heaven's Favorites
cannot fall in Love with Earths, it is natural for a Believer that is clothed
with the Sun, to have the Moon under his Feet, Rev. 12.1.

2. The Frowns of the World too often scare Men from their Obedience, but a due
Apprehension of the Love of God, is a good Security against this Temptation
also. The belief of God's reconciled Heart, and view of his pleased Countenance
is enough to make us Triumph over the fiercest malignity of Men and Devils. It
Matters not who they be that are against us, nor what they can do against us,
so long as we know that God is for us. This will make us Glory in Infirmities,
Necessities, Distresses and Afflictions of all sorts: For he that can encourage
himself, with David, 1 Samuel 30.6. In the Lord his God, will not be dismayed by
any of these Things. Bitter Herbs will go down very well, when a Man has such
delicious Meats which the World knows not of. The Sense of our Father's Love is
like Honey at the end of every Rod; it turns Stones into bread, and Water into
Wine; and the Valley (...) Trouble into a Door of Hope; it makes the biggest
Evils seem as if they were none, or better than none; for it makes our Deserts
like the Garden of the Lord, and when we are upon the Cross for Christ, as if
we were in Paradise with Christ. Who would quit his Duty, for the sake of
Suffering, that has such relief under it? Who would not rather walk in Truth,
when he has such a Cordial to support him, than by the Conduct of fleshly
Wisdom, to take any indirect or irregular Methods for his own Deliverance?

3. The Love of Life is a very frequent and pernicious Snare, which a Sense of
God's Love must deliver us from being entangled by. What so desirable as Life,
if a Man have no Place in the Heart of God? This is the greatest Temporal
Blessing, and nothing can out do it, but the Favor of the God of our Life. And
this excels indeed; Psalm 63.3. Thy Loving Kindness is better than Life. What
Comparison is there between the Breath in our Nostrils, and the Favor of an
Eternal God? Any more than there is between an Everlasting Light, and a poor
vanishing Vapor, compare Isa. 60.19. with Jam. 4.14. Who would not therefore
hate his own Life, which hangs in doubt continually before him, and of which he
can have no Assurance, when he knows that the Living God is his certain
Portion? Who would not freely yield up and part with Ten Thousand such Lives
one after another (if he had so many) rather than the Wrath of God should be
kindled but a little?

4. The Fear of Death is a very usual and hurtful Snare too, which can hardly
be broken without a Sense of the Love of God. Death which will rend and tear
the Soul from the Body, is the Lion in the way, which discourages and affrights
many from hazardous Duties; thousands through sinful Cowardice have rather
chosen to shipwreck their Faith, and prostitute their Conscience then mingle
their Blood with their Sacrifices. But now they that have the Comforts of God
to delight their Souls, are more willingly brought to this King of Terrors; if
God cause his Face to shine, what should hinder our cheerful descent into the
Valley of the shadow of Death? Love is strong as Death, and a great deal
stronger; one would dare to Dye for a good Man, whose Love and Friendship has
endeared him to us; how much more for a God whose kindness has been so
exceeding? This has made so many Martyrs glorify God in the midst of the
Fires; when they have been killed for Christ's sake all the day long, and
counted as Sheep for the slaughter, they have been more than Conquerours
through him that loved them, and through the lively Impression of that Love
upon them, Romans 8.36, 37.

7. The New Nature is ingenuous, and therefore will be wrought up to Obedience
by the Love of God. After we have tasted that the Lord is gracious, we readily
savor all the Things of God. Humaue Nature indeed in our lapsed, depraved
State, may Reward Evil for Good, and Hatred for Love (as David's Enemies did to
him, Psalm 109.5.) before a saving Change is accomplished on the Soul; but it
neither is nor can be so, when God gives Men another Heart, as he does at their
New Birth. Then nothing eyes us so fast to our Duty, as those bands of Love;
nothing is so sweetly, and yet so strongly attractive, Jer. 31.3. With Loving
Kindness have I drawn thee; they that are only haled and dragged by legal
Terror, will be striving to break away again, and loose themselves from the
Yoke of Christ, but Love subdues all Things to it self; it constrains to such
Acts of Duty, as make the mad World think us beside our selves; 2 Cor. 5.13,
14. The Soul is compelled to come in to Christ, and yet it walks at Liberty;
it is so swayed by a Principle of Holy Gratitude, as that it is always studying
that Point, What shall I render? For this is a Principle that never fails to
operate, where the Root of thankfulness is, the Fruit of Service cannot be
wanting. Therefore the Apostle beseeches by the Mercies of God, that we present
our Bodies, etc. Romans 12.1. Love has a mighty prevalency in the obtaining of
all that is desired; Herod would do any Thing at the Request of his beloved
Herodias: Esther chose that Time to perfer her Petition, when she was
expressing her Love to the King in a Banquet; so when Christ is feasting a
Believer with his Fat Things, with his Love which is better than Wine, the
ravished Believer can deny or grudge him nothing.

8. That Love to God which a due Sense of the Love of God does produce in us,
is virtually all Obedience. This Consideration consists of two Branches, which
(to give it the greater Evidence and Force) may be distincty opened.

1. A due Sense of the Love of God to us produces Love in us to God, 1 John
4.19. We Love him, because he first loved us. Sic res accendunt lumina rebus.
Sanctified Affections are blown up in us, by the believing Persuasions of
Divine good Will toward us. As there is something like an exchange of Souls
between Bosom Friends, so there are returns and reboundings of Love betwixt God
and those, whose Hearts are knit to him. The Spouse of Christ proclaims their
mutural Endearments in one Breath, and also in the right Order. Song 2.16. My
Beloved is mine, and I am his. God is the Ocean from which Love first flows
out, and to which it always streams back. Love, when it has descended from
Heaven to Earth, has finished but half its Course, but when it ascends from
Earth to Heaven, the Circle is completed.

2. This Love which is the Product of God's, is virtually all Obedience; both
as it inclines and disposes unto all, and as it comprehends all in it.

1. It disposes and inclines to all Obedience. When the Heart is melted by his
Fire within, it is easily cast into the mould of any Precept whatsoever. As it
puts us upon keeping the Commandments of God, so it keeps them from being
grievous, 1 John 5.3. Obedience can neither be partial nor burdensome,
wherever this Love of God dwells; but it fulsils the Charge which David gave
to Solomon, of serving God with a perfect Heart, and a willing Mind, 1 Chronicles.
28.9.

2. It comprehends all Obedience in it self. The end of the Commandment, is
Charity, etc. 1 Timothy 1.5. Both Tables are reduced by Christ to two
Commandments, and Love is the grand Inscription of them both. Therefore Love is
styled the fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13.10. All the Duty which we owe to God
and to our Neighbor is included in Love to each. And indeed we cannot walk in
God's Truth, unless we walk in Love to one another, as well as to him. Our
Alienations from our Brethren speak our distance from Christ the Center of our
Union. The nearer any Lines in a Circle come to the Center, the nearer they are
one to another; but the further they go from the Center, the more they run out
one from another.

III. To Apply this, What are we to be informed of, and exhorted to?

I. Use, Information.

1. If our Obedience be excited by the Love of God, then the Love of God
prevents our Obedinence. If we did first give to God, he is able infinitely to
recompense it again, above what we can think; but who is it that has first
given unto him? Romans 11.35. There is not one whose Heart God has touched, that
will dare to pretend it. We do not commend our selves to God, but God manifests
himself to us. The Love of God was not purchased even by the Obedience of
Christ, much less by ours, 1 John 4.10. Herein is Love, not that we loved God,
but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the Propitiation for our Sins. The
sending of the Son was the Effect of the Father's Love; and therefore the Son's
coming could not be the Cause of it. How then can we procure what Christ did
not? His Love is not bestowed upon us for our Service, but is the incentive to
it.

2. It Is blasphemy against the Love of God to reproach is with being the Parent
or Nurse of carnal Security. They that have the Kingdness of God in their Eye,
can take no Encouragement from thence to set any wicked Thing before them; for
Sin tends to Cloud that Light, wherein we rejoice. If God be well pleased with
us, it lays the greater Engagement upon us to walk worthy of him. How absurd is
it to say, that when God communicates his Thoughts of Peace, the Soul is
emboldened to new Acts of Treason? As if Men should lay aside the Fear of God,
because the Secret of the Lord is with them that fear him? Psalm 25.14. Or as
if the Spirit of Adoption took Men off from Obedience to God, when they are
called to be Followers of him as dear Children, Ephesians. 5.1.

3. They that by loose and disorderly Practices give any occasion to such
Blasphemers, have a great deal of Sin to answer for, besides their own. If any
of us Cause this way of Truth, to be evil spoken of, we bring the guilt of
those Calumnies upon our selves. It will be an heavy load to a tender
Conscience, if sound Doctrine is arraigned through our unmortified Corruption.
How do we wrong the Purity of the Gospel, when we turn the Grace of our God
into lasciviousness! For the Grace of God which brings Salvation, teaches us
the contrary, It Is. 2.11, 12. What is this, but to change the Glory of God into
an Image made like to unclean Spirits! Woe to those Libertines, by whom this
offense comes! What Jealousy and Rage does that Adulteress deserve, who
impudently abuses her Husband's Love?

4. The Grace of God in us is a comforting Evidence of his Love to us. Though
Holy Walking is no Foundation for Trust, we may reflect upon it as a Token for
good. It Is said of the way of Holiness, that the redeemed shall walk there,
Isa. 35.8, 9. as Mary Magdalen's Pardon is concluded from her Affection, so if
God enables us to make straight Paths for our Feet, it is a sign that he has
set his Heart upon us. As all Obedience issues from the Spirit, so the Gift of
that Spirit is a Testimony of peculiar Favor, Ezekiel. 39.29. Neither will I hide
my Face any more from them, for I have poured out my Spirit, etc.

5. A denial of the possibility of Assurance is injurious to Holiness. The
first and best Christians were such as could say, we have known and believed
the Love which God has to us, 1 John 4.16. And they that have had the same
Spirit of Faith, have always approved themselves the greatest Saints in all
succeeding Times; but to say, that this their belief was a Delusion, is in
effect to say that all their Religion was a Cheat too, which in this more
degenerate Age is hardly to be matched. To stake Men down to uncertain suspended
waverings about their Interest in the Love of God, is to destroy the most
quickening Motive to Obedience.

6. The Christian Life is as far from being uncomfortable, as from being
irregular. What greater Pleasure can there be, than to be constantly influenced
by the Love of God to the Service of God? A dull and sour Complexion does not
belong to real Christianity, Psalm 97.11. Light is sown for the Righteous, and
Gladness for the upright in Heart. Though Cain's Countenance fall, Abel's Race
may lift up their Heads. If there be any Consolation in Christ, they that are
his, have reason to rejoice; and what more sure, than that there is all in him,
and none out of him? He has a Chariet of Gold paved with Love, for the
Daughters of Jerusalem, Song 3.10. What so delightful, as to go up and fit with
him in that Chariot?

II. Exhortation.

1. Think not only on the Love of God in general, but on the most affecting
Properties of it in Particular. Such as

1. Its Antiquity. God loved us from Eternity, before we were, and before the
World was; and there have been Early discoveries of it; there is the Love of
God to us in our Childhood, Hos. 11.1. And his Kindness in our Youth, Jer. 2.2.
Which are both Seasons of Vanity. The Loving Kindnesses of God are not of
Yesterday, but of very ancient Date; They have been ever of Old, Psalm 25.6.

2. Its Freeness, according to the Tenor of his Promise, Hos. 14.4. His Love is
the Reason of it self; He loves, because he loves, Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8. And it must
needs be so, if we consider what unamiable Creatures we are. God bids us to
love our Enemies, and he himself is the great Example of it. He loves our
Persons, when he hates our Enmity.

3. Its enlargedness. He shows Loving Kindness to Thousands, Jer. 32.18. And he
Crowns every one of those Thousands with it, Psalm 103.4. He has many Objects
to let it out unto, and every one of these Objects stands in need of multiplied
Acts; yet the Fountain of Mercy overflows to all, and remains still full.

4. Its Stability. It Is unmovable and Everlasting, Isa. 54.8. No Creature can
separate us from it. The Anger of God is transient, Isa. 12.1. But his Love is
permanent. The Time will come, when God will be Angry no more; but the Time
will never come, when he will be favorable no more. Let your Faith feed upon
these Thing.

2. Beware of renouncing your share in that Grace which God has encouraged you
to claim. Refusal of Divine Comforts is a Sin, as well as Disobedience to Holy
Motions.'It Is almost a fundamental Mistake (says Dr. Sibbes) to think that God
delights in slavish Fears. It Is a very unpleasing Thing to him, to have his
Kindness called into Question, Mal. 1.2. I have loved you says the Lord, yet
you say, wherein have thou loved us? Therefore give not Place to the Devil, nor
the unbelieving Suggestions of your own Hearts.

3. Attend to the Love-visits of Christ, and thankfully receive them. The
Spouse smarted by grievous Dosertion, fro delaying to open to Christ when he
knocked at her Door, Song 5.1, -- 6. When our Beloved comes into his Garden, we
must not neglect the holding of converse with him. We may lose him a great
while, if we put by such an Opportunity once.

4. Avoid all Confidence in the Flesh, as a fatal hinderance to spiritual Joy.
No wonder, if we hear God say, I have n delight in you, when we have fond
Conceits of our own Performances. That House which stands upon the weak
Foundation of a personal Righteousness must needs be shaken with perpetual
Doubts, and the fall of it at last will be great. We might Fear every Day, the
Heart of God being turned to hate his People, if their Hopes of abiding in
Favor with him were built upon the best of their Duties.

5. Take heed of spotting your Garments with the Flesh, after God has been
spreading his Skirt over you. Sinning against Love and Light at once, is a
double Aggravation. It was a foul blot upon Solomon, That his Heart was turned
from the Lord God of Israel, who had appeared unto him twice, 1 Kings 11.9.
It Is reasonable to expect that you should not defile your selves any more with
your detestable Things, Ezekiel. 37.23. If any part of your Walk be contrary to
God, it is worse, than if the whole Walk of other Men be so

6. As you desire an increase of Comfort, make daily progress in a course of
Obedience. If you covet a greater fullness of Joy, labor after an higher
Exercise of Grace. God required more exactness in the Services of the Jews,
when they were come to their rest in Canaan, than when they were harrass'd in
the Wilderness, Deuteronomy. 12.8, 9. So you who look for extraordinary Love tokens
from God, must remember, that he calls for great Improvements from you. An
abundant entrance into the Kingdom of Christ is ministered to Believers in a way
of unwearied Diligence, 2 Pet. 1.11, with 5. The more ground we get, and the
further we advance, the greater likelihood there is of meeting with more of God.

SERMON V.
October 8. 1695.
II CORINTH. I. xx. For all the Promises of God in him are yea, and in him
Amen, unto the Glory of God by us.


IT is observable, that as none among the Apostles was more useful and
serviceable than Paul to the Interest of Chrit, and the Souls of Men, so the
Devil did especially labor to stain his Gredit, and to blast his Minstry; and
and even little Things, taht had nothing of Evil in them, such as common
Charity would have excused in any other Person, were maliciously improved and
perverted against him. We need to go no further than this very Chapter for an
instance; there being an Imputation of Levity and falsehood cast upon him,
because he had resolved to come to this Church at Corinth, but did not. This
was aggravated so far, as if he were one that said, and unsaid, one that took
no Care about the keeping of his Word, and that therefore no regard was to be
had to any Thing that he delivered. In Opposition to this foul and groundless
Charge, the Apostle makes an Apology and Defense for himself, ver. 17. Where he
lets them know, that he was no such fickle and unconstand Man, as he was
represented; for his Intention of coming to them was real, though he was
providentially obstructed in performing it. And on this occasion he also tells
them, that his whole Doctrine had been uniform, and consistent with it self at
all Times, without any Variations, or Contradictions, ver. 18. The course of
his Preaching among them, being like the great subject of it, Jesus Christ, the
Son of God, who is not Yea at one Time, and Nay at another, but fixedly and
unchangeably the same for ever, ver. 19. Now, as a convincing Proof of this, he
adds in the Words of the Text, For all the Promises of God in him, are Yea, etc.

In which Words we may consider.

1. The Things spoken of Promises, (...), which is very much a kin to (...):
The Gospel strictly taken, being indeed a Treasury of blessed Promises, and
Declarations of Grace.

2. The large Extent in which these Things are spoken of. [All] none excepted,
but as many soever as there are, and of whatsoever kind they be, as Solomon
said, 1 Kings 8.56. There has not failed one good Word, etc.

3. The Author of them. [God.] This ought to be eyed by us, because the
Infinite Power and immutable faithfulness of God are grand Encouragements to
our steady Expectation, Romans 4.21. Heb. 10.23.

4. The Stability of them. They are [Yea and Amen] here are two different Terms
used to signify the same Thing; the former of these is a Greek Word, and the
latter Hebrew, as Gal. 4.6. Abba Father; the one is Hebrew, and the other
Greek; intimating that both Jew and Gentile are concerned in these Things.

5. The Foundation of this Stability, [in him] i.e. in Christ, and to give it
the greater Emphasis and force, the Expression is doubled, which Repititions
are not unusual in the Writings of this Apostle on the like occasions, Ephesians.
1.10. All Things in Christ, even in him. Col. 1.20. By him to reconcile all
Things, by him, I say, etc.

6. The End and Scope of all, [unto the Glory of God] that which is God's
design in his gracious actual Vouchsafements, is the tendency of every Promise
also, the magnifying and exalting of himself is ultimately aimed at; and
hereunto the Holiness and Comfort of his Creature is but subordinate.

7. The Instruments or Means of bringing about this End, [by us] which may have
a respect both to the Ministers of Christ, whose Work it is to hold forth the
Promises of God, and to all Believers, whose Duty it is to embrace and apply
them; each of these contribute in their Place, and in their measure, to the
advancing of the Glory of God.

Obs. All Divine Promises are fully ratified in Jesus Christ to the Glory of
their Author. This is the Sum and Substance of the Text, which an Interpreter,
one of a Thousand, Calvin (though too meanly thought of, and vilely reflected
on in this degenerate Age,) calls Sententia memorabilis, and unum ex proecipuis
Fidei nostrae capitibus; a memorable Sentence, and one of the chief Articles of
our Faith. Here I. Open something of the Nature of Divine Promises. II. Enquire
into some of the Principal Kinds of them. III. Show, why they are said to be
ratified in Christ. IV. How they tend to the Glory of God. V. Use.


I. To open something of the Nature of Divine Promises. In five Propositions.

1. The Promises of God are of a middle Nature, distinct from his Purpose and
Performance. They come between the Decree, which is from Everlasting, and the
Execution of it, which is in Time. They are Significations of his Will, as a
thing past, and forerunners of the Event, as a Thing to come. When God
promises any Thing, it is before he does it, and after he has determined it;
we must suppose a praevious Resolution, and we may expect a following
Accomplishment. A Promise is the unfolding of the Heart of God, the
communicating and manifesting of those kind Thoughts which he thinks toward
us, when he has not yet fulfilled them. It is impossible that God should
Promise any Thing, but what he has rodain'd to be, and when it has a real
being, there is no need of any further Promise. God is willing first to reveal
his Love to us in Word, and then in Act; that while the Blessing he intends to
bestow, is but in the Way to us, and at a distance from us, we may Live in the
comfortable Prospect of it. A Promise is a Transcript of God's Counsel, and a
Pledge of the Thing it self. What he has purposed, he speaks; and what he has
spoken, he cannot go back from.

2. The Promises of God argue much Condescension to us, but no Imperfection in
him. God humbles himself, as it were, in making them, but he does not truly
lessen himself thereby. He stoops to the Infirmity of his Creatures, and yet
the Honor of his own Majesty is preserved. In every Promise, it is true, that
God makes himself a Debtor, but still he remains our Infinite Superior; for
though the Promises be made to us, and for our Benefit, yet God does not owe
any Thing to us, or for our sake; the Debt is properly to himself, on the
account of his own Fidelity, not to us on the account of Justice; therefore
it is said, That he abides faithful, he cannot deny himself, 2 Timothy 2.13. It Is
no debasement of God to stand bound to his own Word, but it is below him to be
under any Obligation to his Greature. We cannot demand or claim the fulfilling
of any Promise, as if the denial of it would be an injury and wrong to us, but
because it would derogate from his Glory, and be unworthy of himself. This is
what we have to fasten upon, and this hold is sure enough.

3. The mere goodness of God is that which puts him upon promising. There was
no Necessity of God's engaging himself to do any thing for us, though we were
tied to do our utmost for him; but his Engagements are Free and Voluntary, and
spring from his own gracious Inclinations and Propensions to us. God was at
absolute Liberty, whether he would enter into any such Bond or not; such a
Liberty was essential to him as God; whereas a Creature must needs be under the
Yoke, as soon as it has any being. Every thing is due from us to God, whether
we willingly oblige our selves to yield it to him or not; but there is nothing
due from God to us, nor can we challenge the least Thing more than he freely
binds himself to. What God has not promised, we cannot look for; and even that
which he has promised, must have been despaired of also, if it had not been
his good Pleasure to make those Promises; for he promises because he will.

4. The goodness of God in Conjunction with his faithfulness, is his
influencing Motive to perform the Promises which he bath made, Psalm 57.3. God
shall send forth his Mercy and his Truth. Mic. 7.20. Thou will perform the
Truth to Jacob, and the Mercy to Abraham. This lovely Pair of Attributes are a
joint Security to our Faith, that whatsoever God has declared in his Word,
shall be indeed accomplished to us. The same Mercy which first moved God to
express such kindness to us, is our warrant to believe that those Expressions
shall be made good to us, whatever seeming difficulties and impediments lie in
the Way. Everlasting Mercy is our mighty support in this Case, which we are to
set against the Discouragement of our daily Sina. These are the most likely
Evils to hinder and withhold our good Things from us; but these Obstacles are
removed by Grace, Psalm 65.3. Iniquities prevail against me; (but there is a
Remedy for this) as for our Transgressions, etc. Psalm 65.3.

5. The Promises of God are given forth for Believers to live upon. While they
are in this World, they are the Pilgrim's Staff, whereon he is to lean and
rest, as long as he passes the Time of his sojourning here. They are the Wells
of Salvation, from which we are to draw Water in a dry and thirsty Land. The
Life which we live in the Flesh, is not a Life of Enjoyment, but a Life of
Faith, and this is the Food which God has provided for the maintaining of that
Life. The Apostle says, We are saved by Hope, but Hope which is seen is not
Hope, for what a Man sees, why does he yet Hope for? Romans 8.24. Heaven is the
Place and State of sight, here we are but Expectants; there they are in
Possession, but the present World is designed for the Exercise of Trust. God is
to be our Confidence on this side the Grave, and our Portion afterward. Faith
is the Substance of Things hoped for, Heb. 11.1. We are to look upon that as
present, which is in it self Future.

II. To enquire into some of the principal Kinds of Divine Promises. The Text
speaks of All, implying that they are manifold, and of diverse sorts: I shall
take Notice only of what may be distributed under these six following Heads.

1. There are Promises which concern the Preservation of the World in general,
as well as others which respect the welfare of those who are chosen out of the
World, Isa. 54.9. This is as the Waters of Noah unto me; for as I have sworn,
that the Waters of Noah should no more go over the Earth; so have I sworn that
I would not be wroth with thee, etc. The Promise which God here refers to, is
as ancient as the Flood; I will not again smite any more every living Thing, as
I have done, Genesis 8.21. So, I will set my Bow in the Cloud, and it shall be for
a token of a Covenant between me and the Earth, Chap. 9.13. This Promise of God
is as a Fence or Bank to the World against a second Deluge; but this has its
Ratification in Christ, for it was made upon God's smelling a sweet Savor from
Noah's Sacrifice, which was Typical of Christ; and the Rainbow it self seems
to be a Figure of him also, Rev. 4.3.

2. There are Promises which relate to the Church of Christ, as an Holy
Society, as well as others that concern particular Believers, Mat. 16.18. Upon
this Rock I will build my Church, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail
against it. Whether the Powers of Darkness acted by the Devil, or the Gates of
Death and the Grave be here meant, it amounts to the same Sense, the intendment
of our Lord being plainly this, that he will have a Church in the World to the
End of the World; it shall never totally perish from the Earth, but be
confirmed in spite of its greatest Adversaries, and survive them all. This
Promiso, as it was uttered by the Mouth of Christ, so it has its Stability
from him; for it becomes the Head to protect the Body, and to take Care that it
be not destroyed. He sitting on the Throne is a safeguard to his People,
dwelling on the Footstool.

3. There are Promises which belong to the Posterities of them that believe, as
well as others to their Persons; for God receives, and takes in not only them,
but their, Acts 2.39. The Promise is to you and to your Children. This is not
to be taken so universally, as if all the Children of Believers were the
Children of Promise; we see the contrary often; many spiritual Men are
afflicted with a carnal Seed; Grace is not tied to a lineal descent in
Religious Families, but only flows down where the Vein of Election runs.
However the Promises are indefinitely laid down, and may accordingly be urged
to God by his faithful ones, for those that belong to them, Psalm 112.2. The
Generation of the Upright shall be Blessed. This has its Establishment in
Christ, for as he was sent to Bless, so little Children particularly were blessed
by him.

4. There are Promises which have a Reference to Temporal Things, as well as
others that refer to Spirituals and Eternals. This is such a Distribution as
the Apostle makes of them, 1 Timothy 4.8. Having the Promise of the Life which now
is, and of that which is to come. Some Promises do more immediately concern the
Body, others bear a Relation to the Soul; some respect Time, and others
Eternity. Both sorts have their Confirmation in Christ; only Temporal Promises
are fulfilled with more Limitations and Restrictions, than the Spiritual are;
because Temporal good Things may not be always good for us, but when they are
so, they shall be given. Yea, and in spiritual Cases also, we must distinguish
between what is indispensibly necessary to Salvation, and what is not: For we
may want some Degrees of Grace, and of Assurance, and yet the Promise may stand
fast.

5. There are Old Testament Promises, and New Testament Promises; which do not
differ in regard of Matter (for they exhibit the same substantial Mercies) but
only in regard of elder or newer Date. There were Promises which nourisht the
Faith of Believers before Christ's Time; Promises made unto the Father, which
Christ was sent to confirm, Romans 15.8. Promises which kept the Church alive,
till Christ appeared, we have all these, with the Addition of many more; we
have Line upon Line, Promise upon Promise, since the coming of Christ into the
World; for the Riches of Mercy are now more plentifully made known, and the
Discoveries of Grace abound under the Gospel Dispensation; but all this fresh
Edition of Promises as well as the other, are founded upon Christ.

6. There are Promises which have been performed already, some perfectly, other
is Part; and there are Promises which yet remain to be performed. The promised
Deliverance of Israel out of Egypt, and Babylon has been accomplished; the
Calling of the Gentiles also accomplished in some measure, and the Detection and
begun Consummation of Antichrist; but there are still to come many glorious
Things, which are spoken of the City of God: The National Conversion of the
Jews, a more eminent setting up of the Kingdom of Christ in the Kingdoms of the
World, the repairing and beautifying of Sion beyond the Patterns of fromer
Ages, the total and final overthrow of all her Enemies. As to every one of
these, though yet only promised, we may apply that Voice from Heaven, Rev.
16.17. And say it is done. That which is Future is secured upon the same
bottom, as that which is past, was. Every Word of Promise from God, whether
fulfilled or unfulfill'd, has but one Center of Infallibility, viz. Jesus
Christ.

III. Why are Divine Promises said to be ratified in Christ. Upon what accounts
does the Apostle here pronounce them Yea and Amen in him?

Ans. For these seven Reasons.

1. Jesus Christ acts the Part, and Office of a Witness on the behalf of God,
who is the Person promising. God never left himself without a Witness, for the
has authorized and employed many, in the several Ages of the World, to bear
their Testimony to him, and his Blessed Truths; but he has eminently and
emphatically given Christ to be a Witness, Isa. 55.4. Who does incomparably and
infinitely excel al others; for he is styled the Amen, The faithful and true
Witness, Rev. 3.14. Yea, he is the Truth it self; John 14.6. He testifies what
he has seen and heard with the Father; an Eyewitness, and an Ear-witness,
Chap. 3.32. An Honor which no Man could assume, but the Man Christ Jesus who
was in the beginning, and before the beginning with God, who was by him from
Everlasting, and know all that was in his Heart, when there was nothing uttered
by Word, or committed to Writing. He has manifested the Fathers Counsels of
Peace, and Commissioned his Servants to Report them. Rev. 22.6. He said unto
me, these sayings are, etc.

2. Jesus Christ is the Surety of that Covenant, wherein all the Promises are
comprehended. So he is expressly called, Surety of a better Testament, Heb.
7.22. Or better Covenant, which is established upon better Promises, Chap. 8.6.
He undertakes and engages for God, that all which he has Promised shall be
made good to us; he was that Angel of the Lord, that appeared to Moses in the
burning Bush, and said to him, I am the God of thy Father, the God of Abraham,
etc. Exodus 3.6. He speaks in his Fathers Name, and as a Person concerned to see
the Contract performed. Now as this general Promise of God's being our God, is
the sum of the New Covenant, so all particular Promises are included in this;
for if God be our God, nothing cna be withheld by him, nothing can be wanting
to us. And this new Covenant being Written (as it were) and Sealed with his
Blood, we are not more sure, that that Blood was really shed, then we are sure
that this Covenant will be punctually kept.

3. Jesus Christ is the Person to whom the Promises are primarily made. As he
is said to be the Heir of all Things, Heb. 1.2. So is the first and chiefest
Heir of Promise. The Promises were made to Abraham's Seed, which is Christ,
Gal. 3.16. Many understand that Text of Christ Mystical, but I see not why
Christ Personal should be shut out. However other Scriptures evince the same
Thing, Tit. 1.2. In Hope of Eternal Life, which God that cannot Lie, has
Promised before the World began. We did not then exist our selves, therefore it
must be promised to Christ on our behalf, as the second Adam, the Head of the
Election of Grace; for from him it is conveyed to us, and belongs to us, no
otherwise than as we are one with him. Hence we read of the sure Mercies of
David, Isa. 55.3. i.e. Of Christ, as the Apostle applies it, Acts 13.34. See
likewise, Psalm 89.3, 4. where David is to be understood in the same Sense. On
this account he is said to receive of the Father the promise of the Holy Ghost
for us, Acts 2.33. If God break Promise with us, he must be false to his Son.

4. Jesus Christ is the first and main Thing promised. The most Ancient and
Leading Promise had a direct Reference to him; The Seed of the Woman shall
bruise the Serpents Head, Genesis 3.15. And when the Apostle had drawn up a List
of those famous Worthies that Lived and Dyed, before Christ's Time, he says of
them, These all having obtained a good Report through Faith, received not the
Promise, Heb. 11.39. There were several Promises which they did receive, and
were possessed of, but the Appearance of Christ in his incarnate State, which was
the grand Promise; they lived not to see, but dyed in the belief of. Therefore
when he came into the World, good Old Simeon, was so cheerfully willing to
leave it; Lord now let thou thy Servant depart in Peace, etc. Luke 2.29. q.
d. now I have seen the verifying of thy Word in this great Point, I have enough.

5. The Promise of Christ was a Pledge of the Performance of all other
Promises. In the Time of Ahaz. one of the worst of King's, Syria and Israel
were Confederate against Judah, and God bids them not to fer nor be faint
hearted, but rest satisfied that they should be delivered, and for their
Encouragement, so as to put their promised Deliverance out all Doubt, he gives
them a Sign; viz, Behold, a Virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son, and shall
call his Name Emmanuel, Isa. 7.14. If your Faith can overcome this difficulty,
you cannot be tempted to call any thing else into Question. God's Manifestation
in Flesh, and becoming Man, is the greatest Thing, that can be looked for: If
this be done, nothing can be left undone. It Is impossible that any Promise
should be defeated, if this be accomplished, as Romans 8.32. How shall he not with
him, etc.?

6. The Execution of all Promises depends upon Christ's Purchase. Whatever is
promised by God, is performed to us for Christ's sake, as the meritorious Cause
of its actual Conation, Ephesians. 3.6. That the Gentiles should be Fellow-heirs, and
partakers of his Promise in Christ, by the Gospel. The Gospel is the means of
our Participation of Divine Promises, but Christ himself is the Procurer of all
the good Things held forth in them. We enjoy nothing, but what his valuable
Sufferings give us a Right and Title to. It Is hy his Death that they who are
called, receive the Promise of Eternal Inheritane, Heb. 9.15. Terefore the
Covenant is styled a Testament, which is of no Strength, nor can any of the
Things bequeathed in it be demanded, except the Testator Dye, ver. 16.17.
Though God be a free Promiser with respect to us, yet all that is promised is
deserved for us by Christ.

7. All Promises issuing and proceeding from Love and Grace, must needs be
ratified in Christ, and cannot without him. Promises are Expressions of Favor
as threatenings are Revelations of Wrath. Now all the Favor which God shows to
us, comes Streaming through Christ, it is the Love where with God has loved
him, which is in us; or exercised toward us, John 17.26. He is the first Object
of Divine Love; the first begotten, and the first Beloved. The beloved, Ephesians.
1.6. If God should look upon us out of him, we must be the Objects of his
Hatred, and he could not speak peaceably unto us. As Joseph solemnly protested
to his Brethren, concerning Benjamin, Genesis 43.3. You shall not see my Face,
except your Brother be with you; so we could not have one Smile, or good Word,
or Intimation of any kindness from God, unless we had Christ to recommend us.

SERMON VI.
October 22. 1695.
II CORINTH. I. xx. For all the Promises of God in him are Yea, and in him
Amen, unto the Glory of God by us.


IV. How do these Promises so confirmed in Christ tend to the glorifying of God?

This may be Opened two ways; By considering the tendency of them on his part,
and on ours.

1. They tend to the glorfying of God on his part, who is the Author of them;
and this in four respects especially:

1. As they tend to the glorifying of Christ the Mediator, who is so much
concerned and employed in the making of them sure to us. He is had in Honor
the more by this means; this renders him a precious Cornerstone, as he is
called, Isa. 28.16. It heightens our Esteem of him, as well as gives us
encouragement to build upon him. Now whatever is to the Glory of christ, must
needs conduce to the Glory of God; for God is in Christ, as he told the
Israelites concerning the Angel whem he promised to send before them, My Name
is in him, Exodus 23.21. Therefore the Exaltation of Christ is to the Glory of
God the Father, Phil. 2.11. And our Lord tells his Disciples, when Judas was
gone out with a purpose to betray him into the hands of his Murderers, John
13.31. Now is the Son of Man glorified, and God is glorfied in him. The Glory
of the Father, and the Glory of the Son are indeed inseparable; that which
lifts up the express Image of his Person in the World, will necessarily redound
to hmself; as on the contrary, the Contempt which is cast upon Christ, reflects
upon God.

2. They tend to the Glory of God's Grace in setting forth the Sovereignty and
Amplitude of it.

1. They show the Sovereignty of the Grace of God; that the should make such
Promises to Creatures, to whom only Curses and Threatenings belong. What
mavelous Goodness in it, to overruled all the Pleas of Justice and Judgment
so far, that the promise of life in Christ Jesus (2 Timothy 1.1.) should be given
to Men that do nothing but what is worthy of Death! That God should send such
good Tidings of great Joy to those that could have looked for nothing but
flaming Vengeance, and implacable Fury! How plainly does this prove what he
says, That he will be gracious to whom he will be gracious? Exodus 33.12.

2. They show the Amplitude of God's Grace; for if Grace did not abound, and
flow out plentifully from the Heart of God to us, we could never have had so
large a stock of Promises as the Scripture supplies us with. There are Promises
sufficient for every want, and suited to every condition; Promises of relief in
every Distress; of help against every infirmity; Promises of Support in our
Temptations, and of escape out of them, 1 Cor. 10.13. Certainly, If God had not
been rich in Mercy, we should have been more sparingly provided.

3. They tend to the Glory of his Truth. This evidently appears by his bringing
to pass what he has promised. The Word of God being verified in his Works, so
constantly and punctually as it is, is a convincing Instance and Argument of
his Fidelity. If God did never promise the doing of us good, the luster of this
Attribute would very much be lost, though the un-promised Good should be done.
If God should give us Grace and Glory, without telling us beforehand, that he
will, how should we know him to be the true and faithful God by the giving of
it? The Promise is as the Orb, in which this Perfection of God shines forth.
The Promise and Oath of God are those immutable things ((...)) in which it is
impossible for God to lie, Hebr. 6.18. The Exact Accomplishments of these
things are so many clear Demonstrations of that impossibility, Psalm. 89.34. My
Covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing which is gone out of my lips. If
he could have changed or violated his Word, he is provoked enough to do it.

4. They tend to the Glory of his Power. God is tyl'd able to do above all that
we can think, Ephesians. 3.20. and indeed many of the things which God has promised,
are such as could not have entered into our hearts to conceive. Much of that
which God has made the matter of our Expectation, does exceed our Imagination;
and yet we can think a great deal more than we can do, or more than any other
Creature can. This therefore magnifies the Power of God, and shows the length
and strength of his Arm beyond the utmost capacities of Angels and Men. The
Devil indeed frequently promises, not only more than he intends to perform, but
more than he is able to perform if he would. He told our Lord, when he showed
him all the Kingdoms of the World, All these things will I give thee; whereas
he could not really give him the smallest single Thing out of these all;
instead of givng him the whole of what he saw, he could not give him one Foot
of the ground on which he stood. But on the other hand. God cannot Promise more
than he can Perform, though he performs sometimes more than he has positively
promised.

2. They conduce to the Glory of God on our Part, who believe them; for we
glorify God by Believing more than by Working, more by receiving the Promise
than by fulfilling the Command. Though Faith and Obedience are by no Means to
be set in Opposition (for Obedience springs from Faith) yet have the
Preference; Comparison, Faith is to have the Preference; God has set the Royal
Crown upon the Head of Faith and made her Queen instead of Works. No Sin so
great a reproach and dishonor to God as unbelief; no Grace or Duty that brings
in such a Tribnte of Glory to him, as our believing in his Word. Romans 4.20. He
(Abraham) staggerd'd not at the Promise of God through unbelief but was strong
in Faith, giving Glory to God. The stronger the Faith, and the less mixtures it
has of infidelity, the more Glory results to God: This is manifest in two
Things. The Promises which are consirm'd in Christ, are no the Glory of God,
when received by us: Because

1. Faith is a Subscription of the Soul to them. The doing of the Words of the
Law is called a Confirming of them, Deuteronomy. 27.26. Because indeed, every
Transgressor of the Law does as much as in him lies, to disanul and make it
void. So Faith in the Promise is as it were our Confirmation of it; and full
Agreement to it. As on the other side, to disbelieve the Promise, is to
Abrogate and Cancel it, as far as we can. Here lies the Blafphemy of
Infidelity; He that believes not God, has made him a Liar, one not fit to be
Credited, 1 John 5.10. But he that receives his Testimony, sets to his Seal,
that God is true, John 3.33. There is a double Seal to the Foundation of Divine
Promises. The Seal of God's unchangeableness, which he puts to it, and the Seal
of a Believers firm Persuasion and Consent, which is to be affixt by us. So God
declares his Promises to be Amen, and we also by Faith put our Amen to them;
here is Amen and Amen, ours as an Echo to God's; for our Amen signisies not
only desire of accomplishment, but Assurance; not only so be it, but so it
shall be. Of this we have an Example, Jer. 11.5.

2. Faith includes a Dependence of the Soul upon them. Hence David says, My
Flesh shall rest in Hope, Psalm 16.9. That Hope which is grounded on the Word,
gives rest to the Soul; it is as an Anchor to keep it steady, Heb. 6.13. Which
shows the ummoveableness of that which our Anchor is fastened to. The Promise
fustains our Faith, and our Faith is that which supports us. He that Hopes in
the Word, as David did, Psalm 119.81. lays a mighty stress upon it; as Sampson
did, when he leaned upon the Pillars of the House, so as pull it down upon the
Philistines. A Believer throws the whole weight of all his Affairs and
Concernments, Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal upon the Promises of God, like a
Man resolved to stand or fall with them. He ventures himself and all that
belongs to him, entirely upon this bottom, which is in Effect to say, if they
will not bear me up, I am Content to sink; I know that there shall be a
Performance of those Things which have been told me from the Lord, and
therefore I will incessantly look for it.

V. Use. This Doctrine may be improved by way of Information and Exhortation.

1. Information.

1. All that is enjoyed out of Christ, is only in a Course of common Providence,
not by Virtue of any Promise; because all the Promises are Yea and Amen in
Christ. They that are without Christ, are strangers from the Covenant of
Promise, Ephesians. 2.12. In a Christless State, they have no more to do with them,
nor can receive any more Benefit by them, than the Devils themselves, who are
not only reserved to Judgment, but are partly under Execution. Carnal Men have
very often a large Portion of this World; God brings into their Hands
abundantly, Job 12.6. He fills their Houses with good Things, Chap. 22.18. But
as the Holy Ghost says of the Hearts of such Men, so it may be said of the best
of their Enjoyments, they are little worth. They are but miserable Comforts,
because they are not given on the account of Promise; therefore given in Wrath,
and not in Mercy; with a Curse, and not with a Blessing.

2. Legal Promises are out of Date, and quite Excluded. There are no Promises
in force, bu^ what are in Christ. And therefore no Promises but what are
Evangelical; for though Christ came to fulfill the Precepts of the Law, he came
to establish the Promises of the Gospel; Do and Live is the Promise of the Old
Covenant, but this is destroyed and taken away in Christ; and he that attempts
to live by doing, builds up what Christ destroyed. The Law was indeed Published
in its full Perfection to the Jews, but it was with a gracious Design of
subserviency to the Gospel, by leading them to Christ; that being sensible of
their own inability to keep the Law, they might fly to him, and take Sanctuary
in his unspotted Righteousness and complete Obedience. The Law is abused, when
set up to the vacating or weakening of the Covenant of Grace. Paul rejects this
with abhorrence, Gal. 3.21. Is the Law then against the Promises of God? God
forbid.

3. The Promises of God are not founded upon the Performances of the Creature;
for then they would not be to his Glory by us, so much as to our Glory by him.
The Ancient Believers obtained Promises through Faith, Heb. 11.33. And so must
we. And indeed this is the customary Scripture-way of expressing this Matter,
Gal. 3.14. That we might receive the Promise of the Spirit through Faith, ver.
22. That the Promise by Faith of Jesus Christ might be given to them that
believe. Now whatsoever is by Faith must needs be purely of Grace; without the
least respect to any worthiness in the Object. God does not suppose
Qualifications in us, but work them; and those very Promises which are
conditionally propounded, as to the Manner of delivering them, are absolutely
performed to those that are interested in them; for the same God gives both
Repentance and Pardon, Grace and Glory.

4. The Happy State of a Believer is unalterably sure. Psalm 125.1. They that
trust in the Lord shall be as Mount Zion, which cannot be removed, but abides
for ever. The Reason is plain, because the Covenant and Promise of God, which
is all their Salvation, and all their Support, can never be removed, Isa.
54.10. Notwithstanding all our own Threatening Infirmities, here is Matter of
strong Confidence. Grace in us is weak, Corruption oftentimes gets the upper
hand, our Hearts are deceitful, the Tempter is very busy; but none of these
Things shake the Perseverance of the Saints; though they should awaken our
Caution, and persuade our Diligence, they should not move us from our Hope;
because that Word of God is settled in Heaven, which concerns our Settlement
and Security here on Earth. He who requires us to stand fast, has promised
that we shall do so; and his Promises are not suspended upon uncertain
Conditions, which may fail, but they have their full Ratification in Christ,
who is always the same: A Sun of Righteousness without any Shadow of turning.

5. Though a Believer may be stripped naked and bare of all his outward Things,
he cannot be robbed of his truest Riches; he still really abounds when he
suffers the greatest need: For his most substantial Wealth (as well as Life) is
hid with Christ in God, the Promises of God being all confirmed to him in
Christ. Upon this account, though he be utterly emptied of every Thing in this
World, that properly belongs to the World, he may justly say, nevertheless, I
have all, and am full. The Testimonies of God are a goodly Heritage, and the
rejoicing of the Heart in the Total Deprivation of External Comforts: This will
explain that Paradox of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 8.10. As having nothing, and yet
possessing all Things; though we have nothing in Hand, yet we have all Things
in hope; what we want in Possession, is infinitely made up by Promise. To have
our Portion of Goods in our own Hands (as the Prodigal had) is dangerous, we
may spend it or lose it; but to have a Stock in God's Hands is safe, it is a
Treasure which fails not. The Poor of this World have a blessed Recompense,
if Rich in Faith; James 2.5. In this Case, good Bills and Bonds, which will all
be paid, whenever there is occasion, are a far better Estate than ready Money,
which Private or Public Thieves may break through and Steal from us.

6. Special Ordinances are special Privileges. The Preaching of the Word is an
Ordinance that lies open and common to all, and this is a considerable
Privilege; for how should Men be brought to believe without the Word of Faith?
But Sacraments which are limited and confined in their Administration to select
peculiar Persons, are much more considerable, being sensible Signs for the
Confirmation of our Faith, when it is wrought in us. Among the many Advantages
which the Israelites of Old had above all other People, the Apostle reckons up
the Covenants and the Promises, Romans 9.4. I do not know any Thing to the
contrary, but that the Covenants there may be meant of the two Seals of the
Covenant under the Old Testament, Circumcision and the Passover (to which we
have our correspondent Seals under the New Testament) for Circumcision
particularly is called, not only a Token of the Covenant, but the Covenant in
their Flesh, who were Circumcised, Genesis 17.13. Now all Sacraments are visible
Promises, God holds forth to our very sight, what may serve for the
Encouragement of our Faith, and the directing of our Hearts to Christ on whom
we Believe.

II. Exhortation.

1. Come to God in Christ for the Performance of his Promises to you. Two
Things lie in this one.

1. Plead the Promises with God, lay hold of them, and humbly challenge your
share in them. Put him in remembrance of what he has said, Psalm 119.49.
Remember thy Word unto thy Servant, etc. 1 Chronicles. 17.26, 27. Thou art God, and
have promised this goodness to thy Servant, now therefore let it please thee to
bless, etc. Do not say, what have I a Sinner to do with the Promises of Grace:
Thou have a sufficient warrant from the free offer of God's Grace in Christ,
and the express Command of God to believe. It Is thy Duty to comply with his
Invitation, and rely on his Promise of Acceptance. It Is no Presumption in the
filthiest Soul that ever was, to urge God with his good Word, Ezekiel. 36.29. I
will save you from all your Uncleannesses. If the Promises do not belong to
those that see themselves undone, and are under a Sense of their unworthiness
to receive any help, they belong to none.

2. Plead them in Christ, or else your Prayers will miscarry, and the Promise
never be performed to you. Take heed of having an Eye to self, or of imagining
that they should be made good to you for your own sake. An excellent Author,
(A. Burgess) calls this an Ivy-sin, which sticks so close to our Natures, that
it secretly consumes and devours All, look to Jesus if you desire to speed.
Expect not that God should say Amen to any Prayer, in which we have not a
respect to Christ, as the only Person in whom the Promises are Amen. This I
take to be the Evangelical Sense of that Prophecy, Isa. 65.15, 16. The Lord
God shall call his Servant by another Name, that he who blesses himself in the
Earth, shall bless himself in the God of Truth; viz. in Jesus Christ.

2. Consider Christ as the true Foundation of your own Stability. Read the
Words following the Text, ver. 21. As the Promise of God have their
Establishment by Christ, so we also are established in him. We stand by Faith,
and our Faith subsists by the Power of Christ, or else it will fail the very
next Moment, after it is produced, Christ dwelling in our Hearts, is the
Strength of our Hearts; Col. 2.7. Rooted, and built up in him, and stablisht in
the Faith, etc. They that seem to be Pillars, are but sorry Reeds without him,
which every wind of Temptation will bend or break. The same glorious Power
which upheld him in the working out of your Redemption, must likewise sustain
you in the Exercise of Faith upon him; or else you will quickly Experience your
sinful weakness by a miserable Fall.

3. Set a just value upon the Promises of God, as unchangeable Assurances of
his Love and Grace. Remember how much greater the Testimony of God is then the
Witness of Men, and therefore receive it with answerable Joy. We read of
exceeding great and precious Promises being given unto us. 2 Pet. 1.4. They are
so in themselves, and should be so to us. Men of all Degrees are Vanity and a
Lie, of doubtful and uncertain Credit, and we cannot depend much upon what they
say; they often outlive their own Promises, and grow weary of performing them,
or if not, yet their Promises dye with them, and then what are we the better?
But we cannot prize any Divine Promise more than they deserve, because we can
never be deceived by them in any of our Expectations from them.

4. Let no appearing impossibilities make you Question God's Accomplishment of
any of his gracious Words. Though you cannot see how the Thing can be done,
it is enough, if God has said, that he will do it. There can be no Obstructions
to promised Salvation, which we need to Fear. He who is the God of this
Salvation, and the Author of the Promise, will prepare his own Way for the
doing of his own Work, so that every Valley shall be filled, and every Mountain
and Hill brought low, Luke 3.5. Though the Valleys be so deep, that we cannot
see the bottom, and the Mountains so high that we cannot see the Tops of them,
yet God knows how to raise the one, and level the other, Isa. 63.1. I that
speak in Righteousness (or faithfulness) am mighty to save. If any Thing would
keep back the Kingdom of Christ, it would be our Infidelity; but he will come,
though he should find no Faith on the Earth. See Romans 3.3.

5. Cast not away your confidence because God defers his performances. Though
Providence run cross; though they move backwards and forwards, you have a sure
and faithful Word to rely upon. Promises, though they be for a time, seemingly
delayed, cannot be finally frustrated. Dare not to harbor such a thought
within your selves, as Psalm. 77.8. Does his promise fail for evermore? The
Being of God may as well fail as the Promise of God; That which does not come
in your time, will be hastened in his time, which is always the more convenient
season. Accuse not him of slowness, who has said, I come quickly, i.e. he
comes as soon as all things are ready and ripe for his appearance. It Is as
true, that the Lord is not slack concerning his promise, 2 Pet. 3.9. as that he
is never guilty of breaking his Promise. Wait therefore, how long soever he
tarry, do not give over expecting; the Heart of God is not turned though his
Face be hid; and Prayers are not flung back, though they be not instantly
answered.

6. You who are in Christ, take Example from the Promises of God. You are under
the obligation of many solemn Promises made to God, Woe be unto you, if you do
not look to a careful and diligent performance of them. See Neh. 5.13. You have
entered into a sacred Oath, and consequentially into a dreadful Curse, if you do
not according to that Oath. Remember David's Resolution, and imitate his
practice, Psalm. 119.106. I have sworn, and I will perform it, etc. You who have
Vowed constant Service and Subjection to God (as you have done, if you own any
Relation to him) beware of violating that Vow, and let it be in the thoughts of
your hearts for ever. How should unstable Souls be shamed out of their un-even
Walkings, by the strict engagements in which they stand, and by the Pattern
which an immutable God has set before them! Surely his Truth and Firmness to
us should be a strong. Argument against our being loose and wavering from him.
What can we think of our selves, that God should be ever mindful of his
Covenant, and we yet remain so unstedfast in it? Let us therefore this day
resolve once more, and to better purpose than hitherto, in the strength of
Christ, that we will improve God's Promises for the fastening of our own; hia
gracious Promises to the binding of our righteous Promises, that in whatsoever
things we have opened our Mouths to the Lord, we may not by contrary acts make
our tongues to fall upon our selves.

SERMON VII.
December 31. 1695.
PSALM LXXX. xvii, xviii. former Part. Let thy Hand be upon the Man of thy
right Hand, upon the Son of Man whom thou made strong for the Self.

18. So will not we go back from Thee: --


IT is most manifest from several Passages in this Psalm, that it refers to a
Time of great Distress and Desolation in general, though what particular Time
is here pointed at, is variously Conjectured, and indeed after all remains
uncertain. There is one Request for deliverance out of this calamitous Case,
which is thrice Repeaed, ver. 3, 7, 19. in the former Part of which Request,
there is a kind of Gradation observed, every Time it is mentioned, Turn us again
Oh God; turn us again Oh God of Hosts; and turn us again Oh Lord God of Hosts;
but the latter Part is still the same, and no difference made in the Repetiton;
Cause thy Face to shine, and we shall be saved. But yet there is no Petition
throughout the Psalm, which is so remarkable, or that seems to carry such an
Evangelical Sense in it, as that in the Text.

For Explication, there are Three Things to be inquired into.

1. Who is intended here by the Man of God's right Hand, and the Son of Man,
etc? Some think, it signifies the People of the Jews, the whole Commonwealth
of Israel, who are sometimes collectively spoken of, as one Man, and a single
Person; others take it for the House of David, and Royal Family, or for the
Stock and Tribe of Judah, out of which our Lord was to spring; but the
Characters here given do much better agree to the Messiah himself, if we duly
consider them.

1. The Man of thy Right Hand. This imports one highly favored and respected
by God; as Benjamin, which is a Son of the right Hand, (and named, ver. 2.) was
his Father's darling. The right Hand is a beloved Member, as is intimated by
the Command to Cut it off, if it offend, Mat. 5.30. So is Christ peculiarly
dear to God, his Delight and Joy from Everlasting, and exalted to sit at his
Right Hand; a Place too great for any Creature, Psalm 110.1.

2. The Son of Man. This is a Title most frequently given to Christ in the
Gospel, and in the Old Testament also, Dan. 7.13. I saw in the Night-Visions,
and behold one like the Son of Man, etc. Which denotes the Truth of Christ's
Humane Nature, though he came not by ordinary Generation.

3. One made strong by God for himself. As ver. 15. The Branch which thou
made strong for thy self. Now, as Christ is often called the Branch by the
Prophets, so he was really furnished and endued (as Mediator) with extraordinary
Power to serve the great Purposes and Designs of God, such as could have been
accomplished by no other. And so it was foretold, that he should be, Isa.
41.10. I will strengthen thee, yea, I will help thee, yea, I will uphold thee
with the right Hand of my Righteousness.

2. What is meant by the Thing requested, let thy Hand be upon, etc. If we
consider some other Places where the like Phrase is used, we shall find, it
implies Influence, Protection and Support; as Ezra 8.31. The Hand of our God
was upon us, and he delivered us from the Hand of our Enemy, etc. Ezekiel. 3.14. I
went in the heat of my Spirit, but the Hand of the Lord was strong upon me; the
Prophet being then under a mighty Divine Impression, beyond what other common
Persons were, or even he himself at other Times.

3. How are we to understand the Connection of this Petition with the following
Words, so will not we go back from thee. It may be understood two Ways.

1. As it would oblige them to the yielding of steadfast. Obedience; it would
lay them under a special Engagement never to Revolt any more, as they had done;
if God would grant this Request, it would be a most eminent Tie and Bond upon
them to the most constant and faithful Service.

2. As it would enable them to yield such Obedience. And this I conceive to be
chiefly aimed at; if God would lay such help upon Christ for them, they should
receive Power by that means to discharge their Duty to him better than ever
heretofore; though they were very feeble and wavering, false and treacherous of
themselves, yet here would be a successful Remedy.

Note 1. The Consideration of Jesus Christ is very fit and proper to Minister
Comfort and Relief in the most afflicted Condition. That State of the Church
which this Psalm has a Relation to, was very deplorable, but they encouraged
themselves by looking to the promised Savior. When their Vineyard was burnt
with Fire, and cut down, ver. 16. They had an Eye to him that was the true
Vine, whom God exercises such Care and Husbandry about, that his pleasant and
useful Fruit can never be destroyed, John 15.1.

Note 2. It was the commendable Practice of the Church in the Old Testament
Times to Pray for Christ: This was according to the Precept; Psalm 72.15.
Prayers shall be made for him continually. They prayed for his Assistance in
his Work, and for his actual Mission to perform it; that he might be sent into
the World, and that what he undertook might prosper in his Hand. Nor is the
Duty now out of Date, of Praying for his second Coming, for the Advancement of
his Interest, and Enlargement of his Kingdom here below. But the main Scope of
the Words, will lead us to another Point.

Obs. The Strength of Christ is the great and immediate Security of Believers
against Apostasy from God. Here, I. Show wherein lies the true Nature of this
Apostasy. II. Of what Concernment it is to Believers to be secured against it.
III. How is the Strength of Christ their Security in this Case. IV. Why has
God ordered it so to be. V. Use.


I. Wherein lies the true Nature of Apostasy from God. The very Expression
whereby the Holy Ghost does here describe and set it forth, will, if duly
weighed, give us some Light into it.

1. Every failure and defect in the Exercise of Grace, is not to be reckoned as
an Apostasy. There is a great Difference between spiritual Decaies and
Languishings, and this going back from God. The Soul may faint and flag in the
pursuit of God, and yet not be carried off so far, as to steer a contrary
Course. As a Schism in the Body, 1 Cor. 12.25. Is much less than a Separation
from the Body; a breach or disunion in a Church, not so much as an absolute
Rent and dividing from a Church, so there may be Declensions in our Obedience,
and yet no declining from the Law, Psalm 119.51. The Degrees of Grace may be
remitted, when the actings of Grace are not destroyed; and the habits of Grace
weakened, when they are not abolished. As the Church of Ephesus did not cease
to Love, yea even in Sincerity, though charged with leaving her first Love,
Rev. 2.4. Christ says, he had somewhat against her, which is a diminishing
term, but he would have had much more against her, if instead of an abatement
of Love, it had been turned into hatred. These gradual Deficiencies and
shrinkings of Grace, are truly humbling to us, and may issue worse, if not
carefully looked after; we have Reason to lament them, and endeavor a speedy
Cure of them; but such a revolting from God, as the Text speaks of, if more
than all this comes to.

2. Every positive Discovery of Corruption in the actual Commission of Sin is
not Apostasy. A Man may halt and slip, yea he may stumble, and fall, and yet
not go back. He that resolvedly holds on his way, may notwithstanding
oftentimes, through Ignorance or Infirmity turn aside out of it, before he
finishes his Course. A Believer may be led into Captivity to the Law of Sin,
and yet never properly is brought under the Reigning Power of Sin, Romans 6.14.
compared with 7.23. To be violently seized by another as an Enemy, is a very
distinct thing from submitting to another's Dominion, as a Lord. A Subject may
continue Loyal to his Rightful Prince, though the Arms of a wrongful Usurper
may for a Time prevail against him. A voluntary Transferring of my Allegiance,
is much more than to be taken Prisoner by force. Rebellion is an aggravating
Addition to Sin, Job 34.37. Now Apostatizing in Scripture is very frequently
expressed by Rebelling, Josh. 22.29. God forbid that we should Rebel against the
Lord, and turn this Day from following the Lord, etc. Dan. 9.5. We have done
wickedly and rebelled, by departing from thy Precepts, etc. Every Offense
against a Law is not an Act of Treason, or Renunciation of the Sovereign
Authority. All Sin is a Transgression, but this Sin of backsliding is the great
Transgression.

3. Apostasy from God includes not only a Deviation in the Life, but an
Alienation of the Heart. Not only a sinful wandering, but a loving to wander,
Jer. 14.10. Thus have they loved to wander, they have not refrained their Feet.
So long as the Heart is right with God, it cannot be said that the Man goes
back from him. An unwilling Departure, is not so much the Act of the regenerate
Person, as of the Sin that dwells in him, Romans 7.17. No outward Performance,
good or bad, does denominate so much as the inward frame and working of the
Spirit. A great many miscarriages will be graciously overlookt in the visible
Walk and Conversation, when there is a cleaving to God with full Purpose of
Soul. The Errors of a Man's way are far more pardonable, than erring in Heart.
The Generation whom God was so much grieved with, were a People that did err in
their Hearts, Psalm 95.10. Though there be no manifest or gross backsliding in
the Life, yet if there be a revolting and a rebellious Heart, there is the
poisonous Root of all Abomination. Here is Apostasy in the sight of God, though
not in the sight of Men; as the Israelites in their Hearts turned back again
into Egypt, when they were marching in the Wilderness, Acts 3.39. According as
the Mind is estranged from God, or keeps close to him, a Man is clear or guilty
in this Case. Our Heart is not turned back, was the Church's Vindication, Psalm
44.18.

4. Apostasy from God, is really an undoing of all the good which we have done.
It Is a wicked Repentance quite contrary to the Grace of Repentance; as that is
a Repentance from dead Works, so is this a Repentance from Works of a better
sort, Psalm 36.3. He has left off to be wise, and to do good. It Is a
Perversion to Evil after a seeming Conversion from it. The first Apostasy
wherein all are involved, supposes the Creation of Man in a State of
Uprightness; Every one is gone back, Psalm 53.3. Therefore Adams Original
Course was a walk with God. So here, the Apostasy whereof we speak is a
miserable change for the worse, after a plausible. change (at least) for the
better. There can be no going back, but where a Man has once run well; No
looking back, but where a Man has first set his Hand to the Plaugh, Luke 9.
ult. It Is ending in the Flesh, after we have begun in the Spirit; when our
Faces have been toward Sion, and our doings framed to turn to God, this is a
revoking and disanulling of all, and driving toward Hell. It Is a Declaration
of War, where we have pretended Friendship; it is a saying in Effect, the Time
past suffices us to have wrought the Will of God, and therefore now we will
Work our own. In short, it is no less than our pulling down all that we have
built up, and a listing of our selves in the Service of Sin and Satan, whom we
have fought against.

II. Of what Concernment and Importance it is to Believers to be secured
against such Apostasy. This will appear from two Things; their Danger of
Apostasy, and their Danger by it.

1. How much they are in Danger of it, viz. If left alone, and abandoned to
themselves. There are Three Considerations which will sufficiently show the
greatness of this hazard.

1. Grace in us is very weak. The Apostle does not say, be strong in the Grace
which is in thy self, but in the Grace which is in Christ, 2 Timothy 2.1. That
fullness of Grace, of which Christ is the subject, can never be lessened, but
those measures of Grace which are communicated unto us, and lodged in us, might
and would be lost, if we were separated from him. Borrowed Abilities will fail,
if not continually recruited and supplied. All created inhaerent Holiness, of
it self is a perishable Thing; it is indeed made of God an abiding incorruptible
Seed in Believers now, but it is not so in its own Nature. If it were, how could
the Angels in Heaven, or Adam in Paradise have ever fallen? Grace is a good
Treasure in the Heart, but it wants Almightiness to guard it; as there is no
Worldling who thinks, that his Bags or Coffers can defend themselves. Gracious
Habits are the true Riches, but they lie open for Thieves to rob us of them;
except God keep our House after he has furnished it, Poverty will come upon us
like an armed Man.

2. Corruption in us is very Active. We are very apt and ready to be drawn away
by our own Lust, James 1.14. There is Folly enough remaining in the wisest and
best of Men to pervert and mislead them. He was no ordinary Saint, who
complained of his being so foolish and ignorant; that he was as a Beast before
God, Psalm 73.22. There is still too much Brute in him that has attained to be
more than a Man. None of us are so washed from our silthiness, while we are in
this World, but that the Relics of a swinish Principle in our Natures would
make us return to wallow in the Mire, if God did not keep us back. If we
consider how just Lot lingered in going out of sinful Sodom, we cannot but
think, that he would have looked behind him, as well as his Wife, except those
Inclinations had been restrained. Though our Hearts be Circumcised to Love God
predominantly, there are vile Affections stirring in us still, not very easy
to be suppressed. The Law in our Members is not like a dead Letter, but a lively
Principle, which Wars against the Laws of our Minds.

3. The Temptations which come against us, are very numerous. Every Place,
every Condition, every Employment, every Relation is full of them. It Is hard to
avoid being assaulted by them, it is harder many Times to escape being overcome.
Wheresoever we are, we find our selves, like the Prophet in Dathan, 2 Kings
6.14. Compassed about with a great Host. Every Friend of God has many
Adversaries always besieging him, and often soliciting and laboring to seduce
him from his Obedience to God. When Solomon was Old (and when one would have
Thought, he should have been the more confirmed in the pure Religion) his Wives
(who were therein the Instruments of Satan) turned his Heart after other Gods,
1 Kings 11.4. The Devil manages his Point with so much subtilty, as even to
make use sometimes of sincere mistaken Christians to Hand his Suggestions to
us; as Acts 21.4. When Paul by a Divine impulse was going up to Jerusalem,
there were some Disciples who said that he should not go; through the Spirit
they knew what he would suffer there if he went; and as carnal Men, they
dissuaded him from it. The Old Man within, and Old Serpent without us, make it
very difficult to keep our Way.

2. How much danger they incur by Apostasy, if they should be left to be guilty
of it. Three Particulars will give us a sufficient discovery of this.

1. They must needs at the present, lose all comfortable Communion with God.
How can they that go back from him, have any Enjoyment of him? How can they
that go out from the Presence of the Lord, suppose that his Presence should
follow them in their degenerate Course? Must not he that turns his back upon
God, acknowledge it the natural Fruit of his won Ways, if the Face of God be
hid from him? The Lord is with you, while you be with him, 2 Chronicles. 15 2. But
if we forsake our own Mercies, do we imagine, that they will not also forsake
us? God's backsliding Children have sadly Experienced the Truth of this, by
lying long under their Father's frowns; he has suspended the sweet
Manifestations of himself, and they have not known where to find him, even
after they have come to themselves again.

2. They can never see the Kingdom of God, unless they remember from whence
they are gone back, and return and do their first Works. While a Man is in a
Road of Apostasy, he is quite out of the Way to Heaven, and it is impossible
ever to reach the End, without returning into the Way. None are further off
from the Kingdom, then they that once seemed to be the nearest to it, and
afterward Revolt. None more hateful to God, than such as have once expressed
much Love; as a Prince is most provoked by those that first appear very
zealously for him, and then turn maliciously against him. God has said, If any
Man draw back, my Soul shall have no Pleasure in him, Heb. 10.38. God will
never endure such an one to stand in his sight, that dare to quit and renounce
his Service, after the has been for a season employed in it.

3. If they come back to God again, (as undoubtedly they will, if evey they
were truly Converted to him) it must be by very bitter and sorrowful
Repentance. With what Indignation does the Apostle speak, 1 Cor. 6.15. Shall I
take the Members of Christ, and make them the Members of an Harlot? And is
there not as much Cause for the same Holy Indignation against a Man's self,
after he has done so? The Case is the same as to all others Sin's of such a
kind, which are more than common Defilements. When backsliding Israel was about
returning, The Voice of Weeping was heard upon their high Places, Jer. 3.21.
How plentifully should we sow in Tears, when like those Jews, we have been
scattering our Ways to strangers! How should we sit in the Dust, go softly, be
covered with Confusion, and lie down in our Shame, in the Sense of what we have
done, when we have done so wickedly! He that can pass over a foul Apostasy with
little remorse and slight Humiliation, is under a Delusion, if he think that
God has graciously received him.

III. How is the Strength of Christ our Security in this Case? Answer in five
Things.

1. Omnipotence belongs to Christ, on the account of his Godhead, and this
shall be exerted on the behalf of them that believe, as there is occasion,
Prove. 8.14. I have Strength. They are the Words of Christ, who is brought in
speaking under the Name of Wisdom. It is not meant of any created, borrowed
Strength, such as Angels are said to excel in, but infinite essential Strength;
the Strength of God, for he is God. The mighty Angels are his, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7.
made and governed by him, to wait upon him, and Minister to him; but he himself
has a nobler and greater Character, The mighty God, Isa. 9.6. Yea, the
Almighty, Rev. 1.8. The Almighty Son of an Almighty Father, yet not another,
but the same Almighty God; a distinct Person invested with all the glorious
Properties of the same Nature. Here lies the Argument which Christ himself
used, John 10.28. None shall pluck them out of the Father's Hand, because he is
greater than all; and consequently none shall pluck them out of Christ's Hand,
because he and the Father are one. The Strength is equal, because the Essence
is undivided.

2. Christ was anointed with Power, as Mediator, the Improvement whereof is not
to his own Advantage, but the Advantage of those that believe in him. He that
travailed in the greatness of his Strength, declares himself Mighty to Save,
Isa. 63.1. Therefore we read of God's raising up an Horn of Salvation for us,
Luke 1.69. An Horn intimates Strength; Christ is a mighty Savior, and our
Salvation is the End and Scope of his being so. He had a Spirit of might
resting upon him, Isa. 11.2. Great and singular Abilities for his special Work
communicated to him, and the Fruit of all redounds to us. Hence he is called
Emmanuel, the strong God with us, not only so in himslef, but as our Redeemer;
as it is said in the Case of the Deliverance of the Jews from Babylon, which was
figurative of a greater and more excellent Deliverance; their Redeemer is
strong, Jer. 50.34.

3. Christ has destroyed the Power of the Devil, by a Power Superior. to him
This is meant by his dividing the Spoil with the strong, Isa. 53.12. Snatching
of poor Captive Souls as a Prey out of the Teeth of the Devourer, which being
once rescued, are never given up again. The Devil was the strong Man armed,
that kept his Palace, and his Goods were in Peace, but our Lord who was
stronger than he, came upon him, and overcame him, and took from him all his
Armor, wherein he trusted, Luke 11.21, 22. None but Christ the Prince of Life,
was able to do such Execution upon the Prince of this World, whose Slaves and
Vassals we naturally are. But this being done, by Virtue of Christ's Victory, we
also shall be finally Victorious. Satan would have despised our utmost
Opposition, if the Son of God had not foiled him first; now we may despise his.
Our Triumphant Friend has left us a Conquered Enemy to deal with; so that
through him strengthening us, we may tread down Strength.

4. Christ by the matchless Efficacy, and Merit of his Blood has purchased for
us Confirming Grace, and the perpetual Presence of the Spirit with us. Not only
our access into that Grace wherein we stand, but our standing in that Grace
whereinto we have Access, is by Jesus Christ, Romans 5.2. He has engaged
positively, that the Spirit shall not only be given to us, but abide and dwell
with us, John 14.16, 17. And he has engaged for nothing, but what he has
effectually procured. The Sufferings of the best of Creatures are weak and
worthless; but the Death of Christ is of such Infinite force, as to make it
impossible for any one whose Sins he has dyed for, to dye in Sin, By one
Offering he has perfected for ever them, etc. Heb. 10.14. We have deserved to
fail of the Grace of God, he has deserved the Continuance of it; we deserve to
be as Chaff which the Wind drives away, Christ has deserved that we should be
as Mount Sion, which cannot be removed. His Blood is that which Answers all
Things.

5. Christ's prevailing Intercession secures to us the needful actual succors
of Grace, while we are here in this World. There is a great deal which depends
upon this; Heb. 7.25. He is able to save to the uttermost such as come to God
by him, seeing he ever lives to make Intercession for them. Christ's
Everlasting Intercession is mentioned as the Reason of Christ's Ability to save
to the uttermost. Indeed all Christ's Pleadings are irresistible, God can deny
him nothing which he asks; therefore he is called by the Name of Israel, Isa.
49.3. A Name which was given to the Patriarch Jacob, upon the success of his
wrestling with the Angel; for it may be more eminently applied to Christ, what
was said of him, That by his Strength he has Power with God, Hos. 12.3. Christ
produces his strong Reasons which the Father cannot but hearken to. So that if
he Pray for Peter, that his Faith may not fail, it is impossible that it
should. If he Pray for our being kept, we cannot be lost.

SERMON VIII.
January 14. 1695.
PSALM LXXX. xvii, xviii. former Part. Let thy Hand be upon the Man of thy
right Hand, upon the Son of Man whom thou made strong for thy self.

18. So will not we go back from Thee: --


IV. WHy has God ordered it so, that Believers should be secured against
Apostasy by the Strength of Christ? The Reasons of the Divine Will in this
Case, may be such as these Six following.

1. This agrees with God's general Design of heaping all the Glory possible
upon Jesus Christ. Never was such Honor and Majesty laid upon any Creature,
nor was indeed fit to be laid upon any, as was laid upon Jesus Christ. This was
a Part of the Message which the Angel brought to his Virgin Mother, concerning
the Son whom she was to conceive and bear, He shall be great; Luke 1.32. He was
that Son of Man, whom God resolved peculiarly to magnify, and advance above
all, That all should be beholden to him, and have their Dependence on him. I
will set him on high, says God, Psalm 91.14. He shall be the Head of my Family
in Heaven and Earth; he shall be as the firt-born among many Brethren; I will
give him an universal Pre-eminence, and put all Things in a State of necessary
subjection: He shall be the Joseph to whom every one's Sheaf shall bow down,
and whom all in my House shall be nourished by, and receive their subsistence
from, This was the Glory which the Father determined from Everlasting to give
to Christ, to make him the unmovable Center of the whole Creation of God, Ephesians.
1.10 That in the dispensation of the fullness of times he might gather together
in one all things in Christ; etc. that nothing should be firm or steady but
what is brought into him, The Tenure of all the Good that we enjoy, is
therefore in Christ, In the Lord have Irighteousness and Strength, Isa. 45.24.
What we have in Him, we hold by Him alone; What is given for his sake, is
secured by his means, that he may be every way glorious.

2. This suits with God's Design of Grace in our eternal Election; for we are
chosen in Christ, Ephesians. 1.4. Therefore it is sit that we should be also preserved
in Christ, Jude 1. God's choosing of us, is a giving of us to Christ; it is often
expressed so in Scripture; and therefore who so fit to be their Security, as he
to whom they are given? Christ has the Christ has the Care of all whom the
Father chooses, and he is to give account of them at last. They are committed to
him, and will be demanded from him, and therefore where should stength be
lodged for their support and establishment, so properly as with him? John.
6.39. This is the Father's Will who has sent me, that of all which he has
given me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again, etc. to prevent
their being finally lost. God gives 'em to Christ; this is God's End and Aim;
but how shall the Loss be prevented, except we have Strength and Stability from
Christ, whose Charge and Trust we are? That God's Foundation might stand sure,
he lays his own Son for a Foundation; Every Stone in the Building rests upon
Him, or else there would be no difference between them and those that are out
of the Building; for he must keep those that are in it from dropping out. It
would have been a vain thing to constitute Christ the Head of God's Elect, if
God had not also appointed that the Elect by his Influence, should be
inviolably maintained to the very last.

3. It Is necessary that we should be sccur'd against Apostasy by the strength
of Christ, because he is the First and the Last in our Sanctification. He
styles himself the Beginning and the End, Rev. 21.6. So he is not only in
himself, but with respect to the Work of Grace in us; He begins it, and
compleats it, the Author and Finisher of our faith, Heb. 12.2. i.e. The Firist
Author and Finisher of it. Now it is impossible that he should be so, without
being our Establisher and Preserver all the time between. From the First to the
Last we must be upheld by him, or else all that is wrought in us will quickly
come to nothing. If he do not strengthen his own work, it will be soon
destroyed though it be his own, Psalm. 68.28. Stengthen, O God, that which thou
bast wrought for us. Another Hand is not able to preserve what his Hand
produces. The best Beginnings will have the worst Endings, if any thing less
than the Power of Christ have the Management of them. So that Christ will lose
the Glory of our begun Sanctification, unless he undertakes for our settled
Confirmation; and he never will have the Honor of our perfected
Sanctification, except he enables us to hold on in the way that we have entered.

4. It Is necessary that Christ should secure us in our Way to Glory, because
it is his Business to receive us into the Possession of that Glory at the close
of all. John 14.3. If I go and prepare a Place for you, I will come again, and
receive you to my self, etc. The Reception of departing Souls to Heaven at
Death is the Act of Christ, and so is the Sentencing of them to an Eternal
Abode in Heaven at the general Judgment. 2 Timothy 4.8. Henceforth there is laid
up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge shall
give me at that Day, etc. But who shall there be to wear this Crown, if Christ
do not keep them in the way of Righteousness, till that Day comes? Mat. 25.34.
Then shall the King say unto them on the Right Hand, Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom, etc. But where will any such Persons be found, if
abandoned by Christ, while they are here in this World? This is to be the
Portion of Christ's Sheep indeed, but the Wolf will have scattered them all, if
he do not defend them, before that Time. There will be no Heirs to this
Inheritance, unless he that bought it for them, take Care that they may not
alienate it from themselves.

5. The Wisdom of God is hereby seen in a most shameful baffling of the Devil.
Though all the Posterity of the first Man are utterly weakened and disabled by
Sin, yet the Man Christ Jesus is become a Fountain of spiritual Strength to his
own Seed. The Devil Triumphed over the Old Adam, as having cast down many
wounded in the foiling of that one; but here is a second Adam, assuming the
very same Nature, that Triumphs over him, and helps us to Triumph also. Flesh
and Blood was conquered by him in Paradise, but here is a Partaker of Flesh and
Blood, that puts him to flight. Though Man alone could not grapple with him,
but fell by his first assault, yet God-man has bruised him under our Feet, and
given us a firmer standing. The Devil must now pull down the Banners which he
had set up; because his Head is broken by the Woman's Seed. One that once dwelt
among us, in such an House of Clay as we do, has delivered us from him, and
fortified us against him. Though he gave us a Mortal blow in our first Parents,
here is the Son of Man has quickened us again, and is the Strength of our Life.

6. Believers could not have a better Security, than that whereof there has
been a visible Experiment in the Person of Christ himself. His Strength is a
tried Strength; if it had not been enough for us, it had failed him; but if it
sustained him in so difficult a Work against so much Resistance both from Earth
and Hell, we cannot fear its falling short. Christ had a Work upon his Hands,
that all the Angels in Heaven could not have done; and yet he went through it.
Christ was tempted in all Points like as we are, and a great deal more than we
are, yet the Tempter could fasten nothing upon him. He never flinch't from what
he undertook, but pursued his first Engagement, till all Things foretold
concerning him had an End. Isa. 50.5. The Lord God has opened my Ear, and I
was not Rebellious neither turned away back. He went on, though there was a
Lion in his Way, the Roaring Lion, yea though God himself came forth with his
drawn Sword of Justice, as an Adversary against him, for our sakes. This may
give us the more Encouragement to believe, that he can and will keep us also
from going back.

V. Use. Several Things are to be learnt as Truths, and urged as Duties from
this Doct. Some Things for the informing of Judgment, and others for the
directing of the Practice.

I. Information.

1. What a wretched Case must they be in, that are out of Christ? The Apostle
calls them unstable Souls, that are easily beguiled; and how can they be
otherwise? 2 Pet. 2.14. The Devil does with them as he will, carries them
whither he pleases, for there can be nothing to hinder him, where the Power of
Christ does not rest upon their Persons. Such as partake not of the Root, that
do not derive a Virtue from thence, are like dead Branches, or withered Leaves,
which may hang on for a Time, but will certainly be blown off by some Wind or
other. Hypocrites that are in Christ by outward Profession only, are like
Meteors which glitter and blaze a while, but they are soon spent, and tumble to
the ground; but the Stars in Christ's Right Hand ( Rev. 1.16.) cannot do so.
They that belong to Christ, have their Preservation from him, but it is no
wonder to hear that all others miscarry. Those that thou gave me, I have
kept, and none of them is lost, but the Son of Perdition, John 17.12. And this
Son of Perdition, was none of them; not given in order to Salvation, but
Apostleship. That goodness which Christ does not establish, must needs be as a
Morning Cloud; no Creature can escape a fall that stands upon its own Bottom.
All counterfeit Graces, plausible Duties, fair Shows, and false Joys, will
vanish and come to nothing, because the Persons whose they are, are separated
from Christ, and have no Strength or Support by him.

2. This discovers the Reason of the Difference which there is oftentimes
between one Believer and another. Their Strength is not in themselves but in
Christ, and from him it is variously communicated and dispensed, according as
he sees good. Hence it is that they who have obtained like precious Faith, are
not equally strong in Faith; and they that are risen up to greater Seize
come short sometimes as to spiritual Acts. Some that have been best furnished
with the Habits of Grace, have at particular Season been most defective in the
very Exercise of Grace, and betray more than others of their own Corruption.
Weaker Christians have done better, in resisting of some Temptations, than such
as have been a great deal stronger. The Women that followed Christ (though the
weaker Vessels) denied not Christ, as Peter did, though a more eminent
Disciple; for though Christ prayed, that his Faith might not fail, he did not
Pray that he might not faulter. It was said to the Church of Philadelphia, Thou
have a little Strength, and have kept my Word, and have not denied my Name,
Rev. 3.8. The weakest Christians will stand with Christ help, and the strongest
cannot stand without it.

3. This shows how there comes to be such a Difference and inequality in the
same Believer at several Times. Sometimes he withstands a greater Temptation,
and at other Times is foiled by a lesser; because no Man, not the best of Men
prevails by his own Strength, but according as Strength is given out from
Christ to succor and assist him. One while David is got up so much above
carnal fear, that nothing can shake him; he encourages himself in God, and
concludes that he shall not be greatly moved, Psalm 62.2. Yea, not moved at
all, ver. 6. At another Time, he is so overwhelmed with horror, so sunk and
dispirited, as if there were no Providence to shield him, and therefore cries
out for the Wings of a Dove, that he might fly away from the reach of his
Enemies, Psalm 55.5, 6. The same Soul follows hard after God, when his right
Hand upholds it, Psalm 63.8. Which afterward flags, and is almost ready to
give over following, when that right Hand is withdrawn.

4. This lays open the ground of the Devils Enmity against Christ, which has
been always most extreme and implacable. He knows, that he should easily
compass his Ends upon Belivers, if Jesus Christ did not stand in the Way. All
the Powers of Darkness were furiously bent against the Person of Christ,
because the great Strength of all that belong to him, lies in him. If they
could have conquered him, no Member of his could ever have stood against them.
The Destruction of the Head would have been the Destruction of the whole Body;
as when the Philistines saw that their Champion was dead, they all fled
immediately, 1 Samuel 17.15. All God's Jewels and peculiar Treasure are laid up
and kept in the Hands of Christ, so that the subduing of him (if it had been
possible) would have been the seizing of all at once. What an Exedrcise has
Christ undergone for our sakes, in bearing both the Wrath of God and the Rage
of Hell, when he might have avoided both, if he had not designed to be a
Refuge, and Covert from both to us!

5. The State of those that are in Christ is greatly amended and improved since
the Fall, beyond what it was before. Never was better Tidings brought to the
World, than that; behold I make all Things new. Men are given to change, and
often change for the worse; but God's Alterations are always to Advantage. The
New Testament Dispensation mightily excels the Old; the latter Days will
outshine and outdo the former Times. Isa. 60.17. For Brass I will bring Gold,
and for Iron I will bring Silver, and for Wood Brass, and for Stones Iron. That
which comes in the room of what is done away, is still of a more valuable Kind.
The second Covenant is better than the first, the second Adam more glorious
than the first. Sinful Man restored, is in a better Condition, than innocent
Man as he was Created. A poor Believer is stronger in Christ, than the holiest
Angels without Christ; for without Christ no Promises of Perseverance, but in
him there are, and such as cannot be broken. He will not turn away from us, we
shall not depart from him, Jer. 32.40.

6. It Is inexcusable Folly for any one in the World to lean to his own Arm. As
the Holy Ghost says, that Vain Man would be wise, i.e. it is an instance of his
Vanity, that he will not be persuaded to cease from his own Wisdom; so the
Pride of our Hearts makes us very unwilling to suspect our own Strength, or to
cast away all Confidence in it. This Pride does not only go before Destruction,
but is the Cause of it; Man would be a God to himself, his own Savior, and
Defender, and in thinking himself so, he is his own Destroyer. Nothing does
more effectually Ruin us, than the Conceit that we can recover or preserve our
selves from Ruin. It is such kind of Presumption which slaies its Ten
Thousands; if Men were more sensible of their own Infirmities, and distrustful
of their own Abilities, the Devils Kingdom would be empty in Comparison of what
it is. To imagine that we can do any Thing without Christ, is the way to undo
the Work of God already done. If Adams perfect Holiness was not permanent,
while he was left alone, how should ours be so, which is imperfect?

7. Everlasting Strength must fail, before any true Believers can Everlastingly
Miscarry. I say, before any can; for if any one may perish, all may; because it
is the same Strength which secures all. Unless the Lord's Hand be shortened, no
Soul can ever be plucked out of it. The Honor of Christ is concerned and indeed
engaged to see every Child of God brought safe to Heaven; and therefore they
may do well to consider what Reproach they cast upon Christ, who (by their
Doctrines of Apostasy) make believers walk with him, (as one said) like sorry
Dancers on a Rope, that are every Moment in danger of breaking their Necks. Is
Jesus Christ such a strong Helper, and yet may the Gates of Hell prevail
against those that are joined to him? Has he pawned his unchangeable Word,
that the good Part shall not be taken away from those that have once chosen it;
Luke 10.42. And shall Men that turn the Gospel upside down, represent it as a
doubtful uncertain Portion? Is Grace no better than common Gifts, and outward
Blessings? That we may be totally disposlest of the one as well as the other?
Nothing can more derogate from our Blessed Lord, or expose him worse than this
scandalous Opinion does, as a feeble incompetent Undertaker.

II. Exhortation.

1. Beware of falling from your own stedfastness, 2 Pet. 3.17. This is proper
and pertinent Advice to those whose Strength is in Christ, Gospel-Principles
breed an Holy, not a Carnal Security. Watchfulness and Diligence,
Circumspection and Caution, are necessary in our daily Walk; for they that lay
these Things aside, do thereby Declare that they have nothing to do with
Christ, nor any Interest in the Privilege I have been speaking of. They are
woefully mistaken, who think that infallible Promises render all Exhortations
fruitles: The Spirit of God teaches otherwise; 1 John 2.27, 28. Ye shall abide
in him; and now, little Children, abide in him. How absurd is it to suppose,
that certainty of Perseverance in Grace, should make Men do such Acts as are
contrary to Grace, and destructive of it! Or that we should therefore live in
the neglect of Means, because we are sure to persevere in the use of them! This
is such kind of Divinity, as the Devil's was, Mat. 4.6. He shall keep thee,
therefore hazard thy his Angels shall bear thee up, therefore cast thy self
down.

2. Be not utterly dismayed, when Satan has gotten any Advantage of you,
through your sinful Weakness. Be duly affected with, and suitably abased for,
the least Departure from God, but do not let go your hold of Christ, as if you
were irrecoverable. Say not, as the Church in Captivity did, Lam. 3.18. My
Strength and my Hope is perished from the Lerd. This is a very false and unjust
Conclusion, not warranted by the Word of Grace, but a mere Artifice of the
Devil. When he tempted you to Revolt, he would also urge you to despair of a
return; but though you have complied with him in the one, stand it out against
him in the other, Psalm 145.14. The Lord upholdeth all that fall, etc This
seems a Paradox indeed, for how should they fall, if he upholds them? Ans. He
upholds them so far, that they shall not utterly sink, and he will take Care to
raise them up again; do not reckon your selves destroyed, though cast down; The
ransomed of the Lord may be carried Captive into a Land of Enemies, but they
shall return and come to Sion with Songs, and Everlasting Joy upon their Heads,
Isa. 35.10.

3. Take heed of scornful or censorious despising of weaker Brethren. If he
that deals to every Man his measure of spiritual Strength, has afforded more
to you, and less to some others in the World, do not lift up your selves above
them. Boast not against the Branches (those that are inferior to thy self) for
thou bear not the Root, but the Root thee, Romans 11.18. If Jesus Christ were
not more liberal to you, than to them, your Soul would be in their Soul's Case.
Judge not those who are upright in their Hearts, though they do err in lesser
Points; the Holy Ghost says, they shall be holden up, for God is able to make
them stand, Chap. 14.4. Trample not upon them that are most bowed down with a
Spirit of Infirmity. There is a respect to be paid to God's halting Jacob's,
and his Lame Mephibosheths. The greatest and the least of Saints are both
depending Creatures, and therefore should carry themselves with all Modesty and
Meekness one toward another, He who establishes us with you in Christ, is
God, 2 Cor. 1.21.

4. Make no Promises of Perseverance in your own Strength. Learn the contrary
of the Psalmist in the Text, who first makes his Request, Let thy Hand be, etc.
Then expresses his Resolution, So will not we, etc. If we Vow continuance with
Christ in all Temptations, and intend to pay what we Vow, we must not Account
our selves capable of Payment without Assistance from Christ. No Man has Grace
enough to be his own Keeper, or to execute any Purpose of that sort, unless he
be still receiving more Grace from Christ's Fullness. A Thing well resolved, is
half done; but we can never resolve well, unless we do it in the Strength of
Christ. Mic. 4.5. We will walk in the Name of the Lord our God for ever and
ever. A Phrase which does at once import two Things, that should go together,
attendance on God's Service, and reliance on his Power.

5. Look to your Faith, as the principal Grace, which contributes to your
Establishment. Isa. 7.9. If you will not believe, surely you shall not be
established. The contrary is employed, If you do believe, you surely shall be.
The Scripture says more than once, That by Faith we stand, Romans 11.20. 2 Cor.
1.24. Which is more than is any where said of any other Grace, and the Reason
is evident,

1. Because Faith is the uniting Grace, and it is Union with Christ, which is
the ground of our Safety.

2. It Is the receiving Grace; that whereby we do not only receive Christ
himself, but all from Christ; and it is by Virtue of Strength received, that we
are able to stand. This is the Grace whereby we do not only receive from Christ
at first, but whereby we must be receiving from him all along; for we renew our
Strength by waiting upon God, Isa. 40. ult. Which is a Scripture Phrase for
Faith and Patience together. It is the blessedness of those whose Strength is
in God, that their Strength is still increasing; they go from Strength to
Strength, Psalm 84.5, 7. But without Faith, there is no such Blessedness to be
had, the Unbeliever has no Strength but what is in himself; a mere seeming
Strength, and therefore a perishing declining Strength; for from him that has
not, what he seems to have, shall be taken away.

6. Exercise Faith upon Christ especially in Times of great Temptation and
general Defection Never think to stand long, if you stand loose from Christ;
but keep your hold of him, and stick close to him, and then you will be able to
stand fast, and having done all to stand, whatever assaults are made upon you,
whatever Apostacies are committed by others, continue touching him, and Virtue
will still come out of him. Make your Nest in this Rock, when the Devil blows
with his Wind; when Paul was buffeted with the Messenger of Satan; he besought
the Lord that it might depart, and though that was not immediately granted, yet
he had a very satisfactory Answer, My Grace is sufficient for thee, my
Strength, etc. 2 Cor. 12.7, 8, 9. If it be a Time wherein the Faith of many is
Shipwrackt and overthrown, Holy Trust in Christ will be an Anchor to the Soul,
sure and steadfast. When many of Christ's Disciples went back, and he put the
Question to them, Will you also go away? Peter cries Lord to whom shall we go?
(to whom besides thee?) John 6.66, 67, 68.

7. Do not arrogate the Honor of your standing in Christ, and abiding with
Christ, in the least measure to your selves. Let Christ have all the Glory of
your setting out, and holding out; let him have it now, and let him have it at
the Last. Ascribe all to him, who is able to keep you from falling, who alone
could do it, and has done it, Jude 24.25. Christ is the Person there meant,
for the Presentation of Believers faultless in the great Day belongs to him.
Say to him, Lord by thy Favor thou have made my Mountain to stand strong,
which else had been removed and carried away long since; thou have made me a
Pillar in thy Temple, else I had waver'd and gone out again, as well as others.
When you Live, and when you Dye, acknowledge this to your Redeemers Praise.

SERMON IX.
March 24. 1696.
JUDGES XVI. xx. last Clause. And he wist not that the Lord was departed from
him.


THE Person whom these Words concern, was the Twelfth of those Judges, from
whom this Book receives its Name, as being the History of the Commonwealth of
Israel, during their successive Administrations. He was one that had an
extraordinary Presence of God with him, which stirred him up to, and made him
successful in very great and wonderful Undertakings. So we read, That the
Spirit of the Lord began to move him, Chap. 13.25. And came mightily upon him,
Chap. 14.6. And again, Chap. 15.14. The first Miscarriage, whereby he forfeited
his Privilege, was his Conversation with the Harlot at Gaza, and yet God was
pleased by his special Assistance to let him escape the Danger which that Sin
brought him into, ver. 1, 2, 3. of this Chapter. The second Debauchery proved
more fatal; viz. the letting out of lustful Affections to Dalilah, a Woman in
the Valley of Sorek, ver. 4. This Sin was followed with others, as the telling
of three deliberate repeated lies, ver. 7, 11, 13. And at last consenting to
the Violation of his solemn Vow as a Nazarite, by the shaving of his Head, ver.
17. One would think from the discovery of such an important Secret, that he had
been bereaved of common Prudence, when there were such plain Reasons to suspect
a persidious Design; but so God rightly ordered, that the Folly should be a
Punishment of the Sin, and that both should make way for his further Suffering.
For as soon as this was done, his Strength went from him, ver. 19. His Strength
seems to be a peculiar Gift to him, which was to be continued upon the
Condition of keeping his Hair uncut, and so that Condition being broken, this
Gift was recalled. Yet the strange Presumption and Stupidity of Smpson after
all this, may be Matter of Astonishment to us; of which we have an Account in
this 20th ver When Dalilah comes to rouse him with the usual Cry, The
Philisines are upon Thee. See 1. His Presumption, He awoke out of his Sleep,
and said; I will go out as at other Times before, and shake my Self] How could
he imagine this, when he himself had said, that if he were shaven, he should
become Weak, and like another Man? How could he expect to do as he had done,
when he had so positively foretold his own Fate? Therefore 2. See his
Stupidity; [And he wist not that the Lord was departed from him.] He said what
he did, upon a sudden, at his first awaking, before he found how he was
betrayed; besore he perceived that his Locks were cut off, and before he
considered what the Consequents of that would be. He was not instantly
apprehensive of the Misery of his Case, through God's just abandoning of him,
but depended on the same Assistance which he had formerly received, till he
felt the contrry by woeful Desertion. It is a lamentble Truth which these Whords
do teach us, but yet a Truth which is prositable to be known.


Obs. There may be sad Departures of God from Believers themselves, of which
for a while they may remain insensible. Sampson was not only an eminent Type of
Christ, in whom the Power of God was gloriously displayed, 1 Cor. 1.24. But is
also reckoned among those Old Testament worthies, Heb. 11.32. Of whom it is
said, notwithstanding their various sinful Infirmities, That these all obtained
a good Report through Faith, ver. 39. And therefore this general Doctrine may
be built on this Particular Example. In handling of it.

I. What are those Departures of God which even Belivers are incident to. II.
What are the Causes and Occasions of them. III. What are the Essects which
sollow thereupon. IV. How far may Believers be insensible hereof. V. HOw comes
it to pass that they are so. Vi. Use.
I. What are those Departures of God from Believers, which they are liable to,
and sometimes exercised with? There are Three Things, which must be distinctly
inquired into, with Respect to this Point.

1. What are they as to the Kind?

1. Not a Loss of the Favor of God, Psalm 89.33. My Loving Kindness will I not
utterly take from him, etc. It Is brought in with a nevertheless, after he had
spoken of the visiting of Transgression with the Rod, ver. 32. God's sharpest
Corrections for Sin are no Arguments of his Alienation from the Person; when
his Hand goes forth with most Severity against us, his Heart may be still
toward us as much as ever. So Isa. 54.10. The Mountains shall depart, etc. but
my Kindaess shall not depart from thee. The Mountains are the most solid and
lasting Parts of this lower Creation, yet they may and shall be removed, they
may by violent Eruptions be carried into the midst of the Sea, they shall be
overturned at the End of the World; but the Love of God is Everlasting and
Immovable. Where it is once fixed, it is never to be taken away; neither Things
present, not to come shall be able to separate us from it. If the foresight of
our Sins did not prevent it, Sins actually committed, shall not displace it. If
God bear such a good will to unbelieving Sinners (for the first fulsilling of
the Work of Faith in us, is a Fruit and Evidence of his Love to us) we cannot
reasonably suppose that it should afterward cease to sinning Believers.

2. It Is a withdrawing of the Spirit of God, not in Regard of real Fresence,
but manifest Influence.

1. The real Presence of the Spirit is not withdrawn, for this is constant and
perpetual. Both its Constancy and Perpetuity I conceive to be intimated, John
14.17. He dwells with you, and shall be in you. Where he once makes his
abode, he always settles it; he is not an uncertain Guest, but a resolved In
habitant. Believers have the Spirit, when they cannot discern that they have
him; for they would be no longer Believers, if they were without the Spirit. We
must be cut off from Christ, if the Spirit should be taken from us, for our
Union with Christ is maintained and secured by the indwelling of the Spirit. 1
John 3.24. Hereby we know that he abides in us, by the Spirit which he has
given us. This is a continued Privilege, upon which others depend; for we are
no louger the Members of the Lord Jesus, than we are the Temples of the Holy
Ghost.

2. The manifest Inftuence of the Spirit may be withdrawn; though his Residence
be not altered, his Operations may be interrupted; in Three Respects, as to
Gifts, Graces, and Comforts.

1. In Respect of Gifts. These receive the Name of spiritual Gists, not only
from their Nature, but from the Spirit as the Author; for how various
soeverthey be, they all flow from him as their common Fountain. There are
diversities of Gifts, but the same Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.4. Now they that are
possessed of these Gifts will fsind them withering and decaying, and be as though
they had none, when the Spirit of God withholds that actual Influence which
gives Life and Vigor to them. With what stammering Lips do we speak, when he
is not with our Mouths! What poor ignorant Babblers are we, when he does not
enrich us in Utterance and Knowledge!

2. In respect of Graces. As the Habits of Grace are infused, so the Actings of
Grace are assisted, by the Spirit, and the most strong and lively Christians
are very feeble and languid, when he keeps back his quickening Helps. The being
of Grace is the Effect of the Spirits planting, the springing of Grace is the
Effect of his Watering. The choicest Vine will yield but sorry Grapes (like the
shrivelled Fruits of a dry Tree) when God Commands the Clouds, that they do not
Rain upon it. In such a Case, though the Seed of God remain in a Believer, 1
John 3.9. Yet what he bring forth, is always ready to Dye.

3. In respect of Comforts. All Consolation is the Work of the Spirit, which is
certainly more or less, according as he affords or abates his Testimony. When
he sheds abroad the Love of God in the Heart, there is abounding Hope, and a
full Tide of spiritual Joy, Romans 5.5. When he refuses or forbears to do this,
there is a black Cloud upon all our Evidences, and we find nothing but Trouble
and Sorrow. Many Holy Souls have been thus dealt with; The Comforter that
should relieve them, has been far from them, Lam. 1.16. And Faith has with
difficulty subsisted in the midst of perplexing Doubts and restless Fears.

2. What are those Departures of God as to the Degree?

1. The exact Measure or Distance cannot be stated. We cannot say, that thus
far God may go, and no further; for his Dispensations of this sort are very
different, with one and with another, yea with the same Believer at several
Seasons. Sometimes though he let us go out of his Hand, and do not actually
uphold us, yet he is so near to us, as to be ready to catch us when we are
falling; sometimes he stands so far off, that he first lets us fall, and then
raises us again. Sometimes he is within our reach, when we feel after him,
sometimes he is gone a greatlength, and we cannot take hold of him. God sets
bounds to us which we cannot pass, but we can prescribe no Limits to him. The
best are beholden to Sovereign Mercy, when they are at the worst.

2. God does never totally depart from those, whom he has once vouchsaft his
gracious Presence to. His immutable Promise is the Believers Security against
any such Desertion. Heb. 13.5. He has said, I will never leave thee, nor
forsake thee. The Truth of this Word would be not only shaken but overturned,
if the forsakings of God were total at any Time. He never leaves us, but in
Part; he never leaves us so, but that at the same Time he is still present with
us; if he leave us in one respect, he is present in another. When he is
withdrawn from us as to Revival, he is yet with us in a way of Support; when
he does not Work in us to Do, he continues working in us to Will. Though the
Spirit may retire as one that is grieved, yet he is not absolutely quenched;
there is the Fire, when there is no Flame.

3. What are they, as to the Duration?

1. There is great variety in the dealings of God, as to this also. The
Intervals of his Absence from us are longer or shorter, as he sees good. He
changes Times and Seasons, not only in a Political ( Dan. 2.21.) But in a
spiritual Sense, as it pleases him. Our dead Calms have doubtful Periods; for
his Wind blows when it lists. Sometimes Christ's renewed Visits are more
quick and speedy, and sometimes more slow and lingering, Song 3.4. It was but a
little that I passed from them, and I found him whom my Soul loves: She had
just begun her Enquiries after him, when she met with him. So God sometimes
comes back at the first call; but Saints do not always fare so; at other Times
when they cry and shout, he shuts out their Prayer, Lam. 3.8.

2. The Departures of God from true Believers are never final, they may be
tedious, but they are Temporary. As the Evil Spirit is said to depart from
Christ for a season, Luke 4.13. (Though he quitted that Temptation, he did not
quit his Design, so as to Tempt no more) so the good Spirit withdraws from
those that are Christ's, for a Season only, it is with a Purpose of comeing
again. When he has most evidently forsaken, it is as unquestionable, that
sooner or later he will return: And the Happiness of his return will richly
recompense for the sadness of his Desertion, Isa. 54.7. For a small Moment have
I forsaken thee, but with great Mercies will I gather thee. Here is not only a
gathering after a forsaking, but great Mercies to make amends for a small
Moment. He who has engaged to be our God for ever, cannot depart for ever.

II. What are the Causes and Occasions of these sad Departures? Among others
these are the Chief.

1. The seeking of our own Credit and Glory, or any other selfish Ends, in our
serving of God. Where Pride is at the beginning of a Duty, shame will be (as
one says) the Conclusion; God will make the Body of those Actions to stink
which are corrupted with an evil Eye; by the withholding of his Spirit, he will
disparage those, who under a pretense of honoring him, do really aim to lift up
and magnify themselves. When Men disire to be extolled as Herod once was, This
is the Voice of God and not of Man, he makes it appear that it is the Voice of
a forsaken Man without any thing of God. A plain Sign of this evil is, when the
Spirit that dwells in us Lusts to Envy, when we are afraid that our
Reputations should be diminisht, and our Names darkened by another's shining
Brighter. In that Case, we should indeed be troubled, that Gos is no better
served by us, but we should rejoice that he is better served by others; it
should humble us that we are less useful than others, it should not disturb us
that we are less esteemed; this is the way to drive the Spirit of God from us.

2. Self-Confidence in the Performance of Religious Duties. The Spirit of God
frequently and justly denies his Aid and Help in the carrying on of that Work,
which we venture to Undertake without him. We should never seek the Face of
God, without seeking his Strength, Psalm 105.4. Divine Power is communicated to
us in a way of believing Expectation; Zech. 10.12. I will strengthen them in
the Lord, and they shall walk up and down in his Name. We are likely to succeed
best in Holy Services, when we go about them in a distrust of our own
Abilities, and Sense of our own weakness. The greatest Gifts and Graces will
fail, by relying on them; and in those very Things wherein Men most abound in
their own Apprehensions, they usually fall most short. If we do not look up to
God to prepare our Hearts, he will convince us how insignificant our Personal
Preparations are. If we Fancy that our own Enlargements will be sufficient,
it is no wonder, if we find ourselves more straightened and indisposed then, than
at any other Times.

3. Self-Applause after the Performance of Religious Duties. When we Sacrifice
to our own Net, the Spirit leaves us to Toil in casting it to no Purpose. The
spiritual Man shall be cast from his Excellency, if he ascribe that to himself
which belongs to God. When Grace has been exercised in the highest Measure,
the Heart ought to lie lowest under the Consideration of its own nothingness.
When Paul speaks of his laboring more abundantly than they all, he corrects
himself presently, yet not I, but the Grace of God, which was with me, 1 Cor.
15.10. He was afraid of that little boasting Pronoun [I] and therefore retracts
it, and strikes Sail to the Grace of Christ, God will resist, instead of
helping us, if we steal his Crown, and put it on our own Heads. The Spirit will
never agree to walk with us, if we take the uppermost Hand; and we shall lose
the Benefit of his Holy Breathings, if we be puffd up in our own Conceits. God
will disable those from doing any thing praiseworthy, that give not him the
Praise.

4. The setting up of Duties in the room of Christ. This we are exceeding apt
to do; Disciples need to Learn that Lesson of being Converted, and becoming as
little Children, Mat. 18.3. It was very truly said by Mr. Rutherford, that
Deadness to good and gracious Works, and lively Activity in the Performance of
them seldom meet together; high Degrees of inherent Holiness, and a full
devolving of the Soul upon Christ's imputed Righteousness rarely Kiss each
other. It Is well, where they do, but it is a Provocation to God to abandon us,
where they do not. If we would run in the way of God's Commandments, we must
remember that it is not of him that runs; if we would be assisted in the
Duties of Obedience, we must bear it upon our Hearts, that we can never be
entitled to Heaven by them. We forfeit the Spirit of Faith, if we imagine that
Faith it self (the noblest of all Graces) does enrich us any otherwise, than as
a Vessel which holds the Treasure; Sicut olla paecuniis referta hominem
locupletat. Calv.

5. Spiritual Sloth is another Cause; in the disuse of Gifts, not exercising of
Grace, and neglect of Duty. This is the contrary extreme to that
Self-Confidence mentioned before, as that was a Conceit that we could do all
Things in our own Strength, this is to sit still, and do nothing. We must stir
up the Gift which is in us, if we would preserve it; God uses to help the
Industrious, but he abhors the Sluggard. Seneca, a sober Heathen, calls
Idleness the Grave of a Living Man. Dr. Arrowsmith, an Holy Divine, styles it
the Hell of a Living Christian. We hazard the taking away of our Talents, when
we do not employ them. To let our Graces lie asleep, is not the way to nourish,
but to starve them. Many have almost lost the Spirit of Prayer, by the
restraining of Prayer, Arise, and be doing, and the Lord will be with thee, 1 Chronicles. 22.16. If we leave God to do all, God will leave us to our selves; if we
fold our Hands together, we cannot expect that his should be stretched out for
our Assistance.

6. Sleightness and Formality. A sincere Believer, who is so in the Main, and
Acts as such for the most Part, may yet sometimes imitate the Hypocrite too
much, i.e. his Heart may be too little engaged in approaching unto God. We too
often pour out Words in Prayer without suitable Affections, too often attend on
God's Word, without bending our Minds to it, or taking heed how we hear. Now by
our resting so much in the outward Forms of Religion, we lose the Spirit of
Power; by going in a Road of Duty, and performing this or that Act of Worship,
because we are accustomed to do it, we put our selves out of the Way of Divine
Influences. When we do not serve God with our Spirits, we may well expect to be
deprived of his Spirit; when we do not seriously and earnestly pursue Communion
with God in Duties, how can we expect to enjoy any? We put off God with a
little bodily Exercise, God puts off us with a visible Church-Priviledge; we
lift up our Hands in the Sanctuary, without our Souls, he lets us see nothing
of his Power and Glory there.

7. Worldliness and Carnality. The minding of Earthly Things clips the Wings
wherewith we should mount up toward Heaven. So far as we are joined to such
Idols, we may look to be separated from God; we open our Bosoms to them, and he
hides his Face from us. Hence it is that that Condition of Life which does most
please and gratify the Flesh, does most expose to the withdrawings of the
Spirit; because when our Portion of good Things in this Life, is very large, we
are very prone to rejoice inordinately in it; and when the World smiles much
upon us, we commonly grow fond of the World. Therefore a low or afflicted State
has been oftener bless't with sweet incomes from Heaven, than the height of
Prosperity, 2 Cor. 1.5. As the Sufferings of Christ abound in us; so our
Consolation also abounds by Christ, some have enjoyed so much of God in
Prisons (as that Martyr in Bonner's Coal-hole) that they have been unwilling to
receive their Liberty. But it is very usual, that according to what Men gain in
Temporals, they lose in Spirituals.

8. Base and sinful Compliances for the avoiding of outward inconveniencie.
This is as great an Offense to the Spirit of Christ, as Peter once was to
Christ himself in a like Case. The affording of a Man's Presence at false
Worship, may justly provoke God to deny his wonted Communications to us, when
we are joining in the true. If a Man partake of the Table of Devils, what
Divine Fellowship can he look for at the Table of the Lord? The woeful
declinings of many Persons, who have been merely led by Fear to Build up what
they formerly destroyed, have been too plain a Testimony to this Truth.
Sulpitius (the Historian) who lived with St. Martin, tells us that after he had
joined in Communion with Ithacius the persecuting Bishop, through the
Threatenings of the Emperor Maximus, there was a remarkable Suspension of those
Influences and Graces for which he was eminent before. [Dr. B. Answer to Letter
of the Ass, Genesis p. 29.] The best Way to retain the Spirit, is to retain our
Integrity, whatever we hazard by it.

9. Unbelieving Dejection wilfully indulged. There is a saying of the Hebrew
Doctors mentioned by Drusius, Spiritus Sanctus non residet super hominem
moestum; the Holy Spirit does not delight to dwell with one of a Sorrowful
Spirit; and it is in great measure true. The Spirit of God is not a Spirit of
heaviness, it is no Pleasure to him to see any of his Saints go mourning and
bowed down, when their Hearts should rather be lifted up in the ways of God.
Nehemiah was sore afraid when the King took Notice of the sadness of his
Countenance, Chap. 2.2. And Mordecai would not enter the Court-gates with his
Sackcloath on, Esth. 4.2. An Holy Joyful Frame, and Garments of Praise are
always comely for Upright ones, and most acceptable unto God. As David's Music
drove away the Evil Spirit that troubled Saul, so Christian Alacrity (not vain
and foolish Levity) is a means of having the good Spirit to abide with us.
Hardening our selves in Sorrow is giving Way to Unbelief, the Sin of which he
especially reproves.

SERMON X.
April 7. 1696.
JUDGES XVI. xx. last Clause. And he wist not that the Lord was departed from
him.


10. REjecting the Present Motions of the Spirit, which ought to be instantly
embraced and followed. All the Spirits Motions are seasonable, and therefore
not to be put off; for Delay is a kind of denial, and savours of such
ungrateful Contempt, as must needs be very displeasing to him. When thou
said, Seek ye my Face, my Heart said unto thee, thy Face will I seek, Psalm
27.8. God does not only expect such an Answer, but expects it immediately upon
his Call. When ever he blows with his Wind, he looks that we should spread our
Sails. If we refuse his offered help, we may deservedly want it when desired.
As Christ withdrew himself from the Spouse, because she let him stand knocking
so long at the Door of her Heart, and she still deferred to open, and tired out
his loving Forbearance with vain and frivolous Excuses, Song 5.2, etc. But as
we must not omit the present Performance of any Duty which he excites unto, we
must not check his Influences by being weary of the Duties which he assists us
in: If we do not improve extraordinary Aids by holding out the longer, we
provoke him to depart.

11. Dallying with Satan's Temptations. This was Sampson's Case, he went on
Mocking Dalilah three Times one after another, till at last he told her all his
Heart. So Eve's parleying with the Serpent, instead of giving a resolute
Repulse, was the introduction to all that Sin and Misery, which has since
filled the World. There can be no Conversation had with the Unclean Spirit, but
that the Holy Spirit will be offended by it. An intimate Friend would take it
ill, and would have Reason to keep at a more than usual distance from us, if he
saw us maintaining any familiar Correspondence with his avowed Enemy. If we
grow bold and presumptuous in playing with the Devils baits, the Spirit of God
will be more shy of having Fellowship with us. If we do not vigorously oppose
the first Suggestions and Assaults, we can have little Hope of being assisted
in the progress of Temptation, and much less of comeing off with Victory at the
End of it. He that will tread upon the Edge of a known Snare, which he should
fly from, is generally left to be caught and taken in it.

12. Carelessness and Negligence in our daily Walk. This may be, and is too
often the fault of those, whose Hearts nevertheless in the main are upright
with God. The Fear of God is in them, but it is not constantly before them, as
it ought to be. Though they be not habitual, Customary Sinners, yet for want of
taking that heed to their Ways which they should do, they may fall into
scandalous and heinous Sins; and what less can we suppose that this should
issue in, than a Departure of the Spirit of God from them? And therefore when
David came to himself, after his foul Miscarriage, and reflected upon what he
had done, he might well put up such a Prayer, Psalm 51.11. Cast me not away
from thy Presence, take not thy Holy Spirit from me. This was what he dreaded
and deprecated, as the just and natural Consequent of his Sin. He that would
not expose himself to such a Judgment as this is, needs to be very watchful and
Circumspect; for if we do not ponder the Path of our Feet, and look well to our
goings, we shall slip into the Mire, before we are aware.

III. What are the Effects which follow upon these Departures?

1. A manifest deadness both in Private Duties and Public Ordinances. It Is
said of the slain Witnesses, that when the Spirit of Life from God entered into
them, They stood upon their Feet, Rev. 11.11. When the Spirit withdraws, we can
by no means lift up our selves, but only creep as it were, and grovel on the
ground. It Is so

1. In Private Duties; the Ebbings and Flowings which we often find in the
Exercise of Grace, the various and unequal Motions of our Souls toward God,
when we are alone, in our Retirements, plainly prove that the Spirit of God is
not always alike present, and that according as he is more or less so, we are
either lively or drooping. When the Spirit is in the Wheels, we are able to
run, but if not, we tire. When we have him with us, we go on swiftly, when we
are without him, we draw very heavily. When God pours out his Spirit upon us,
how fervently can we pour out our Souls to him? When he is departed, how
strangely are we bound up? The Influence of the Spirit sets us on Fire, and in
his Absence we can get no warmth.

2. It Is the same in Public Ordinances. When God fills them with his own
Presence, there is a mighty Power, a glorious Majesty, a charming Beauty, a
satisfying Sweetness in them; but when God withholds himself, they are empty of
all this. When the Spirit of God moves upon the Waters of the Sanctuary, they
are a Stream that make glad the City of God; but else, even the Children of
Sion have no Refreshment by them. Hence it is that the very same Persons are so
differently affected with, and wrought upon by the same Administrations at
several Seasons; sometimes it may be, we meet with that ravishing Pleasure and
Joy in Worshipping Assemblies, that we are ready to cry, it is good to be here,
at other Times we feel no such Thing. When we are in the Spirit on the
Lord's Day, the Sabbath is our Delight, the Word is savoury Meat, the Supper is
a Feast of Fat Things; but without the Spirit, these Days of Heaven are lost to
us, and the Wells of Salvation like dry Pits.

2. A wretched indifferency toward the Service of God. As this is an Effect of
God's departing, so it naturally follows upon the former; for where Men are not
quickened in God's way, they will certainly need to be quickened to it. When
the vigorous Relish of the Soul is gone, the Appetite will be gone
proportionably. Our desiring of the Word depends very much upon our Tasting of
it, 1 Pet. 2.2, 3. The better Meals we make in God's House, the more we hunger;
and the more we drink of the River of his Pleasure, the greater is our Thirst.
Here lies our Misery therefore, when through the Absence of the Spirit God's
Service is become undelightful to us, it is also too much undesir'd by us. Some
desire to his Name is still remaining in every gracious Soul, but it is
marvelously cooled and abated, and the edge of it taken off; there is not that
vehement Desire, which the Scripture speaks of, 2 Cor. 7.11. There is not a
desiring with Desire; as Luke 22.15. There is not that Panting after God, nor
that earnest longing to come and appear before him, which David professes,
Psalm 42.1, 2. They can pass over Seasons of conversing with God, or be
hindered of them, more easily than when the Spirit is present.

3. The Revival of secret Corruptions, whereby Satan gets great Advantages. The
Evil present with us, is never so prevalent, as when the Lord is departed from
us. Then those Lusts which seemed to be pretty well mortified and subdued
before, start up again, and recover their Strength, and the Devil falling in
with them, does abundance of mischief. Believers are hereupon sometimes
overcome by Temptations, which they Thought themselves most secure against, and
furthest off from a Compliance with; they are led to commit the very Sins which
they had the greatest Aversion to and Abhorrence of. Satan and indwelling Sin
together do not make up so great a Force, but that we may withstand and repel
them, when we have the Presence of the Spirit of God; but when we are bereaved
of that Presence, we are too weak to grapple with them asunder. Therefore the
first Rule in the spiritual Warfare is, be strong in the Lord, Ephesians. 6.10. It Is
not to be believed, what an Head Corruption will get, and what inrodes the
Devil will make, when a Saint is left but a little to himself. One Temptation
is admitted after another, with very faint and fruitless Reluctance; like
Jerusalem That opened her Feet to every one, etc. Ezekiel. 16.25.

4. Impenitency for a Time under the guilt of Sin committed. There are several
Causes of sinful hardness, and among the rest, we find it sometimes in
Scripture attributed to God; which cannot be understood, as if he were in any
Sense the Author of it, or the Agent in it, so as to produce it by positive
Influence, but chiefly by Way of Privation, viz. by removing of the Spirit from
us, whose proper work it is to soften, to make our Hearts tender, and bring us
to Repentance. Hence it is that the very Children of God, such as can boldly
say, doubtless thou art our Father, do not only err from God's ways, but (which
is more) are hastened from his Fear, Isa. 63.16, 17. They may not only commit
Sin, but continue in it a great while, when the Case is so with them. It Is
astonishing that David should remain without Repentance so many Months as he
did; we cannot imagine but that he often heard and read the sixth and seventh
Commandments in that Time, both in his own House and in the Temple, and yet
Conscience lay asleep still, till the Spirit of God by Nathan awakened him
again. His Reproofs of Sin are the only Effectual Ones; for while he is silent,
all other smitings will signify little to sound Conviction.

5. Impatience or Despondency, even under light Afflictions. Fretting or
Fainting in a Day of Adversity, are the natural Issues of our own Spirit, when
they are not calm or comforted by God's.

1. We cannot possess our Souls in Patience under Suffering, when the Spirit
leaves us. There is need of strengthening with all might, according to his
glorious Power, unto all Patience, etc. Col. 1.11. There is a natural
Frowardness of Heart which all afflictive Evils tend to Kindle and Provoke,
which we are no more able of our selves to Conquer, than we are to rule the
Raging of the Sea. The same God that lays his Hand at any Time upon us, must
also by his own Grace humble us under it, and reconcile us to it, or else our
rebellious Passion will struggle and contend against it. Jonahs extravagant
Anger for a Gourd, and justifying of himself, shows how ungovernable we are,
when forsaken of God, Jonah 4.9.

2. We cannot rejoice in Hope under any Suffering, when the Spirit is
withdrawn. We are ready to sink immediately, when our Support is taken away;
our feeble Knees (like Belshazzar's) are apt to smite one against another, and
we cannot bare any Burden alone. Carnal Fear swallows up the Soul, our Hearts
fail us, and wear as they that have no more Spirit in them, when we have lost
God's encouraging Presence. God's help is as necessary against Despair in
Trouble, as for Deliverance out of it. He that believes to see the goodness of
the Lord, when he is feeling his Severity, must be under the Influence of the
Spirit of Faith.

6. Shameful Denials of God's Name, in perilous Times, when we are called to
hold it fast, and to make an open Profession of it. Courage and Resolution,
Constancy and Stedfastness in appearing for the Cause and Interest of Christ at
all Times, is an eminent Fruit of the Spirit; and therefore Believers were not
so frequently, nor in such large numbers, called to suffer for God under the
Old Testament as now under the New. When there is a more plentiful Effusion of
the Spirit, than there was before. And therefore the Apostles were commanded to
tarry at Jerusalem, and not to Launch into a Sea of Persecution, by going about
to Preach the Gospel, till the Spirit was given, which Christ expresses by
their being endued with Power from on high, Luke 24.49. What a miserable Coward
was Peter before this, that had not the Confidence to own his Master, when only
challenged by two of the Maids of the High Priest, Mark 14.66, etc. And yet how
undaunted after this, in his Acknowledgment of him to the Rulers of the People,
and Elders of Israel? Acts 4.10, 11. When the Disciples were filled with the
Holy Ghost, they spoke the Word of God with boldness, ver. 31. But how easily
will Men's furious Threatenings scare us, when our God abandons us.

7. Woeful Confusion and Disorder in the Exercise of our Thoughts, and workings
of our Affections.

1. In the Exercise of our Thoughts. A Man's Thoughts are naturally quick and
nimble, and therefore the more apt of themselves to be hurried and confounded,
as we know that the swiftest Motions are perplexed the soonest. When Cain went
out from the Presence of the Lord, he became a Fugitive and a Vagabond; so the
Mind is full of will and loose, incohaerent, distracted, vain Imaginations,
that serve to no use, that will be kept in no Order, when it is not under the
actual Conduct of the Spirit of God; it roves and wanders from one thing to
another and can fix or settle no where, as it should. There are swarms of bad
Thoughts which thrust out the good ones; and we can no more meditate to any
Purpose upon spiritual Objects without the Spirit, than a Man can take the
Prospect of a Star through a Glass held with a shaking Hand.

2. In the working of our Affections; these are as hard to be regulated, as our
Thought are to be composed. They will boil over, when they should be kept in,
and when they ought to flow out, then there will be none stirring. The best of
our Hearts, if they be not under better Management than our own, will be hot
and cold by fits, at the contrary Seasons. Upon slight occasions, we know not
how to restrain them, and upon great occasions, we know not how to excite them.
This is and will be the Case, whenever God suspends his own gracious Acts, and
stands at a distance from us.

8. Unwilling and sad Expectation of Death and Judgment. It Is impossible for a
Child of God, cheerfully to lay down his Temporal life, and lay hold of
Eternal, unless God be with him, Psalm. 23.4. Though I walk through the Valley
of the Shadow of Death, I will fear no Evil, for thou art with me, etc. How
dismal must it be, to think of going to a departed God? Of standing at his Bar,
when we apprehend our selves cast out of his sight! How can we be persuaded of
his receiving us in the next World, when we are Jealous of his rejecting us in
this? Who can look into Eternity without Horror, that now looks upon God as
one afar off? Though the Passage be safe, it will be unavoidably Dark and
Stormy; though the Victory be certain, yet the Conflict will be sharp and
grivevous. The last Enemy will terrify, though it cannot hurt, and the Serpent
will hiss, though it cannot sting. The deserted Believer enters into Peace,
when he Dies, but he goes out of the World with much Disturbance. He is in
Bondage, as to his Frame, though at Liberty as to his State? he stands
trembling on the Brink of the Grave, because not upheld with God's Free Spirit,
Psalm 51.12.

IV. How far may Believers be insensible of those Departings?

1. They may not be instantly sensible of them; they may not perceive God to be
departed, as soon as he is so, they may conclude him to be still present when he
is not. We are not only incident to such mistakes, but it is possible to persist
in them for a while; and this is permitted by God, though he does not give us
up to such strong, nor to such lasting Delusions, as other Men. A Man in a
swooning fit, does not miss the Things which are taken from him, just at that
Moment, when they are taken, but afterward he recollects what he had, and
considers what is wanting. So it is here, at the very Time of God's Departure,
we may still Fancy that all Things continue as they were, but after he has
been some time departed, we shall discern a notorious Change.

2. They may not be thoroughly sensible of them for a much longer Time. When the
Soul is in a drowsy Frame, though it begins to be allarmed, there is however
some distance of Time, before it can shake off its slumbers, and perfectly open
its Eyes. Spiritual Distempers creep upon Believers by Degrees. and so they go
off again by Degrees also; they neither seize, nor leave us, all at once; but
it is most unquestionably true, that they are sooner Contracted than Cured, for
the most Part. It Is an easier Matter to stupifie than it is to rouse us. A
Saint may first be convinced by the Effects that God is departed, and yet some
time may pass, before he is duly humbled for the Causes of that Departure; he
may see in some measure what his Condition is, a great while, ere he seriously
Reflects, how he came into it.

3. The Sense of God's departings may not abide so long upon them, as it should
do. As it may need to be increas't after it is wrought, so it may need to be
renewed. We are too prone to wear out Impressions of this Kind, and to forget
what we have felt. This is contrary to what God expects from us; the Church did
not quickly lose the Taste of her Wormwood and Gall, but cries out, My Soul
has them still in Remembrance, Lam. 3.19, 20. God's joyful returns are not to
deface the Memory of his mournful Departures. It Is good to call to mind what is
past, that we may the better enjoy, and value and improve the Present. When the
doleful sorrow of God's Absence is gone, there is a becoming Sense of it to be
still preserved and retained.

V. How is it that Believers come to be so insensible of these Things?

1. That which they are insensible of, is some Reason of their insensibility.
When God departs, it is not to be supposed that our spiritual Senses should be
so vigorously Exercised as at other Times. We know, when our natural Spirits
are obstructed and retire, bodily Sense is taken away by it; so in this Case,
when the Spirit of God has left us, there is more than ordinary dullness and
benummedness which by that means seizes upon us. The Soul is therefore
unapprehensive of God's forsakings, because God has forsaken it; and it is a
token for good, that he is about returning, when the Soul begins its enquiries
after him.

2. The Devil is very busy in contriving Diversions for us at such Times, or
in making us think that me are well enough, though we should never be better
than we are. Satan has a great many Deviees to keep us from attending to the
Dispensations under which we are, or else to misrepresent our Condition to us.
When a Believer is in his best Estate, then his Work is to accuse and disquiet;
when a Believer is at his worst, then he labors to Flatter and Deceive. When
God testifies his Love to us, then he is suggesting Wrath; when God is angry,
he speaks nothing but Peace.

3. Believers themselves are oftentimes too much wanting in the careful
Examination of their own State; and so there happen sad Alterations, and they
know them not. We are ready to trust too much to former Trials, whereas we
should be frequently communing with our own Hearts, in order to a farther
search. It ought to be part of our daily Exercise, that we may see what ground
we get or lose. Reviews of our spiritual Condition can never be superfluous;
but neglect of it may be very dangerous; for so it is, that many are brought
extremely low, before they are aware.

VI. Use.

I. Information.

1. The Presence of the Blessed God is the spring of a Creatures Blessedness in
both Worlds. When John is describing the Happy State of the Church in Heaven,
or the happiest State of the Church on Earth, he expresses it by this; God
himself shall be with them, and be their God, Rev. 21.3. If we have God with
us, we cannot be miserable, if we have him not, we must of Necessity be so.
It Is an Heaven upon Earth to enjoy him, an Hell upon Earth to want him.

2. How great is their Misery, whom God is at an Etcrnal distance from? The
Spirit comes and strives for a Time with many, upon whom he never rests; and
when he once goes away, he does not so much as strive more. And then, where no
Fruit grew before, there can no Fruit grow hereafter; the Earth must always be
as Iron, when the Heaven over it is as Brass. When the Spirit of the Lord
departed from Saul, he came not again, but an Evil Spirit in his Place, 1 Samuel
16.14.

3. The new Creature is no more able to sustain it self, than the old Man to
transform himself. He restores my Soul, he leads me, etc. Psalm 23.3.
Restoring and Leading are both the Acts of God. Believers are not like Engines
which the Artificer sets a moving, and then they are left to go by themselves.
All that God has done for us in Conversion, will be undone by us, if he do not
continue doing. He that first makes the difference between us and others, must
keep it up to the last.

4. God has other ways to visit the Sins of his own Children, than by
Everlasting Destruction. This is that Wrath of God which comes upon the
Children of Disobedience, Ephesians. 5.6. But there are milder Effects of fatherly
Displeasure, for his offending Sons and Daughters. Instead of depriving them of
their Inheritance in Glory (which is infallibly secured) he suspends the
influences of his Grace; instead of casting them into outer Darkness hereafter,
he hides himself from them now, so that they can see no good, till the Veil is
rent again; and this is dismal enough.

II. Exhortation.

1. To those that are in Sampson's Case, from whom the Lord is departed.

1. Put your Mouths in the Dust, and acknowledge the Righteousness of God in
this Dispensation. Let thy Conscience give an impartial Answer to that
Challenge. Have thou not procured this unto thy self, in that thou have
forsaken the Lord thy God, etc.? Jer. 2.17. We are first in forsakin, God is
first in returning. The Lord is with us, while we are with him, 2 Chronicles. 15.2.
We wickedly depart from him, and then he justly departs from us; as Adam hid
himself from the Presence of the Lord, before he was driven out.

2. Own the goodness of God to you, even while he is dealing thus bitterly with
you.

1. Own his Goodness in giving a Sense of your Condition. How much worse would
your Case be, if you were left to be past feeling, or did not apprehend how
your Case is.

2. Own his Goodness that you are yet alive, and have a space and season
allowed you of returning to God. It was a Mercy to Samson, that the Philistines
did not kill him as soon as they seized him, but that he had an Opportunity for
Repentance.

3. Own his Goodness, if he fetch you home by Temporal Severities, and so
produce in you a speedier and livelier Sense of your spiritual State. Thus
Sampson was sorely afflited, and the Image of his Guilt plainly stamped upon his
Punishment. Gaza was the Place of his Suffering, as it had been of his Sin,
ver. 1. with 21. He that made himself a Slave to an Harlot, was made to grind
in a Prison, and his Eyes that were the Windows of his Lust, were put out, that
he might see his Sin and Misery the better.

3. Continue in Prayer, and all other Duties, how long soever this Dispensation
should last.

1. In Prayer; though God seems to sly from you, do you pursue him with greater
Importunity. Never give over seeking till you find; be much upon your Knees,
till you feel your selves upon the wing. Though I would not advise to affected
length in any one particular Address to God, when Life and Fervor is wanting,
yet it is good to try him by often repeated Approaches, for what we fail of at
one Time, we may meet with at another.

2. In all other Dnties, which are like Plowing and Sowing, that must be
minded, if we desire any Fruit, though at present we have neither Sun nor Rain.
Wait for the Promise of the Holy Ghost in his own Way; and do not think to
receive him by running farther into Sin. Omissions of Duty are not likely means
of spiritual Recovery. When God had in part forsaken David, he still resolved
solved to follow him in a course of Obedience, Psalm 119.8. We must look to our
Work, tho we have samll Supplies of Strength.

4. Be as far from casting away your Confidence, as from slacking your
Diligence. God does Devise Means, that his banished be not quite or for ever
expelled from him, 2 Samuel 14.14. When Sampson was brought forth to make Sport
for Three Thousand Philistines, he calls to God to remember and strengthen bim
yet again, that he might be avenged upon his Enemies; and God heard and
answered him, Ver. 28. Look to Christ by Faith, as forsaken of God for a Time.
Eye him as the escape Goat that was carried into the solitary Wilderness of
Divine Desertion for our sakes; yet he came out again and triumphed gloriously.

2. To those from whom God is not departed.

1. Do not despise; but pity those who are bereaved of that Presence which you
enjoy. They may not be greater Sinners, though you are greater Favorites.

2. Keep a watchful account of the gradual Accesses and Recesses of the Spirit
of God. Take notice of the Times of his stay with you, and the intervals of his
Separation from you.

3. Do not make Light of the least withdrawing, nor sit contented under it; for
it is truly deplorable, and will let in greater Evils upon you, if not
prevented. When it appears to you, as if he were about to depart, block up his
way, by throwing your selves at his seet; when he begins to stir, take hold of
him; as the Disciples constrained Christ to tarry with them, when he made as
though he would have gone further, Luke 24.28, 29.

4. Labor to be filled with all the fullness of God, Ephesians. 3.19. This is the way
to preserve you from his departings: The more you have of his presence, the
less danger you are in of losing it. To be always breathing after an increased
fellowship of the Spirit, is the way not to be deprived of what we possess
already.

SERMON XI.
June 16. 1696.
ACTS V. xxxii. latter Part. And so is also the Holy Ghost, whom God has given
to them that obey him.


THE Infinitely wise God knows very well how to serve his own Interests and
Ends, both by acts of Judgment and Mercy. Ananias and Saphira are suddenly
struck dead at the beginning of this Chapter; and on the contrary, many sick
are healed in the following part of this Chapter; both are overruled in an
eminent manner for the propagation of the Gospel in those early New Testament
times. This so enraged the High Priest and his Party among the Jews, that they
seize and imprison the Apostles, v. 17, 18. but the very next Night an Angel is
sent to open the Prison-Doors, and set them at Liberty, and commands them to go
and Preach in the Temple, which they did accordingly betimes in the Morning, v.
19, 20, 21. Their Enemies being amazed at this Deliverance, and afraid of a
Tumult among the People, bring them without violence, before the Council, who
charge them with Stubbornness and Sedition for persisting in the exercise of
their Ministry, after they had forbidden them, ver. 29. Hereupon Peter in the
Name of the Rest, makes a noble and courageous Defense. He tells them, that
what they did, was to avoid the guilt of Disobedience to God, whose Authority
is greater than Man's; ver, 29. And that the same Jesus, whom they had
Crucified, God had raised, and exalted to be a Prince and Savior, to give
Repentance, and Remissions of Sins, ver. 30, 31. This was the sum of what
Christ himself had ordered to be Published in his Name, and these were the
Things which they were Commissioned to Testify; Luke 24.47, 48. Therefore the
adds in the Text, [And we are the Witnesses of these Things,] The spreading of
this Doctrine in the World, was a trust which they had received, and they dared
not to be silent; their Lord had expressly said, Ye shall be Witnesses unto me,
both in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, etc. Chap. 1.8. And no Prohibitions or
Threatenings must stop their Mouths, or tempt them to neglect their Duty. But
this is not all; that which follows in the last Clause of the Verse, is yet
more considerable: [And so is also the Holy Ghost whom God has given to them
that obey him,] q.d. Though you quarrel with us, and oppose our Testimony,
there is a witness above all Exception, who may not only silence, but Cure your
lnfidelity; we are not alone in this Work, we have one to back us, who is
greater than all, even the Spirit of God himself. This agrees with what Christ
had said, John 15.26, 27. When the Comforter is come -- he shall testify of
me; and ye also shall bear witness --

The Words are the Conclusion of Peter's Reply to the Jewish Sanhedrim, in
which we have a brief Abridgement of his Sermon, or larger Discourse, upon the
Day of Pentecost, though that and this had very different Effects; they who
heard that, were pricked to the Heart, and it issued in their saving
Conversion, Chap. 2.37. They who heard this, were cut to the Heart, and
consulted about slaving the Apostles, ver. 33. of this Chapter. The same
Expression is used concerning Stephen's Murderers, Chap. 7.54. And signifies
the galling of their Consciences; Which provoke them to a more furious
Resistance of the Truth, when they have been persuaded to embrace it. Thus,
that very Word (in substance the same) which is the savor of Life unto one,
becomes the savor of Death unto another.

Obs. The Holy Spirit whom God has given to them that obey him, is a Witness
to Jesus Christ. The Text is not a direct Assertion of the Doctrine of the
Trinity, but we have here all the Three Divine Persons brought in and mentioned
together. Our Lord Christ is the Person witnessed to, the Holy Ghost is the
Person witnesssin, and God the Father is the Person whom this Witness proceeds
from, and is sent by. These are the Three that are siad to bear Record (or
witness) in Heaven, 1 John 5.7. And indeed they all Testify to each other. The
Father bore Witness of Christ, John 5.37. Christ also was given to be a Witness
to him, Isa. 55.4. And in this Place, the Holy Ghost is named as a Witness to
Christ. In handling this, I. Show in what Sense the Holy Spirit is given. II.
Whom he is given to. III. How he performs the Work and Office of a Witness to
our Lord Jesus. IV. Use.


I. In what Sense is the Holy Spirit given by God? In many Places, which it is
needless to repeat, the same Phrase occurs to us, especially in the New
Testament. To prevent misunderstanding, in so fuudamental a Point, I shall
endeavor (with an humble regard to the greatness of the Mystery) to open it
Negatively and Positiverly.

1. Negatively. The giving of the Spirit by God the Father, does not import the
Spirits being Inferior to the Father, nor does it exclude the Purchase and
Gift of Christ.

1. This does not import the Spirit's being Inferior to the Father. How
difficult soever it be to conceive the Order which is among the Persons in the
Godhead, we are sure, it is impossible that there should be any inequality. The
Blessed Spirit is one with the Father, and to him belong all the glorious
Perfections of the Supreme Being; he is the most High God, as the Father is.
All the Three Persons have the same Infinite Essence, and Nature, the same
Understanding, Will, and boundless Power. If any one Person be put beneath
another, his Deity is thereby destroyed; and therefore, we must take heed of
any such unscriptural Imagination concerning the Spirit of God. The Holy Ghost
is given indeed, but not as by a Superior, who has a command over another,
whether he will or not; for he is given with his own Consent; and one equal may
give another, if they agreee to do so; as in like manner Jesus Christ, whom the
Scripture calls God's Fellow, is also said to be given of God.

2. This does not exclude either the Purchase, or the Gift of Christ. The Holy
Spirit is given by the Father, and yet Purchased and given by the Son too.

1. Purchased by Christ, the Son of God. He has obtained the Spirit for us, or
else we should never have partaken of him. Hence it is that he is said to be
shed on us through Jesus Christ our Savior, Tit. 3.5, 6. His Blood was the
Price of this Privilege, his Intercession procures our actual Enjoyment of it.
John 14.16. I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforther,
etc. After the finishing of his Work on Earth, and Exaltation to Glory, the
Apostle tells us, That he received of the Father the Promise of the Holy Ghost,
Acts 2.33. The Promise of the Holy Ghost, here is put for the Holy Ghost
promised; to speak strictly, Christ received the Promise of the Holy Ghost, in
the Everlasting Covenant of Redemption, upon such and such Conditions which he
was to perform in the fullness of Time; but now, those Conditions being
performed, he received an abundant Accomplishment of this Promise, not for
himself, but for those that belong to him.

2. The Spirit is given by Christ. He is said to shed him forth; in the last
cited Place. So he engaged to send him, John 15.26. Chap. 16.7. The same Act
may very well be attributed both to the Father, and Son, as concurring in
external Operations. My Father works hitherto, and I work, Chap. 5.17. The
Father is represented as the Maker of all Things, very frequently, and so is
the Son; In the Beginning God Created the Heaven and the Earth, and in that
beginning Jesus Christ was with God not as an unactive Spectator, but as a
Co-worker. Believers are sanctified by God the Father, Jude 1. And they are
also sanctified in (or by) Christ Jessu, 1 Cor. 1.2. The Greek Particle is the
same in both Places; (...), and (...). Therefore it is manifest that the giving
of the Holy Ghost by God the Father, is not at all inconsistent with the
dispensing of the same Gife by our Lord Christ.

2. Positively. There are Four Things which seem to be signified to us, by the
Father's giving of the Holy Ghost.

1. That the Grace and Love of the Father, is the spring of all Divine
Communications. Here is the first Rise and Original of all the good that we
receive; it is all resolved into the Father's good Pleasure, as the Primary
moving Cause. John 3.16. God so laved the World that he gave his only begotten
Son, etc. It Is from the same Fountain of Eternal Love in the Bosom of God the
Father, that this Gift of the Holy Ghost does issue also. It Is very remarkable
therefore that our Lord directs the Faith of his Disciples to fasten chiefly
hereupon, Chap. 15.26, 27. I say not unto you, that I will pray the Father for
you, for the Father himself loves you. The meaning is not that Christ would
omit to mediate for them, or that his Mediation was not to be eyed by them, but
the meaning is, that the Father's Love, does prevent as it were, this Act of
Christ, and is the very ground which it is built upon; for Christ had never been
appointed to this work, if God had not loved us.

2. That the Communication of the Spirit is altogether free and undeserved. He
is truly given; and whatsoever is proper Gift, is not bestowed as a recompense
to any previous Endeavors, but in a way of most gracious voluntary Disposal;
it might be withheld, denied and kept back, without the least shadow of
unrighteousness or wrong to the Creature. God is under no Obligation to give
the Spirit to any, but what by his own Promise he has laid upon himself; and
there is no Promise, but what Mercy is as much concerned in the making, as
Truth in the keeping of. God has practiced to give the Spirit to them that ask
him, and for our our Encouragement, he is described as more willing to give the
Spirit upon our asking, than the tenderest Parents are to give necessary
Sustenance to their own Children, Luke 11.13. But is this ever the less an Act
of Grace, because we are put to beg it? And is not our very begging an effect
of Grace received? For we cannot ask the Spirit, without the Spirit; the Spirit
of Supplication is poured out, where Pleaded for.

3. That when the Spirit of God is once communicated, he is never totally
recalled, God does not take away what he gives, of this sort. His saving Gists
(as the Gift of the Holy Ghost most certainly is) are without Repentance, Romans
11.29. In them is Continuance; (as the Prophet speaks, Isa. 64.5.) Their
Duration runs Parallel with the being of the Giver. They that are really made
partakers of the Holy Ghost, in his special sanctifying Operations cannot lose
him. He is given to abide with them for ever; they are his Living Temples,
which shall be at no Time forsaken, or left desolate. There may be transient
workings, and long strivings of the Spirit, with carnal Hypocrites, but they
are not indeed possessed of him, and therefore are sinally without him. There was
a notable Difference between the Anointing of Saul and David; the former with a
Vial, 1 Samuel 10.1. The latter with an Horn of Oil, Chap. 16.1. God's Ceremonies
are very signisicant; the Horn was a more solid, the Glass a more brittle
Substance, to intimate the permanency of the Divine Presence with David, and
its sudden removal from Saul.

4. That the Communication of the Spirit is an exceeding valuable Blessing.
When God is said to give the Holy Ghost, it implies the Privilege of those
that receive him. It Is an instance of singular Favor on God's Part, and a
Matter of unspeakable Advantage on their Part, both to themselves and others.

1. It Is the greatest Advantage to themselves. There are many good and perfect
Gifts of God, but this Gift excells. The Promise of Christ in the Old
Testament, and of the Spirit in the New, contain all the Promises in Eminency.
There are some Things which God gives in Anger, but he never gives the Spirit
so. There are some Things which God distributes promiscuously, and some times,
to those whom he hates, most plentifully; but the Spirit is a Gift which the
World cannot receive, John 14.17. Other Things may be the lot of such as are
reserved to the Day of Destruction, but they that have the Spirit are sealed to
the Day of Redemption.

2. It Is a great Advantage to others also, 1 Cor. 12.7. The Manifestation of the
Spirit is given to every Man to profit withal. No Persons in the World so
useful in their Places, as they that partake of this blessed Gift. It was this
which recommended Joseph to the Egyptians, Genesis 41.38. Pharaoh said unto his
Servants, can we find such an one as this, a Man in whom the Spirit of God is?
One filled with the Holy Ghost is worth a Thousand of common Men; he is a
capable Instrument of much more good in his Generation, than all the
Philosophers, Critics, and Disputers of his World with their vast stores of
unsanctified Learning.

II. Whom is this Spirit given to? The Answer is in the Text, to them that obey
him. For the clearing of this, there are Three Things, which should be a little
inquired into; Who is the Person here said to be obeyed? What is meant by our
obeying him? And how we are to understand the Spirits being given unto such?

1. Who is the Person here said to be obeyed? [To them that obey him,] (...).
It Is indeed applicable to all the Three Persons; Father, Son, and Spirit, as
they are all the just Objects of our Obedience, God the Father is to be obeyed
in the Commands which he gives forth, God the Holy Ghost is to be obeyed in his
inward Motions upon our own Hearts; but I incline rather to their Judgment who
Interpret this especially of God the Son, Jesus Christ, This seems the fairest
Construction, if we view the Words in the Original, we are his Witnesses, (...)
i.e. Christ's Witnesses. Christ is the Person spoken of first and last; the
Verse begins and closes with him, Now that Christ has a right to our
Obedience, is undeniable.

1. Because we were made by him; and as his Creatures, we are bound to be his
Servants. He that brought us into Being, may upon that Account require the
utmost Performance of Duty from us.

2. As he is our Redeemer. he is entitled to be our Ruler. He may very well
give Laws to us, that has restored our Lives to us; as the impotent Man urged
to the Jews, when they censured him for carrying his Bed on the Sabbath Day;
John 5.11. He that made me whole, the same said unto me, take up thy Bed and
Walk, q.d. it becomes me to follow his Orders, to whom I owe my Recovery.
Christ is Savior and Lord to the same Persons; and all that are ransomed by
him, are thereby engaged to be subject to him.

2. What is meant by obeying him here? Some render it by Believing; and that
this must be included (if it be not principally intended) I would offer these
few Argumeuts to prove.

1. Faith it self is the highest Act of Obedience. We read of the Obedience of
Faith, Romans 16.26. As the great End of the Gospels Publication; and the very
same Words are rendered Obedience to the Faith, Chap. 1.5. If we should take
Faith here for the Doctrine of Faith, it is evident that the receiving of this
Doctrine is set forth by Obedience, In believing we obey; for this is his
Commandment, that we should Believe, etc. 1 John 3.23. Indeed it is the most
difficult Duty, as they that are found in the Performance of it, are able to
declare from their own Experience. Presumption is easy, but the true Exercise
of Faith is hard Work.

2. Faith is the Foundation of all Evangelical Obedience. Obedience is that
which inseparably results from it, but can never be presupposed to it. By
Faith, Abraham, obeyed, when he was called to go out of his own Country into a
strange Land, Heb. 11.8. And whoever obey from any other Principle, they are
nothing in God's Account, and all that they do, will avail nothing to them.
Receiving of Christ is the first Act, and yielding our selves to him, is
consequent upon it.

3. We are expressly said to receive the Promise of the Spirit through Faith,
Gal. 3.14. (...), and Faith is opposed to Works, twice in this very Case of
receiving the Spirit, ver. 2, 5. And therefore the Gospel, which is the
Doctrine of Faith, as distinguished from the Law, which is the Rule of Works, is
styled the Ministration of the Spirit, 2 Cor. 3.8. A Road of doing, separate
from believing, is not the Way of the Spirit of God.

3. How are we to understand, the giving of the Spirit to them that obey Christ?

1. It must not be understood, as if this were the Reason of the Gift, or the
actual Qualification of the Persons before the receiving of this Gift. Our
foreseen Faith and Obedience is not the Reason why God gives the Holy Ghost to
us; for he is given freely (as has been said) from no other Motive, but the
mere Kindness and Goodwill of God to lost and undone Sinners. Nor are any
Persons so qualified and prepared for the receiving of the Spirit, before he is
given to them; for we are unbelieving and disohedient, till the Spirit has
been mightily at Work in us. The whole Race of Manking, are by Nature a
wretched Company of Insidels, and Rebels against Christ, without the Spirit.
And there is not the least Disposition in us to any Duty whatsoever, but what
is of his producing.

2. Believing and Obeying are the present Effects of the Spirit's Influence
upon our Souls, as soon as he is given us. He is given in Order to this End, and
this End is immediately and infallibly brought about by his powerful Agency.
When the Holy Ghost was given to the Gentiles, their. Hearts were instantly
purified by Faith, Acts 15.8, 9. To have the Spirit and remain one Moment an
Unbeliever, is a Contradiction. So we read of Sanctification of the Spirit unto
Obedience, 1 Pet. 1.2. Where the Spirit is, he Acts as a Sanctifier; and where
he Acts so, it instantly appears by the Fruit of Obedience; which flow
naturally from it. So the Promise runs, Ezekiel. 36.27. I will put my Spirit
within-you, and cause you to walk in my Statutes, etc.

3. In the Exercises of Faith and actings of Obedience, we have more and more
of the Spirit given to us. So we may understand the giving of the Spirit to
them that obey Christ and believe in him, not of the first Donation, but of the
increased Degrees and Measures of the same Spirit to those that have him
already. In this Sense, we read of the Spirit's being given and received, John
7.39. He was given before Christ's Ascension, but more sparingly; when he was
ascended, the Spirit came down in greater Floods; there was a more signal and
liberal Effusion. So, though the Spirit is poured out, that we may believe, yet
after we believe, there are still larger Portions continually given forth. This
the Apostle calls the supply of the Spirit, Phil. 1.19. It Is the same Word
which is used, 2 Pet. 1.5. Add to your Faith, etc. God does not stop at the
first Gift, but vouchsafes daily further additional Supplies.

III. How is the Work and Office of a Witness performed by the Spirit to our
Lord Jesus? Ans. This may be shown under four Heads distinctly. How he did it
before Christ's coming, and during Christ's stay on Earth, and after his
Departure to Heaven? And how he does it even now at this present Time?

1. How did the Spirit perform the Work and Office of a Witness to Christ
before his Coming? Chiefly by Prophecy. Now here two Things are to be proved;
that Prophecy was indeed a Witness to Christ, and that the Spirit did witness
by it.

1. That Prophecy was a Witness to Christ. This the Scripture most positively
Asserts, Acts 10.43. To him give all the Prophets Witness, etc. There are very
numerous and plentiful Instances which might be given of the Truth of this, if
we look into the Prophetical Writings of the Old Testament, which unanimously
Point to Chtist, as their main Subject. Our Lord calls the Jews to search the
Scriptures in General, upon this account, because they testified of him, John
5.39. Various Predictions concerning Christ even in the Books of Moses, in the
Psalms of David, in the Greater and Lesser Prophets, in those that Prophesied
before the Captivity, and in them that Prophesied after the return out of
Captivity. There were few or none among them all, but what foretold the coming
of the Messiah, and gave some Character of him.

2. It was the Holy Spirit who witnessed hereby to Jesus Christ. The Spirit of
God is said to testify in the Prophets, Neb. 9.30. 1 Pet. 1.11. Whatever is
written in the Word, he is styled a Witness of, Heb. 10.15. Because he dictated
to the Penmen of the Word, not only the Matter and Substance, but the very
Expressions themselves. For Prophecy (as the Apostle says) came not in Old
Time by the Will of Man, but Holy Men of God spoke as they were moved by the
Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1.21. When the Word was brought to them, it was not lest to
them to invent or choose out such Terms as they thought best for the declaring
and reporting of it; but they were acted herein by the Divine Spirit, (as
Passive Instruments) to deliver all that which he suggested and nothing else.
The Gift of Prophecy was entirely his, without and antecedent Preparations of
their own; and the Exercise of this Gift was from him, and under his Conduct
and Management also. Therefore the Angel might justly say, Rev. 19.10. The
Testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of Prophecy. This Testimony was born to
Christ before his Coming, and the Spirit was the Author of it.

SERMON XII.
June 30. 1696.
ACTS V. xxxii. latter Part. And so is also the Holy Ghost, whom God has given
to them that obey him.


2. HOW did the Spirit perform this Work of a Witness, when Christ was upon the
Earth? I will mention only Three Ways, 1. His Visible Descent upon Christ at
his Baptism, Luke 3.22. The Holy Ghost descended in a bodily shape, like a
Dove, upon him, etc. It is not to my present Purpose to enquire of what Nature
or Substance this Appearance was, the Form or Resemblance here assumed, is said
to be that of a Dove, which was obvious to Sense, and seen by his forerunner,
the Person that Baptized him, which was the Token that God had given him to
know the Messiah by, and this he bare Record of, John 1.32, 33. That this was
designed as a solemn Testimony to Jesus Christ, is manifest, because
immediately after this he entered upon his public Ministry; here was a Pledge
first given of the Authority which he was invested with, that he might be
accordingly acknowledged and regarded in the Exercise of his Office, which till
now he had not begun. 2. The extraordinary Works that were done by Christ,
these were the Seals of his Commission, and proved him to come from Heaven, for
the Doctrine of an Impostor would never have been so signally asserted. But now
all these Works were done in the Power of the Holy Ghost, whom he is said to be
anointed with, and partly for that End, Acts 10.38. Particularly he cast out
Devils by the Spirit of God, Mat. 12.28. And for that Reason he charges the
Jews with Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost (the unpardonable Sin) who ascribed
this mighty Act of his to Beelzebub, the Prince of Devils, ver. 31, 32. If
Christ himself only had been concerned in this Work, this could have been
Blasphemy against him only, but seeing the Spirit of God concurred with him in
it, they were guilty of Blaspheming that Spirit also. 3. The Resurrection of
Christ, which was a considerable Testimony to his Eternal Deity, is ascribed to
the Spirit likewise. This Work is indeed in Scripture ascribed to all the Three
Persons; to the Father, Romans 6.4. To Christ himself, John 10.17, 18. And the
Holy Ghost is interested in it too. Romans 8.11. If the Spirit of him that raised
up Jesus from the Dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the Dead,
shall also quicken your mortal Bodies by his Spirit, etc. The Connection of the
Words, and the Relation which one Thing in them bears to another, shows this to
be the meaning, that God will revive and raise the Dead Bodies of Believers by
the same Spirit, by whom he raised his Son, that Spirit who reunited the Humane
Soul and Body of Jesus Christ, will reunite ours also. So 1 Pet. 3.16.
Quickened in the Spirit, the same Spirit by which he Preached to the
Disobedient in the Days of Noah, ver, 19, 20. with Genesis 6.3.


3. How did the Spirit witness to Christ after his Departure into Heaven? I
mean in the Times of the Apostles, and in those first Ages of the Gospel.

Answ. I. By the Revelation of the Mysteries of the Gospel to the Apostles,
which they were to Preach to others. This we have an Account of from Christ
himself. John 16.12, 13, 14, 15. I have yet many Things to say unto you, but
you cannot bear-them now; howbeit when the Spirit of Truth is come, he will
guide you into all Truth, etc. He shall Glorify me, for he shall receive of
mine and show it unto you; which is repeated in the next Words. The Disciples
then were weak in the Faith, prepossest with carnal Notions about the Kingdom
of Christ, and at that Time also overwhelmed with Sorrow, upon the Notice of
his intended Departure; and by this means they were incapable at the present,
of Learning all that they needed to be taught; now Jesus Christ, who considered
their weakness, and dealt with them according to it, refers them to be more
fully instructed by the promised Spirit; who though he did not discover any new
Truths which they never heard, yet he brought old Truths to their Remembrance
with new Illumination; he helped their remaining Ignorance and Infrimity, in
giving them a clearer Understanding of all the Things of Chirist, of all those
Doctrines concerning Christ, which were hid and veiled from them before.

2. By endowing them with a miraculous Power of doing those Things, which were
above the utmost activity of Nature, for the Confirmation of the Christian
Doctrine. Thus he is said, to give Testimony to the Word of his Grace, in
granting Signs and Wonders to be done by their Hands, Acts 14.3. God bearing
them Witness with Signs and Wonders, and diverse Miracles, and Gifts of the Holy
Ghost, Heb. 2.4. A great many of those supernatural Effects were produced by
his means, in the Course of their Ministry, and some of them such as even
exceeded what were wrought by our Lord himself. So he had told them that it
should be, John 14.12. He that believes on me, the Works which I do, shall he
do also, and greater Works, than these shall he do, because I go to my Faither.
I would not go about to restrain this Text to the Apostles (because Christ puts
it in larger Terms, He that believes, etc.) but undoubtedly, it was verified
in them. They were enabled to Work the same Miracles which he did, and in some
Respects such as out-did them, Chap. 9. The Healing of those that were laid
upon Beds and Couches in the Streets with the Shadow of Peter passing by, ver.
15. of this Chapter, and Chap. 19.11, 12. We read of special Miracles wrought
by the Hands of Paul, so that from his Body were brought unto the Sick,
Handkerchiefs or Aprons, and the Diseases departed from them, etc. The Reason
of these greater Works done by the Apostles, was Christ's going to the Father;
which made Way for an eminent pouring forth of the Spirit, and this tended not
so much to the Reputation of their particular Persons (for they could not Work
them when they would) as to the Glory of Christ, whose Interest was hereby
advanced in the World.

3. By the remarkable and numerous Conversions of great Multitudes to Christ,
among whom they preached. As soon as ever the Holy Ghost was come upon them,
there were Three Thousand Souls added to them; That gladly received their Word
and were Baptized, Chap. 2.41. Soon after, these were made up Five Thousand,
Chap. 4.4. All this was done in the compass of very few Days, and the first
Harvest was the Fruit of one Sermon. At Samaria, when Philip went and Preached
Christ to them, it is said that the People with one accord gave heed to the
Things which he spoke; Chap. 8.5, 6. Which is the more extraordinary, because
they had all given heed to Simon the Sorcerer before, from the least to the
greatest, ver. 10. What a strange and mavelous turn was here in an whole City,
upon the Preaching of the Gospel? In many other Places, the Word of God grew
mightily and prevailed, Chap. 19.20. It got ground against all the Opposition
both of Jews and Gentiles. The Preachers of it were made to Triumph in Christ,
and baffies all contrary attempts, from open Enemies, and false Brethren, and
overcame the Devil by the Word of their Testimony. And the way of doing all
this, is explained to us, 1 Cor. 2.4. My Speech, and my Preaching was in
Demonstration of the Spirit and of Power. The Spirit of God accompanied their
Word, and made it thus successful.

4. By the supernatural Gifts which were bestowed upon other Believers also, as
well as the Apostles. The Truth of this might be made out by several Instances,
if it were needful. Acts 10.44. While Peter spoke, the Holy Ghost fell on all
them which heard the Word, viz. Cornelius, and his Kindred and Friends, whom he
had called together, ver. 24. But how did he fall on them? Peter himself
explains it, Chap. 11.15. As on us at the beginning; i.e. in a miraculous
extraordinary Manner. So Christ had said, Mark 16.17. These Signs shall follow
them that believe; in my Name shall they cast out Devils, they shall spoke with
new Tongues, etc. Not only they that Published the Gospel, but they that
received it, were many of them thus eminently gifted by the Holy Ghost; and
this was much for the Honor of Christ, whom they believed in, and served to
rescue his Gospel from that Contempt and Reproach which the World was so apt
every where to pour upon it.

5. By the admirable Patience and Resolution both of the Apostles and other
Believers in the extreme Sufferings which they underwent for Christ and the
Gospel. I think (says Paul) that God has set forth us the Apostles, as it were
appointed to Death, 1 Cor. 4.9. He protests for his own Part, that he Dyed
daily, Chap. 15.31. Stood in jeopardy every Hour, ver. 30. Others, to whom he
writes, endured great fights of Afflictions, Heb. 10.32. Not little Skirmishes,
but continual Combats. What vast numbers of them crowned all at last with
Martyrdom, which is the most peculiar Notion of witnessing? And with what
meekness and undauntedness was all this done, as by Men that had fully learnt
to despise their own Lives, and dearest Comforts, together with the greatest
Cruelties of their Adversaries. But whence did all this proceed? From the
Spirit of Glory resting on them, 1 Pet. 4.14. As Stephen being full of the Holy
Ghost, saw the Glory of God, when his Murderers gnash their Teeth, Acts 7.54,
55. Their dying witness to Christ, was through the special Assistance of his
Blessed Spirit

4. How does the Spirit witness to Christ, even now in our own Times? For there
is a never failing Testimony which he gives still, and will always give to the
End of the World. Not by Voices, Dreams, or Enthusiastic Inspirations, which
are usually dangerous Delusions, where they are pretended and rested on, but in
such Ways as are safe and clear, and highly beneficial. As 1. The Spirit
witnesses at this very Day to Jesus Christ in the written Gospel. This is the
standing Memorial and Register of all Divine Testimony. There the Doctrine of
Christ is preserved incorrupt, and is the same in writing to us, that it was
originally to the first Christians; and here we have a sufficient History of
the Miracles which recommended and backed this Doctrine. I say, a sufficient
History, sufficient to Answer the End, though not a complete History of all
that was done. John 20.30, 31. Many other Signs did Jesus in the Presence of
his Disciples, which are not written in this Book, but these are Written that
ye might believe that Jesus is the Son of God, etc. They were not only wrought,
but are written in Order to our Believing; this puts it out of doubt, that we
are bound to Believe upon the Testimony of those Miracles, which we never saw,
as faithfully related; if they were to be renewed in every Age, the commonness
of them would make them lose their End; and every Generation after they are
ceased, might challenge a Repetition of them, as well as one; and to what
Purpose should Persons be enjoined to tell the wonderful Works of God to their
Posterity, if they were not obliged to give Credit to them? As Exodus 10.2. And
many other Places. 2. He witnesses to Christ by the Operations and Effects
which the Gospel has upon all the chosen of God; for hereby it is distinguished
from the Word of Man, even by its Effectual Workings, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. There is
no Comparison between them in their Natures, For what is the Chaff to the
Wheat? Jer. 23.28. Nor in their Operative Virtues; For is not my Word like as a
Fire? says the Lord, and like an Hammer, etc. ver. 29. This shows the Power of
the Spirit attending it; this is that which puts an Edge upon the Word, and
gives a force to it; which makes it quick and mighty, sharp and searching in
the Work of Conviction; hereby it takes hold of Sinners, Casts down
Imaginations, and brings every thought into Captivity to the Obedience of
Christ, 2 Cor. 10.5. The Word alone would not do this; but as it comes in
Power, and in the Holy Ghost, 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. There are Impressions of the
Majesty and Authority of God upon the Word, stamped by the Spirit, but the same
Spirit must enable us to discern them; as a Stranger must Learn to know an
Artificer's Workmanship from himself. 3. By giving us an inward Experience and
feeling of the Things of Christ. Spiritual Senses are a great Advantage to
those that have them, and whoever have them, are beholden to the Spirit for
them. Hence it is, that the Things of Christ, are called the Things of the
Spirit of God, which the natural man neither does receive, nor can know, 1 Cor.
2.14. A mere notional acquaintance with them, is vain and insignificant, and
yet this is all that any Man in the World by Nature, without the help of the
Spirit, can Rise up to. We know them by receiving them; they are strange
Things, till they are taken in, and made Familiar to us, by real and
experimental Knowledge. Therefore it is said, He that believes on the Son of
God has the Witness in himself, 1 John 5.10. That Verbal Testimony which is
without him in the Scripture, is then transcribed within him on his own Heart;
he is satisfied from himself, which is the highest and fullest Satisfaction. 4.
By the producing of Faith in Christ, which is a Work that is never fulfilled in
any Soul, where be is not given; for it is one of his Titles, the Spirit of
Faith, 2 Cor. 4.13. He infuses the Habit, he excites to every Act. Divine
Supernatural Faith requires a Divine and Supernatural Agent. It Is he that
effectually Reproves for the Sin of unbelief, John 16.9. He discovers the
Disease, he applies the Remedy. It Is a part of the Mystery of Godliness, that
Jesus Christ is believed on in the World, and another part of it is, that he is
justified in the Spirit, 1 Timothy 3.16. But one part Contributes to the
unriddling of the other. If Christ were not justified in the Spirit, he would
not be believed on in the World. Christ is justified in or by the Spirit,
whenever any one in the World is persuaded to believe; they are the Spirits
internal Arguments on the behalf of Christ, that sway the Soul to a receiving
of, and closing with him. He reveals those Things concerning Christ to us,
which could not enter into our Hearts to conceive of him, 1 Cor. 2.9, 10. 5. By
the strengthening and increasing of this Faith daily, after he has produced
it. There are gradual Displaies of the Glory and Excellency of Christ to the
believing Soul; all is not manifested at once; there are fresh Communicatious
of Light and Grace, as long as we are in the World, that our Faith may grow,
and that what is lacking in it, may be perfected. According as the Spirit
enriches us in the Progress of our Sanctification, the Testimony of Christ is
confirmed in us, 1 Cor. 1.6. He grounds and settles us, and makes us unmovable
from the Hope of the Gospel; he fortifies and establishes us against various
contrary Temptations, whereby the Devil is frequently endeavoring to loosen
our hold of Christ, and beat us off from him. We are poor wavering, unsteady
Creatures when we are left to our selves; rejoicing one Moment, and drooping
the next, confidently assured of that at one Time, which we are ready to call
in Question at another. The best Believers in the World will most humbly own
this; the strongest Faith would certainly fail, if the Cause of Christ in the
Soul were not often pleaded over again by the Spirit, as an Antidote for the
Motions to Infidelity.


IV. Use. There are several Things which from hence we may be informed of, and
exhorted to.

1. There are several Things which we may be informed of. As

1. Jesus Christ never will, nor can be left without a Witness, because the
Eternal Spirit is his Witness, who will never with-dram his Testimony. This
Spirit of Christ is given to all that obey him, and he testifies of Christ to
them, and by them to others; but if we could suppose, this whole Generation of
the righteous to be extinct (which yet shall never be; as long as the Earth
remains) if all these Humane Witnesses were slain, and not one left to stand up
on the behalf of Christ in the World, yet while the Holy Ghost survives as a
faithful Witness in Heaven, it is impossible that Christ should be destitute.
Let the Rage and Malice of the World against Christ go as far as it can, in
stopping the Mouths or shedding the Blood of all that receive or bear the
Record which God has given of his Son, the Spirit cannot be prevented from
doing constant Honor to Jesus Christ.

2. The Word of Christ has a better Foundation, than any Tesitimony from Man,
or from any Church, or Party of Men whatever. As Christ said, He had a greater
Witnrss than that of John, John 5-36. Concerning thy Testimonies, I have knowu
of Old, says David, that thou have founded them for ever, Psalm 119.152. But if
mortal Witnesses were their only Supporters, they would be as liable to fade
and perish, to be subverted and destroyed, as other Inferior Things. To build
the Credit of the Gospel upon Humane Tradition, is like putting the Ark of the
Testimony into a wooden Cart, which will be apt to shake and reel, if not to
tumble. The Church of God is the Pillar and Ground of the Truth, 1 Timothy.3.15. To
hold it forth indeed, not to hold it up; not such a Pillar as Houses stand
upon, but as Writings hang upon for Public Notice.

3. The unrighteous Judgment of Satan and the World against Christ, is and will
be perfectly reversed. Now is the Judgment of this World; says Christ, John
12.31. So Chap. 16.11. When the Sprit is come; he will Reprove (or Convince)
the World of Judgment, because the Prince of this World is judged. I take these
Two Texts to refer to one and the same Thing; for the Prince of this World, and
the World it. self pass the same Judgment on Jesus Christ, and the Judgment of
both is very unjust; the World and its Prince, make up as it were but one
Person, the Head and the Body; and they exactly Agree and Join in the same
Sentence, to condemn our Lord Jesus. But here is a Witness that nuls this
Sentence; and plainly proves the Iniquity and Falsehood of it; and indeed none
of the Devil's Devices can stand, when God himself comes forth to withstand and
oppose them.

4. It must needs be a lying Spirit that speaks a Word against Christ, or that
derogates any Thing from him. 1 Cor. 12.3. I give you to nderstand, that no Man
speaking by the Spirit of God, calls Jesus accursed. Whatever is spoken by
any to the dishonor of our Lord Jesus cannot proceed from the Spirit of God.
This is most certain, because the Spirit of God cannot contradict himself, he
cannot testify for him, and against him too. The Holy Ghost is Christ's
Witness, the unclean Spirit is his Adversary; and too many Tongues are duided
by this unclean and wicked Spirit, that pretend to Prophecy in Christ's Name;
and whereas a true Witness delivers Souls, Prove. 14.25. These do lay snares
for their Ruin and Destruction.

5. They that have the Spirit of God cannot err in what is essential to the
Faith of Christ, and necessary to Salvation. They are undoubtedly taught to
hold the Substance of Divine Testimony, though they may be mistaken in lesser
Particulars. This is hinted by what our Lord says, Mat. 24.24. There shall
arise false Christ's and false Prophets, and shall show great Signs and
Wonders, insomuch that (if it were possible) they shall deceive the very Elect.
That Parenthesis is the most material Part of the Proposition; there is no
possibility of any of God's chosen and called ones miscarrying by a fundamental
Delusion; they have a Resident Witness for Christ in their own Bosoms, who
secures them from it.

6. Unbelief is a special Sin against the Holy Ghost; all unbelief is so,
though all unbelief (and perhaps no mere unbelief) is not the Sin against the
Holy Ghost. It is the Spirit that bears Witness, because the Spirit is Truth,
1 John 5.6. But he that believes not, makes him a Liar; ver. 10. Hypocrisy is
a lying to the Lord (as Ananias and Sapphira lied to the Holy Ghost) but
infidelity is a belying of him, Jer. 5.12. It Is a painting of the Spirit of God
like the Sons of Men, who are Liars upon Record, Romans 3.4. Yea, like the Devil,
who is the Father of Lies, John 8.44. This black aggravated Evil is included in
the not receiving of the Spirit's witness.

2. There are some Things, which we may hence be exhorted to.

1. Set your Seal to the Truth of the Spirits Testimony unto Christ, by
Believing in him; and reject it not against your selves. Embrace him with all
your Hearts upon the high and honorable Commendation which the Holy Ghost
gives of him. How readily do we repose a Confidence in Creatures, when we have
received a worthy Character of them from Persons of known Integrity! And shall
we be influenced more by the Witness of Man, than by the Witness of God? God
forbid. How much greater Encouragements have we to Divine, than humane Faith?
There are infallible Grounds for Divine Faith to rest upon, which for humane
cannot be.

2. Grieve not the Spirit of God by Sin, that he may not deliver you up, nor
leave you alone to be led away by Error. The Holy Ghost is often provoked by
Men's loose Conversations to give them over to some unsound Opinions. Practical
Godliness is an excellent Means for the maintaining of Doctrinal Orthodoxy. If
any Man will do his Will, he shall know of the Doctrine, John 7.17. Follow the
Spirits Guidance in the Course of your Lives, if you would not forfeit it, as
to the regulating of your Judgments. Be governed by him as a Spirit of
Holiness, if you would be instructed by him as a Spirit of Truth.

3. Whatever the Spirit in and according to the Scripture testifies against,
give it no Entertainment. That cannot be the Doctrine of Christ, which he does
not attest. It Is another Gospel, and therefore not to be received, though an
Angel from Heaven were the Publisher of it. We have a sure Word of Prophecy,
whereunto we do well to take heed, 2 Pet. 1.19. That must be no Article of our
Faith, which we have not first tried, or which upon the Trial, is not approved
by this Rule of Faith. According as the Testimony of the Spirit in the Word is,
we are to Judge of every Cause which comes before us.

4. Regard the Witness of the Spirit, with respect to Christ in you, as well as
Christ without you. He is a capable Witness as to both, for he searches all
Things; he knows the State and Disposition of our Souls toward God, as well as
the outgoings of the Heart of God to us. He that can reveal Christ in us, is
undoubtedly the sit to discover us to our selves. Therefore, what our
Conscience bears us Witness in the Holy Ghost (as Romans 9.1.) Is to be
comfortably acquiesced in, as a faithful unerring Report. If Conscience it,
self be as a thousand Witnesses, how much more when the Holy Ghost concurs with
it.

5. Beg the help of the Spirit in Order to the giving of your Testimony to
Christ, as you ought to do, in your several Places, 1 Cor. 12.3. No Man can say
that Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Ghost.

Obj. What think you then of those that call Christ Lord, Lord, and do not the
Things which he says?

Ans. It Is true, the mere repeating of such words is easy, and may be done
without the Spirit; but if we say it from a right Principle, in a right Manner,
and to a right End, it must be by the Holy Ghost. And therefore this saying, is
like that confessing, 1 John 4.15. Not a bare Verbal Confession with the Mouth,
but joined with believing in the Heart.

6. Manifest your having of the Spirit, by your ready, resolute and eonstant
witness-bearing on the behalf of Christ. Be not ashamed of the Testimouy of our
Lord, 2 Timothy 1.8. It Is the greatest Honor to us, when we are called to any
such Service to our great Redeemer. A Work which is done by the Spirit of God
himself, must unquestionably be a Matter of Glory and Reputation to such as we.
Nor is it only upon solemn extraordinary special Occasions, but in the whole
Course of our Lives, in all that we think, speak and do, we should testify to
our Lord Jesus. In short, you who have the Spirit of Christ dwelling in you,
can do no less among a World of Men, that ungratefully despise him, than by
your whole behavior proclaim your deserved esteem of him.

SERMON XIII.
September 8. 1696.
MARK X. xxvi, xxvii. And they were astonished out of measure, saying among
themselves, Who then can be saved?

And Jesus looking upon them says, With Men it is impossible, but not with
God: For with God all Things are possible.


To understand the occasion of the Words, we must look back as far us ver. 17.
of this Chapter, where we find a young Ruler (as two of the other Evangelists
describe him, Mat. 19.20. Luke 18.18.) addressing himself with some Earnestness
and Reverence to Christ, for his Judgment and Advice in a very important Case;
What shall I do, that I may inherit Eternal life? Christ framing his Answer
according to the Principles then generally embraced, of living by doing, refers
him to the commandments: He that put the Question having too good an Opinion of
himself, confidently affirms his keeping of them all; Christ in his Reply, to
convince him that he was not so perfect as he pretended himself to be, offers
him a Test which he could not comply with; viz. Selling what he had, and giving
to the Poor, and taking up the Cross, and following him. This was no
unreasonable Proof of his Obedience; for a resolved Preference of Heaven to all
that this World affords, and actual parting with all for it, when we are called
thereunto, is every one's necessary Duty. But this Ruler was sad at that
saying, and went away grieved; Carnal Men may be sorry that they cannot bring
down God to their own Terms, when they refuse to come up to his; they would
reconcile Things in Heaven, and Things in Earth, and enjoy their Portion in
both Worlds. Hereupon our Lord applies the rest of his Discourse to his
Disciples, as being most concer'd for their Satisfaction and Improvement; to
them therefore he says, How hardly shall they that have Riches, enter into the
Kingdom of God? ver. 23. These Words astonished the Disciples, and yet Christ
with little Variation repeats them, ver. 24. And enforces them by a Proverbial
Comparison, which was yet more startling, ver. 25. It is easier for a Camel to
go through the Eye of a Needle, than for a Rich Man to enter into the Kingdom
of God. Whether that which we render here a Camel, should be rather Translated
a Cable-rope, (because the Original Word sigifies both) is not much material;
but certainly a Man with great Possessions, loaded with thick Clay, might be
fitly enough represented by a camel, carrying Burdens more for others than
himself, and the Entrance into Life being strait and narrow, may very well be
said to resemble the Passage through the Eye of a Needle. But this brings us to
the Text it self, wherein we have two Parts; the Amazement of the Disciples at
Christ's Doctrine and his own Explication of it.

1. The Amazemenet of the Disciples at this Doctrine of Christ, ver. 26. And
they were astonished out of measure, saying among themselves, who then can be
saved? The Word here, which we render by Astonishment, is not the same with
that ver. 24. But more significant, as if the Mind were not only struck, but
struck out as it were, with Horror and Confusion. Besides it is added here, out
of measure, or abundantly and exceedingly; for this Doctrine appeared very
rigorous and severe to them, as if it shut out all Persons almost from a
possibility of Salvation. Becaufe 1. Though all Men are not Rich, nor perhaps
the most, yet there are few, but what desire to be so, and the Love of Riches
(which is indeed the Disease) prevails, where there is not the Possession. It
was very common among the Jews in the Prophet's Time; From the least to the
greatest every one is given to Covetousness, Jer. 6.13. Chap. 8.10. And it is
not less natural to other People. 2. The Rich seem to have the greatest
Advantages and Helps for Heaven, beyond those that are of an Inferior Rank;
and therefore if their Salvation be so difficult, they concluded that Others
might Despair of it. 3. The Poor have their Temptations also, and fall into
diverse Sins, as well as the Rich; and there are other Things, which must be
acknowledged to be Impediments and Obstructions in the way to Heaven, as well
as Riches; so that they thought, if one stumbling block was so fatal and
pernicious, the rest might be as bad, and then all Mankind must be in a
miserable Cafe.


2. Christ's own Explicatiln of this Doctrine; ver. 27. Jesus looking upon
them, faith, with Men it is impossible, but not with God; for with God all
things are possible. Here are Three Things to be considered, 1. The general
Ground which Christ speaks upon; That all Things are possible with God. This is
a Notion which shines clear by natural Light, the Being of God is not more
demonstrable than this, that Infinite and Unlimited Power belongs to him. This
is plentifully confirmed in Scripture, Job 42.2. I know that thou can do
every Thing. Jer. 32.17. There is nothing too hard for Thee. And Luke 1.37.
With God nothing shall be impossible. If there were any Thing which God could
not do, which is fit to be done, and becoming or consistent with his other
Perfections, he could not be God. 2. The Particular Truth which he lays down,
and builds upon this Foundation. With Men it is impossible, that either the
Rich or any other Person should be saved, but not with God, We must mot measure
God's Power by our own; because this is mavelous in our Eyes; we are not to
think that it is so in his, Zech. 8.6. Though Man cannot withdraw his own Heart
from an inordinate Desire and Pursuit of such Temporal Enjoyments, yet God can
enable as to do it, Though we cannot recover our selves out of this Snare of
the Devil, the strong God can perform it for us; He can give us other Hearts
than what we have by Nature, and produce such a change in us, as we know not
how to suppose; where Corruption makes the greatest Opposition, he can Conquer
it; so that a Poor Man shall be Rich in Faith, and a Rich Man Poor in Spirit.
3. The Posture and Aspect of Christ in delivering this Truth. He looked upon
them (i. e. the Disciples) and said, etc. There seems to be a double Reason for
this.


1. Christ hereby discovers his Knowledge of their Thoughts, and the most
secret Passages of their Conversation: For what they said in the foregoing
Verse, they did not speak so as that he might hear it, but among themselves; or
(as the words import) one to another.

2. Christ hereby points out them, as singular Instances and Examples of the
Truth which he had proposed: For as there were Holy Men under the Old
Testament, who were nevertheless rich in this World, such as Abraham, Lot, Job,
etc. And Zaccheus, under the New Testament, a rich Publican, was converted to
Christ, Luke 19.2. So these Disciples, upon Christ's call, had left all and
followed him, ver. 28. following the Text; and their All was as much to them,
as the rich Man's larger Estate can be to him. So that in them was this saying
of our Lord fulfilled.

Observe. The Overcoming of the Difficulties of Salvation must be resolved into
the Almighty Power of Divine Grace. Here, I. Show, What are the chief
Difficulties of Salvation to be overcome. II. How this must be resolved into
the Power of God's Grace. III. Why it must be so. IV. Use.


1. What are the chief Difficulties of Salvation to be overcome?

Ans. There is the Difficulty of Believing. This is primarily necessary to
Salvation, and yet one of the hardest Things in the World to be done aright.
The Counterfeits of Faith are frequent and feisable enough, but they that
imagine unfeigned Faith to be an easy matter, know not what it is. It Is
commonly said, That we readily believe, what we wish to be true; but this is a
very great mistake; we have several Instances in Scripture to the contrary.
When Jacob's Sons, at their second return out of Egypt, told their Father that
Joseph was yet alive, and Governor of the Land, his Heart fainted, for he
believed them not, Genesis 45.26. When Christ showed his Disciples his Hands and
his Feet, they believed not for joy, Luke 24.41. We are often slow in
believing, what we are most eager in desiring. So we may sometimes believe that
which appears to be more incredible, or is indeed more difficultly credible,
and yet still doubt of easier and lesser things; as Lazarus's Sisters believed
that their Brother would rise again at the last Day, and yet questioned his
being raised after four Days, John 11.24. with 39. Now if Men stick and
hesitate at the least things, it shows the Work to be much more difficult, than
if they stumbled at the greatest. But more particularly the Work of Faith is
difficult at first, and then living by Faith, and at last dying by Faith.

1. The work of Faith, at the beginning of the Christian Life; our first
believing is difficult, when we come out of a state of Sin, into a state of
Grace. A Soul that is deeply convinced of its own Guilt, struggles with great
Discouragements in laying hold of Divine Forgiveness. He that effectually
declares this unto Man, needs to be an Interpreter, one of a thousand, that is
(says Dr. Owen) Christ himself; Job 33.23. Whatever vain Men may talk of being
persuaded by reason, that God is reconcilable; the Sinners own Conscience, when
truly awakened by the Commandment coming home, argues with a great deal of
strength against it. He that is pursued by a sense of Sin and fear of Wrath, is
far more apt to run into downright Despair, than to fly for Refuge to the Hope
which is set before him. The threatenings of deserved Vengeance are much rather
regarded than the free Promises of Remission. As God said to the Jews, with
respect to their backslidings into Idolary, Jer. 5.7. How shall I pardon thee
for this? So the poor convinced Sinner, that has his high and heinous
Provocations set in order before him, is ready to cry, How shall God pardon me
for these? It Is a Mystery which he knows not how to apprehend; a comfortable
Doctrine, but he cannot embrace it.

2. Living by Faith; for this the just must do; after the Sinner is made
Righteous by the Obedience of Christ, he must still go on from Faith to Faith,
as the Righteousness of God is revealed in the Gospel, Romans 1.17. Now this is
no light matter; whatever the Speculation be in their esteem, who never arrived
to any real Exerprience, the Practice is not. To live by Faith in the midst of
various Temptations and Trials, of Darkness and Desertion, of cross
Providence, and cutting Rebukes, is an hard saying to Flesh and Blood. Is it
indeed an easy thing to believe, that we shall be preserved blameless, and
kept to Salvation, and never plucked out of the Hand of Christ, when we find
our selves many times loose and wavering, and incident to numberless
Miscarriages? Is it very easy to believe, that our Justification is perfect,
when our Sanctification is so defective? That we are complete in Christ, when
we are so, (...) so meanly furnished in our selves, that upon a review we might
say with Paul, In us there dwells no good thing? Is it easy to look upon God
as our Savior, and wait for him, when he hides himself? Is it easy to stick
close to him, when he seemingly forsakes us; and to believe his Love, when we
feel his Anger; and to trust his naked Word, when we see no appearances or
likelihoods of Performances, but the contrary? They are insensible in Spiritual
Affairs, that will not acknowledge a Difficulty in these things.

3. Dying in Faith. This last Act of a Believer, is as requisite as all the
rest: It Is said of the Ancient Patriarchs, Heb. 11.13. That they all died in
Faith: For to cast away our Considence then, is to cast away our Souls. And yet
to maintain and keep up lively hopes in the Agonies of Death, to depart, like
old Simeon, in the joyful sight of God's Salvation, to cleave firmly to Christ,
when Flesh and Heart fail, to close our own Eyes, and commit our selves boldly
to Divine Guidance through the Valley of the Shadow of Death; when we are
stepping out of the World, is certainly hard work to such as we are. That Faith
must not be weak nor little, which makes a Man content to be stripped of the
Body, as Aaron of his Garments on the Mount, Number. 20.28. to quit such a
well built commodious Tabernacle, and lie down in the Dust. This seems
unnatural, after we have dwelt in this House so many Years, and therefore
scarcely to be performed without some more than ordinary violence. The love of
Life will probably hold out as long as Life it self; and the fear of Death in
some measure, till we have tasted Death; and a World that we never saw cannot
be very alluring, except the Eye of Faith be very clear and strong. If
believing, under such Disadvantages, when we come to die, be not difficult,
nothing is so.

2. There is the difficulty of getting the Victory over Sin. Such a Victory
must be gotten by every one that is saved; for where Sin is in Dominion, there
can be no Reigning in Life through Christ. It Is plain, That the Motions of Sins
do work in our Members, to bring forth Fruit unto Death, Romans 7.5. These
Motions therefore, though they cannot be prevented, must be repelled: Now an
Enemy that is got within us, has mighty Advantage against us, and it requires
a great deal of strength to be delivered from him; we cannot dispossess him,
and yet we must overcome him; we cannot drive him out, and yet we must keep him
under: Sin will have a being in us, and be giving continual disturbance to us,
and yet it must be so far destroyed, as not to have command over us. This is a
very difficult Achievement, and every one engaged in the holy Warfare sinds it
so; but particularly,

1. The entire abandoning of customary Sins, is hard work. Sins that have been
made familiar to us by long practice, and frequent repetition, insomuch that
perhaps we fall into them, before we are aware, and scarcely know when we have
committed them, are difficult to be forsaken. The Holy Ghost expresses this by
a direct impossibility; Jer. 13.23. Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or the
Leopard his spots? then may ye do good, that are, etc. q. d. one is as casie as
the other. The cure of inveterate Distempers, that have rooted themselves in
our Bodies, and prevailed along time together, is no slight business; Remedies
of small force will avail nothing in such cases.

2. The absolute renouncing of Constitution Sins, is still harder. That there
are some sins peculiarly suited to our several Tempers, is undeniable, and to
reliquish these is a work of special difficulty. A Man cannot guess at the
subduing of his own Iniquity, by his mastery of some other less pleasing Lusts.
It Is easier to conquer all the rest, than this one: A Man that is almost
persuaded to give up all, stops when it comes to his darling Sin: This Image of
Jealousy must be spared, though his other Idols be thrown down and broken in
pieces. This above all is the sin that easily besets us, Hebr. 12.1. and the
sin which is hardly to be resisted, and vanquished by us.

3. The weaning of the Heart from the Love of every sin. We are not true
Conquerors, till this be done: So long as any sin has any room or interest in
our Affections, it is really predominant, and we are properly its Servants,
though we may be restrained from outwardly and openly obeying it. Now this is a
case that too often happens; sin retires out of the visible Conversation into
its strong Hold, the Bosom of the Sinner, and there it remains invincible: Many
times there are are few of its Acts to be discovered in the Life, and yet there
are secret strong desires and inclinations to it in the Soul. Balaam did not
curse Israel, but his mind was set that way to the very last, Josh. 24.10. It Is
a thousand times harder to hate one sin, than to leave many.

3. There is difficulty of standing against the wiles of the Devil, Ephesians.
6.11. The strength of this Adversary is not contemptible, but his cunning is
more formidable; we need to be very vigilant against him as a roaring Lion, but
much more as he is a winding Serpent; we are in greater danger of his stealing
us to Hell by Subtilty, than of his haling us thither by mere armed Fury. We
that are so prone to be carried about by the Craftiness of Men, who lie in wait
to deceive, have much greater cause to be afraid of the Arts and Impostures of
Satan; but particularly in many things it is difficult to discern him, and when
we do, to avoid him.

1. It Is difficult many times to discern the wiles of the Devil; as it is said
of the ways of the strange Woman, they are moveable, that thou can not know
them, Prove. 5.6. So may we say of the Paths of the Destroyer, they are
intricate and disguised, that we cannot find them out: He does not dig many
open Pits, but Graves which appear not, which while we think to walk over, we
fall into. The Holy Ghost says indeed, We are not ignorant of Satan's devices,
2 Cor. 2.11. but I conceive, that must be comparatively understood; the Saints
of God are much more acquainted with them than other Men, though they know them
less, in respect of concernment in them, Rev. 2.24. they know them better, so
as to beware of them. We are not universally ignorant, though we know but in
part, neither our Knowledge nor Ignorance is total; some of his Devices are
known to us, though many are hid from us. He too often deceieves us by his
imitating of God, covering himself with light, as with a Garment; and when he
is so covered, our Eyes are so dazzled, that it is hard to see him as he is.

2. It Is difficult many times to avoid him, even when we do discern him;
because our Duty generally lies betwixt Extremes on both hands, and when we run
from one Extreme, he drives us into another; and in the hurry of Temptation to
keep the middle point is very hard. The Church of Corinth were first too remiss
in dealing with their incestuous Member, and afterward too severe. When we
find Satan getting an Advantage against us one way, to secure our selves from
him, we run too far the other way, and this answers his end as well, and is
therefore slily promoted by him. Either Sin is so small that it needs no
forgiveness, or else it is greater than can be forgiven; if Mercy be not
presumed upon, then it is despaired of. So in the case of Divine Chastisements,
the Devil tempts us either to despise them, and harden our selves against them,
or else throw up all, and utterly faint under them, whereas our Duty lies
between both, Hebr. 12.5. So in the case of natural Affections to natural
Relations, where we have not only allowance, but a command, it is hard so to
govern our selves, but that Satan will make us either exceed, or fall short,
either let out our Hearts too much or too little; either not love them enough,
or overlove them; either be guilty of Neglect, or of Idolatry.

4. There is a difficulty in the performing of those Duties, which seem to be
contrary to each other. Indeed the contrariety is but seeming, for all Duties
are harmonious, and very well reconcilable, as all Scripture is, one part of it
to another, notwithstanding the appearance of opposition in some places; but
however in matters of Practice, it is really hard sometimes to know how to obey
one Precept, without transgressing another. As,

1. It Is hard to mourn, as we ought, for sin, and yet to rejoice at the same
time in Christ: For we are to do both, and this godly Sorrow is never to shut
out spiritual Joy; For we are to rejoice in the Lord always, Phil. 4.4. 1 These.
5.16. Our Tears should never drown our Triumphs, nor our Lamentations silence
our Songs; but as God sometimes causes his Rain to fall, even while he causes
his Sun to shine, so even when we are bewailing the breathes of the Command, we
should take in the Comforts of the Promise. Our Souls should be afflicted, and
yet revived; Sin should be ever before us, and a Savior too.

2. It Is hard to be duly thankful for the lowest degrees of Grace, and yet not
to be contented with the highest measures of it. There is a necessity upon us,
as to both; a little Faith requires high Praises to God, and yet the greatest
that ever Man had, is not to satisfy us. We are to forget those things which
are behind, Phil. 3.13. and yet constantly remember to bless God for the least
of them. We must look beyond them in order to further seize, and yet
never ungratefully or contemptuously overlook them. We must neither say of our
day of small things, This is nothing; nor yet must we say, It is enough.

5. There is a difficulty in the right management of our selves in every
Condition, whether prosperous or afflicted: For there are particular
Difficulties proper to both, as Agur's Prayer against Riches and Poverty does
import.

1. In a prosperous Condition, it is very hard to get our hearts thoroughly
mortified to the Enjoyments of it. The savor and relish of the things of God
is often insensibly abated and lost very much, in a confluence of this World's
delights. Men that are possessed of a great deal of outward Wealth, are mighty
prone to place their Felicity in it, and set their Hearts upon it. If we
compare ver. 23, and 24. here in the Context, it will teach us, That it is hard
to have Riches, and not to trust in them; hard to depend on God as truly then,
as if we had them not. The Holy Ghost very well knew the need which there is of
giving such a charge to them that are rich in this World, 1 Timothy 6.17. Solomon,
who was able to make a Judgment from Experience, tells us the rich Man's
thoughts; His Wealth is his strong City, and an high Wall in his own Conceit,
Prove. 18.11. And though Job could purge himself in this case, that he had not
made Gold his hope or Confidence, Chap. 31.24. yet he was a Man that few could
match him, according to the Character which God gives of him twice, That there
was none like him in all the earth, Chap. 1.8, 1, 2.3.

2. In a afflicted Condition, it is hard to get up our Hearts to such a cheerful
Frame, and keep them in it, as the Word calls for. A meek and a quiet Spirit
under Sufferings, is an Ornament to a Believer, but this is not enough: The
Believers in Scripture, that were set forth for our Examples, went higher; and
we find it difficult to reach that which they exceeded. We are ready to think
our selves good Proficients, if we have our Passions so far subdued, as to be
calm and still, not to rage and fret; to forbear complaining and repining; but
how much harder is it to give thanks, and bless the Name of the Lord, in and
for Distresses? How much harder to Glory and take Pleasure in Infirmities, and
to be exceeding joyful in all our tribulation? 2 Cor. 7.4. This is so
unnatural, to be glad of that which is most grievous to the Flesh, to glorify
the Lord in the Fires, and and bear the heaviest Calamities, as valuable
Mercies, that the performance cannot be easy.

6. There is the difficulty of living in the highest Exercise of every Grace,
with the deepest Humility. This is as necessary as any thing that can be named,
and yet perhaps the hardest of all; without Christ the best Duty, and the worst
Sin (as one excellently says) are both alike; and as the Prosperity of Fools
destroys them, and their fullest Tables are their greatest Snares; so not only
our Sins, but our Duties may undo us, and will if they puff us up; and yet how
apt are we to swell, when we have gone through any service in a tolerable
manner? How few are there, in whom the lively Actings of Grace do not abate the
sense of their Vileness, almost as much as the workings of Corruption increase
it? As there are too many in the World that count this Doctrine absurd, so I am
persuaded, that of all who are in Christ, there are none but what find the
Practice difficult. It Is hard to walk very exactly with God, and yet to walk
very humbly; to do with all our might, and yet entirely to renounce it when we
have done, and mention nothing of it; to be rich in good Works, and yet as
Beggars to live upon God's Free Gift, and with holy Self-denial to return that
Answer to Christ, Lord, when saw we thee an hungry, and fed thee? The remanants
of Spiritual Pride in every one of us, makes this very hard; the greatest in
Christ's Kingdom should be the least in their own Eyes, but it is not very easy
for them so to be.

SERMON XIV.
September 22. 1696.
MARK X. xxvi, xxvii. And they were astonished out of measure, saying among
themselves, Who then can be saved?

And Jesus looking upon them says, With Men it is impossible, but not with
God: For with God all Things are possible.


II. HOW must the overcoming of all these Difficulties be resolved into the
Power of the Grace of God? This may be opened under two distinct Heads.

1. There is a gracious supernatural Power communicated to Believers, and
inherent in them. Two Things here should be a little cleared, that Believers
have such a Power inherent in them, and that it is communicated to them.

1. That Believers have such a Power inherent in them. This is evident, and
beyond all Dispute; For,

1. Hence they are denominated strong; 1 John 2.14. To be strong, and yet
utterly destitute and void of Power, is a perfect contradiction. Abraham was
particularly commended for Strength of Faith, Romans 4.20. And who knows not that
Faith is a Work fulfilled in us?

2. If the Children of God have no inhaerent Power, then the New Birth makes no
Difference, between them and others, or between them and themselves before they
were Born again. An unregenerate State is described by being without Strength,
Romans 5.6. And is a regenerate State so too? Is a Man as weak, when he is made
alive to God, as when he was dead in Sin?

5. If Believers have no Power, then they are not chargeable with the Sin of
spiritual Sloth; which they are so often incident to, and in Scripture accused
of, Isa. 64.7. There is none that stirs up himself, etc. Wherein does
slothfulness consist, but in not exerting and employing the Abilities given us?
And yet how can this be, if we have none to use or to put forth?

4. What is any Grace indeed, but a Power gained over the contrary Corruption?
The Spirit lusting against the Flesh, and the Law of the Mind warring at least
(and for the most Part prevailing also) against the Law of the Members? Romans
6.14. is verified in Believers; Sin shall not have Dominion over you. Now where
Sin loses the Dominion, Grace assumes it; and all Dominion supposes Power.

2. That this Power is communicated to Believers, though inhaerent in them.
They cannot vaunt themselves upon this account, because the Spring and Original
of it is not in themselves. They could have no more Power against Sin and
Satan, except it were given them from above, then Pilate had against Christ.
The God of Israel is he that gives Strength and Power unto his People, Psalm
68.35. He is the Fountain that dispenses it, they are but as the Cisterns that
receive it. It Is ingratitude not to acknowledge the Gift, it is abominable
Pride, to deny the Giver. Believers have such a Principle within them, but it is
infused, not acquired; their Strength is in Part recovered, not by their own
Means or Praevious endeavors, but by a Divine Virtue and Influence let out
upon their Souls. The Spirit that dwells in us as Men, is a Spirit of
Infirmity, the New Spirit which is given us as Believers, is a Spirit of Power.
This we are neither to disown, nor to arrogate; the Holy Ghost lays down this
Truth with Caution against both Extremes, 2 Cor. 3.5. Not that we arer
sufficient of our selves, as of our selves, but all our sufficiency is of God.
He does not say, we have no sufficiency absolutely, but we have none of our
selves, God is the Author of it.

2. There is an unexhausted Power to which Believers may and must have recourse
for further Assistance. This is that, which besides the Grace already given,
the Scripture calls Grace to help in Time of Need, upon every particular
Emergent Occasions, Heb. 4.16. There is no Time wherein we do not need more
Grace from God to draw out the Grace we have into Exercise, and to maintain it
in Exercise also, 2 Timothy 2.1. Be strong in the Grace, which is in Christ Jesus.
The fullness of Grace which is treasured up in our Blessed Lord, must Relieve
and Supply the defects of that Grace which is in us. Therefore Paul ascribes
his more abundant Labors, Not to the Grace in him, but to the Grace of God
which was with him, 1 Cor. 15.10. As we have necessity enough for all the
Strength received, so our Case and Condition in this World requires a greater
Strength to accompany and concur with us. This the Apostle styles in another
Place, The Power of Christ resting upon him, 2 Cor. 12.9. The Word signifies
Dwelling as in a Tent over him; as David speaks of God's hiding him in his
Pavilion, Psalm. 27.5. Such a Screen and Defense was the Power of Christ to
Paul; Christ was the Subject of this Power, Paul the Object; Christ possessed it,
Paul had the benefit of it. And in a sober Sense, that which is for our
Advantage may be called ours; because it is enjoyed by us, though not lodged in
us. As when God had assured Gideon of his Presence, The Lord is with thee,
Judge. 6.12. He is bidden to go in this his might, ver. 14. Gideon's main
Strength lay not in his being a mighty Man, but in his being assisted by the
mighty God.

Quest. To what End should they that are actually furnished with an Holy
Gracious Power for spiritual Services, have recourse notwithstanding to this
Infinite Power of God?

Answ. There is a Threefold End to be regarded herein.

1. To secure the being of Grace; for Grace is the Workmanship of God, and not
God, and therefore cannot support it self, nor stand without leaning upon him.
The innate Strength of the New Creature is not the Foundation of a Saints
Perseverance; for if he were not kept by the Power of God, he would be lost at
last, 1 Pet. 1.5. He is kept by it from his Conversion to his Salvation, from
the first beginning of his Confidence, till he has received the End of his
Faith; or else the strongest Grace in the World would fail.

2. To carry on the Improvement of Grace. A Believers Diligence will never add
to his Stature, if God do not lift up his Head. Instead of getting more
Strength (which he should daily do) he will rather lessen what he has, and
grow weaker than he was. But when God comes in with his Auxiliary Force, they
that were ready to halt and go back, make the greatest Progress. Isa. 40.49. He
gives Power to the faint, and to them that have no might, he increases
Strength.

3. In order to the vigorous Employment of Grace. As Christ said of the Damsel,
She is not dead, but sleeps; so it may be said of many Christians, they are
alive, but not awake; they are too drousie and sluggish in their Course of
Duty. But when fresh help is given in from Eternal Power, what lively Acts do
gracious Habits produce! How nimbly do we move in our walk with God! As the
Prophet says, Hab. 3.19. The Lord God is my Strength, and he will make my Feet,
like Hinds Feet; i. e. swift and unwearied.

III. Why must the overcoming of the Difficulties of Salvation be thus resolved
into the Power of God's Grace? What Reason is there for the placing of all upon
that one Bottom?

1. The highest and most perfect Creatures have miscarried, when they stood in
their own Strength; the Strength with which they were endowed at their first
Creation.

1. The Angels, the highest rank of Creatures, and in a most perfect State,
fell from Heaven. Though they excelled in Strength, yet we see, it was not
enough to bear them up without confirming Grace. They that always beheld the
Face of God, lift up their Heels against him, and wickedly revolted from him.
They that were the Top of the Creation, are sunk into an horrible Pit; they
that were greater in Power and Might than any of the Things which God made
besides, have betrayed their dangerous weakness by a foul and sinal Apostasy.
It Is the harder to explain and give an account of their Fall, because they
sinned without a Temper. They had no Instigation to Evil from without
themselves; and yet we find the mutability of their Natures was enough to
expose them, because they were not, like the Elect Angels, their Companions,
and the rest of their Kind, established in Christ.

2. Adam, who was also made upright, after the Holy Image of God, without the
least Bent or Inclination in his Soul to Evil, fell nevertheless. That we, the
Posterity of the first Man, whose Natures are already corrupted, and strongly
biased with indwelling Sin, should run into all manner of Abominations, unless
God restrain us, is no wonder; but it seems strange, that our pure and sinless
Parents, that had such a stock of Righteousness to live upon, should so
notoriously, and so quickly offend. How plainly does this show, that a Creature
(before a Sinner) given to change, cannot carry sufficient Preservatives from
Sin within it self? Was the Power of standing so soon lost by innocent Man, and
do any of his sinful Race expect to regain it, and raise up themselves without
being behold'n to God.

2. The best and eminentest Saints have most manifestly felt, and readily owned
their necessary Dependence upon the Power of the Grace of God. It may be, some
young and raw Converts may be too rash and confident at first; their
Imaginations go a great deal beyond their Strength, and they think they can do
or suffer any thing for Chirst, like foolish Children, when they begin to use
their Legs, that venture further than they can with Safety, but grow more wary
afterward. So here Babes in Christ, being transported by the heat of their
first Love, forget many Times how feeble and infirm they are, till God by
leaving them, gives them some afflicting Proofs of it. But the most solid, well
grown Christians, that are judicious as well as affectionate, that have tried
their Strength oftener, and considered Things better, that have really profited
more in Religion, and attained nearer to the Resurrection of the Dead, these
are always the most apprehensive of the Truth I am now upon. God's eldest
Children, and that are of all others the fittest for Enjoyment of their
glorious Inheritance, do still perceive, and are apt most freely to confess
themselves incapable of yielding Holy Obedience, without Supplies of Power from
the Spirit of Christ. Paul gives us the Report in an Hour of Temptation; though
he had been caught up to Heaven above fourteen Years before, yet when he came
down again, was like to be overborn by the buffettings of Satan, if God had
not held him up. That Answer which Christ gave him, was all his Support, or
else that chosen Vessel had been broken in Pieces, 2 Cor. 12 9. He said to me,
My Grace is sufficient for thee, my Strength is made perfect in weakness.

3. If both the Desire and the Performance in all spiritual Cases be the
Effects of God's mighty Operation, then all must be resolved into his Power;
for the Desires and Performances take in all. Phil. 2.13. It is God which
works in you, both to Will and to Do, etc. If he Works in us these two
Things, a fixed Inclination to good, and actual Execution of it, what is it
that he does not Work?

1. God Works the Will; all Holy Desires are by his Operation, Psalm 110.3. Thy
People shall be willing in the Day of thy Power. It Is he that roots out our
sinful Aversions and Reluctancies with his strong Hand. The changing and
turning, and new moulding of the Heart is the sole Work of him that fashioned
it at first. None can prevail upon the Soul to choose and affect, what it
naturally abhors, and flies from, but only he.

2. God Works the Deed; all Holy Performances, are the proper Fruits of his
efficacious Influence also. This is undeniable, for in whatsoever Case that
influence is withdrawn, though the Will continues, the Deed is wanting. Though
he has wrought in us to Will what we should do, yet we cannot do what we
should and would. Is not Paul, and every Believer in the World, a clear
Instance of this? Romans 7.18. To Will is present with me, but how to perform,
etc. I find not. We desire to do a great deal better than we attain to do.
David took Pleasure in Duty, and yet craves Ability for it, as a further
additional Gift. Psalm 119.35. Make me to go in the Path, etc. for therein do I
delight. Though the Way be most delightful, we must go in God's Strength.

4. The Tenor of the New Covenant puts this Point out of Doubt, that the
Difficulties of Salvation are to be overcome by the Power of God's Grace only.
The Law (which is our Rule of Duty, and to be observed as such, by those that
are in Christ) requires Things above our Strength, but God in this Covenant of
Grace, Promises what he requires; and undertakes for what he demands. The
Things which he enjoins us to do, he says, He will enable us to do; which
plainly implies, that without his powerful help they could never be done; for,
why should God vainly and needlessly engage to interpose in a Matter, which
might be done as well, though he stood afar off, and contributed nothing
toward it? Does God fear (as Joab intimated to David concerning Rabbah, when
he fought against it, 2 Samuel 12.28.) lest we should take the City, and so it
should be called after our Name? I mean, does God-fear, lest we should do all
our selves, and so run away with all the Honor? No surely, God's Glory may be
wickedly snatched and stolen from him, but it can never be justly won or gotten
by us; and therefore God's gracious Promises are convincing Arguments of Man's
utter Impotency to any spiritual good; his Commands do not more plainly
signify our Obligation to Duty, than his Promises do our Weakness in
Discharging it When God bids us walk in his Statutes, that shows how we are
bound to do it; when he says, he will Cause us to walk in them, Ezekiel. 36.27.
This shows, that we are not able of our selves to do it.

IV. Use. There are several Things which we may from hence be informed of, and
exhorted to.

1. There are some things which we may be informed of from hence. As

1. They make very light of Salvation, who think to work it out by their own
Power. They cannot suppose it to be a difficult Thing, but that which may be
achieved with little labor or trouble. And whereas the Principles of those
who attribute all to the Grace of God are charged with countenancing of
laziness and looseness, it may much rather be retorted upon those who hold the
contrary Opinions. Such as ascribe all to themselves, are the Persons that take
least Care and Pains in the Matters of Religion; as if God's Children were born
without Travail, and the Kingdom of Heaven taken without Violence. Men that
Judge after the Flesh, cannot indeed be imagined to Judge otherwise; For the
Eyes of our Understanding must be enlightened, that we may know what is the
exceeding greatness of his Power, etc. Ephesians. 1.18, 19.

2. Our spiritual Adversaries would find no Difficulty in destroying us, if we
were left alone. We have so little might against them, that we should be an
easy Prey to them, if we had not one to stand by us, who is infinitely
mightier than they. The Devils believe this Doctrine which the Pride of Man
opposes; they know they can outdo and over-match us, if we had not Omnipotence
on our side. When our Lord tells Peter, that Satan desired to have him, the
meaning is, that he would have tried a single Combat with him, unguarded by
the powerful Intercession of Jesus Christ, for that was it which turned the
Scale and prevented Peter's overthrow. Poor Believers are as much despised by
the Powers of Darkness, as Gideon's young Son was by the two Kings of Midian,
Zelah, and Zalumnah, Judge. 8.21. Job himself would not have come off with so
much Honor and Victory as he did, if God had not put Strength into him, Chap.
23.6.

3. This hints the true Reason to us, how it comes to pass that the same
Believers are baffled by some Difficulties, and yet Triumph over others. What
hardships is a Child of God carried through, and made more than Conqueror over
at one Time, who at another Time is almost overwhelmed, and his Courage gone!
How does God at one Time help us to bear the Enjoyment of greater Plenty
without being hurt by it, than we can at another Time? As the Net which was let
down at Christ's Command broke with the multitude of Fishes, Luke 5.6. And after
the Resurruction, Christ orders the Draught as before, and so many were caught,
that they could not pull them to the Shore, John 21.6. And yet the Net was not
broken, v. 11.

4. How vastly does Grace make us to differ from what we are by Nature! I am a
Child, says the Prophet, Jer. 1.6. Easily shaken and thrown down; but what says
God, ver. 18. Behold I have made Thee this Day a defenced City, and an Iron
Pillar and brazen Walls, etc. Without me you can do nothing, says Christ, John
15.5. I can do all Things through Christ that strengthens me, says Paul, Phil.
4.13. What a Difference is here? So great, that there cannot be a greater;
doing nothing, and doing all things. Such is a Difference between a sorry naked
Man, and a Believer obtaining help of God. Though our own Right Hand cannot
save us, the Lord at our Right Hand will save, so as none shall hinder.

5. The best Assistance we can give to any of our Brethren in Soul-troubles and
straits, is leading them to the Rock, that's higher than our selves. We are vain
helpers, except we do as Jonathan did to David, 1 Samuel 23.16. Strengthen one
another's Hands in God. It Is our Duty to Comfort the feeble-minded, and support
the weak, 1 Thessalonians. 5.14. But how shall we do this? By showing them where the
Strength of Salvation is. So the Prophet expounds the Apostle, Isa. 35.3, 4.
Strengthen you the weak Hands, confirm the feeble Knees; say to them that are
of a fearful Heart, be strong, fear not; behold your God will come and save
you. Holy David was very Ambitious of doing this Service to the World; viz.
Showing God's Strength to the Generation, and his Power to every one that was
to come, Psalm 71.18.

2. There are some Things which from hence we should be exhorted to. As

1. You who have lived all your Days in Sin, repair to Almighty Grace for Cure.
The oldest Sores are healed by Christ, as well as the freshest Wounds. He is an
able Physician, and though your Case would puzzle every one else, he will
certainly recover you. Diseases of the longest Continuance, how stubborn
soever, are easily helped and removed by him. He loosed the Woman, whom Satan
had hound eighteen Years, Luke 13.16. He made the Man whole, that had an
Infirmity thirty eight Years, John 5.5. His Miracles of Grace are wrought not
only on Young Sinners, but many Times Elder Persons.

2. When you are brought into a State of Salvation, think of the remainder of
your Work without uncomfortable Terror. The Difficulties in our Passage to
Heaven oftentimes breed too much Affrightment; as the Soul of the People in
their Journeying through the Wilderness to Canaan, was discouraged because of
the Way, Numb. 21.4. They had little Reason for this, whom God had already
delivered out of Egypt; and the like may be said of you, whom God has with a
mighty and outstretched Arm rescued from the very brink of Hell.

3. Let Everlasting Strength be a Motive to your Everlasting Trust. Isa. 26.4.
As Martha said to Christ concerning her Sister, That had left her to serve
alone; bid her that she help me, Luke 10.40. So do you boldly claim God's
promised Assistance at the Throne of Grace, where you cannot be more (humbly)
Confident, than Welcome. Intermitting of a steady Reliance upon him, is as much
your Folly and Sin, as presuming on your selves. What can be meant by that
Precept, of being strong in the Lord, etc. Ephesians. 6.10. If we may not take hold
of God's Strength, and use it as freely as if it were our own? While others
faint, and are weary, and utterly fall, you that wait upon the Lord (i. e.
continue depending) shall renew your Strength, Isa. 40.30, 31.

4. Look upon it as your absolute Duty to despair of nothing that needs to be
done either for or by you. Your own insufficiency is no Plea for doubting in
any Case whatever. Let the weak say, I am strong, Joel 3.10. Paul is our
Pattern, he did say so, 2 Cor. 12.10. The Spirit of God speaks in very large
and comprehensive Terms upon this Subject, Col. 1.11. Strengthened with all
might according to his glorious Power, unto all Patience, etc. So 2 Cor. 9.8.
Here Is a remarkable heap of Expressions (as Mr. Trail very well Notes, page
236.) All Grace first in God, and that abounding toward us; and then as the
result of it, our having a sufficiency, and All Sufficiency, and that always,
and in all Things, and thence flows every good Work, and our abounding to every
good Work.

5. You who are Believers, and consequently to whom all Things are thus
possible, study all thankfulness. What a Debtor is he to God, whose Strength is
in him. According as his Divine Power has given Relief to you, make suitable
returns to him. The Man that had been Lame from his Mother's Womb, as soon as he
received Strength and stood up, he entered with the Apostles into the Temple,
leaping and praising God, Acts 3.7, 8. Thus David cries out, The Lord is my
Strength, and my Shield, my Heart trusted in him, and I am helped; therefore my
Heart greatly rejoices, and with my Song will I Praise him, Psalm 28.7. To
Conclude therefore, as your help comes from Heaven, so let your Praises go up
thither. Remember every renewed Experience calls for a repeated
Acknowledgement; and there may be equal Danger of obstructing God's mighty
workings by ingratitude, and by unbelief; both tend to withold his Hand, and
enfeeble ours.

SERMON XV.
December 1. 1696.
PSALM LXIX. iv last Clause. Then I restored that which I took not away.


THough the Title of this Psalm Points us to the Author [ a Psalm of David] yet
much of the Matter makes it plain, that he is not the only, nor the principal
Subject. The main Substance of the whole agrees well enough to David, and he
might have an Eye in it to his own personal Afflictions, but yet his Thoughts
and Expressions were so directed by the Holy Ghost, as to be more fully and
properly verified in Christ, of whom he was an eminent Type, than in himself.
There are several Remarkable Passages which have a particular Respect to
Christ, and to put it beyond all Doubt, that this was the meaning and design of
the Spirit of God in them, they are so applied in the New Testament. Compare
ver. 9. with John 2.17. And ver. 21. with Mat. 27.34. A Circumstance of
Suffering which we never meet with in the History of David's Troubles, but
punctually Recorded by the Evangelists concerning our Blessed Lord. Again, ver.
22, 23. is applied, not to David's Enemies, but to the Jews, upon their
Rejection by God, for the Crucifying of Christ, Romans 11.9, 10. and so ver. 25.
is said to be fulfilled in Judas for betraying him, Acts 1.20. But we need to
go no further for an Instance of this kind, than the beginning of this verse,
which is Cited by our Lord himself, as spoken with Reference to his Case, John
15.25. They hated me without a Cause. Only what is contracted in the Citation,
is here delivered more at large, where we have four Things distinctly set
forth, concerning the Enemies of Jesus Christ; their Iniquity, Malignity,
Number and Power.

1. Their Iniquity; they were [causeless haters of him] and [his Enemies
wrongfully] they had no just or real Ground for what they did, no Provocation
to do it; they were his Adversaries for his good Works, not for any Evil ones;
and that which should have rather engaged their Affection to him, was the
occasion of their Opposition.

2. Their Malignity; [they that would destroy me] they sought no less than his
Life, they thirsted after his Blood; that which was indeed necessary to be
shed, for the accomplishing of the Holy Ends of God, these wicked Instruments
would not be Content without; so Devilish Rage was overruled to bring about
the Divine Purpose.

3. Their Number; they [are more than the Hairs of my Head] the whole Multitude
of the Jews were for destroying him, Mat. 27.20, etc. And truly, every Man in
the World, that is without Christ, is against him. He has as many Adversaries,
as there are Men in a natural unconverted State.

4. Their Power. They [are mighty] so it was foretold that they would be; The
Kings of the Earth set themselves, and the Rulers take Counsel together against
the Lord, and against his Christ, Psalm 2.2. Which Peter cites, as spoken with
Relation to our Lord Jesus, Acts 4.26. Paul says, That none of the Frinces of
this World knew him, 1 Cor. 2.8. And being ignorant of him, no wonder that they
oppose him. Antichrist has more of the Potentates of the Earth on his side,
than Christ ever had. But that which I intend to insist upon, is what the
Psalmist adds in the close of the verse. [Then I restored that which I took not
away]. Then, when he was so beset and surrounded with Enemies, who were
worrying him to Death; then, when the Waters were come into his Soul; when he
sunk in the deep mire, and the Floods overflowed him; when his Throat was
dried, and his Eyes failed, ver. 1, 2, 3. Which are all so many various Phrases
to denote the Extremity of those Soul-troubles that our Lord Jesus was plunged
into, by Reason of the Wrath of God let out against him, as well as the Wrath
of Man. Then, he restored that which he took not away; he was not forced or
constrained to do it, but he did it willingly with his free Consent; he was
under no Obligation to do it, but what he took upon himself; the Law binds a
Man indeed to make Restitution of that which he has taken away, Lev. 6.4. But
the Lord of the Law could not be bound to restore that which he had not taken,
in order to the making of Peace and Reconciliation between God and the Sinner,
this was graciously undertaken and performed by Christ.

Obs. It was the great and blessed Work of our Lord Jesus here upon the Earth,
to restore what he took not away. In handling this, I. Show, what is it, which
was taken away, and from whom? II. Wherein it appears that Christ took it not
away. III. How he restored it. IV. Why he did so. V. Use.


I. What is it which was taken away, and from whom? For it is manifestly
implied, that there was something unjustly taken, or else what need of any
Restitution? As to God, there was Glory taken from him; and as to Man, there
was Righteousness, Holiness and Happiness taken from him also.

1. There was Glory taken from God. Not his essential Glory, nor any Perfection
of his Being, for that cannot be taken away, but that Glory which shines forth
in the Moral Government of his Creatures, and that Glory, which we are tied to
give to him.

1. The Glory of God shining forth in the Holy Government of his reasonable
Creatures, was taken away by Sin. It was preserved and maintained in the upper
World indeed, among the standing Angels, but among fallen Men in this lower
World, it was entirely lost. It was for our Makers Honor, to have the Man whom
he had made after his Image, live in perfect Subjection to his Will; but when
Man cast off the Yoke of his Obedience, though God's Authority and Right
remained, the exercise of it by actual rule was interrupted. He was a King
still, but of disorderly Rebels, that instead of kissing his Scepter, renounced
him, and bid defiance to him.

2. That Glory which we are tied to give to God, was withheld by sin. There is
a revenue of Glory due from us to God, which sin tends to alienate, and deprive
him of, and so the Devil takes the Advantage, and seizes it for himself. Every
sin is upon this account a committing of Theft; it is robbing of God of the
Honor which we owe to him. We ought to Glorify him with all we have, with
every Faculty and Member, but the Sinner on the contrary vilifies and
reproaches him by the abuse of all. Such was and is the state of Mankind
without Christ. We do not only come short of the Glory of God, but we attempt
to cut his Glory short. As much as in us lies, we make God contemptible, throw
Dirt upon his Name, and set him at naught.

2. There was Righteousness, Holiness, and Happiness taken from Man also. He
was a real loser in all these respects, being once in possession of all, but
cast out of it by sin.

1. There was a loss of Righteousness to the Guilty Sinner. So long as Adam
stood, while his outward nakedness was no shame to him, he was inwardly covered
with a Robe of Righteousness; but Satan alluring him into sin, stripped him of
his Garment, and clothed him with Confusion instead of it. As God made him in
his first Estate he was a perfectly just Person, and could stand in the
Judgment before God; but when his Integrity was removed from him, Guilt was
immediately contracted, and he fell into Condemnation, under the Sentence of
the Law which he had broken. And now till Christ repairs this Loss for us, the
Divine Tribunal is very dreadful; For in God's sight no man living can be
justified, Psalm. 143.2.

2. There was a loss of Holiness to the polluted Sinner. The Image of God in
Man was defaced, the Divine Nature destroyed, and all the Habits of Grace
extinguished; the good Treasure of the Heart was turned into an evil one,
filled with the Seeds and Principles of all manner of Corruption. Every one of
them is gone back, (degenerated from what they originally were, when they came
out of God's Hands) they are altogether become filthy, Psalm. 53.3. Men are now
by Nature so void of the least Relics or Remembrances of their primitive
Purity, that they are insensible of their present Defilement. They are so
blinded with their own Mire, that they think themselves clean, till Christ has
anointed them with his Spirit and washed them in his Blood.

3. There was a loss of Happiness to the miserable Sinner. Adam's Expulsion out
of an Earthly Paradise, though a real Punishment, was the least part of what
Sin rendered him obnoxious to. The Misery of Man was much greater upon him in
other Respects, as he was quite cut off from all Communion with God, made an
Heir of Wrath, not only as to bodily, but spiritual Evils, of all sorts, and
not only in Time, but to Eternity. Upright Man was exempt, and secure from all
these, and placed in as Happy a Condition as a Creature could be out of Heaven;
but when Sin entered, Death entered with and by it, Romans 5.12. A Death which is
comprehensive of all the Calamities and Woes of both Worlds; till Christ came
that we might have more abundant Life.

II. Wherein it appears that Christ did not take away those Things from either?

1. It is plain, as to God, he never took away any Glory from him; for he never
did any Thing dishonorable or offensive to God. John 8.29. I do always those
Things that please him. So Isa. 50.5. The Lord God has opened mine Ear, and I
was not rebellious, neither turned away back. Several of the Prophets did for a
Time refuse to go at God's call, and would have plucked their Shoulders, and
shrunk their Necks, from the Work which he put upon them; as Moses, Jeremy,
Jonas, etc. But our Lord Jesus showed no Reluctance, delighting to do and
suffer his Father's Will. The second Adam had none of that sinful Enmity in his
Nature, which all the rest of the Posterity of the first Adam have; He was
peculiarly that Holy Thing, from his very Birth, Luke 1.35. God's beloved Son,
and faithful Servant, throughout his Life.

2. It is also clear as to Man, that he took not away any Rightcousness,
Holiness or Happiness from him. He was not such a Fountain of Guilt, Pollution
and Misery, as the first Adam had been, but the contrary (as we shall see
afterward.) The first Man poisoned, and ruined all his Seed, but he did not so
to the Children which God had given him. His Conversation was not only
blameless, and harmless, but useful and exemplary. He did no Violence, Isa.
53.9. But he went about doing good, Acts 10.38. Whatever was injurious to Men,
he vindicates himself from; When the Disciples called for Fire from Heaven to
consume the Samaritans, he tells them, that he came not to destroy men's Lives,
but to save them, Luke 9.56. When the Woman taken in Adultery was brought to
him, he would not condemn her, but bids her go and Sin no more, John 8.11.

3. The Scripture therefore speaks of Christ's being cut off, but not for
himself, Dan. 9.26. Though he suffered in his own Person, he did not suffer on
his own Account; Christ bath once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, 1
Pet. 3.18. Sin was indeed the cause of his Suffering, but not any sin committed
by himself; he was the just One, we were the unjust, on whose behalf he
underwent all that was laid upon him. Isa. 53.4, 5. Surely he has born our
Griefs, and carried our Sorrows. -- He was wounded for our Transgressions, and
bruised for our Iniquities. He suffered for that of which we were guilty; he
made reparation for the Wrongs which we had done; he discharged the Debts which
we contracted, and endured the Wrath which we provoked, and drunk of the Cup
which we had filled.

4. The Innocence of Christ was conspicuous in his very Sufferings. Though they
found no cause of Death in him, yet desired they Pilate that he should be
slain, Acts 13.28. He that gave Sentence against him, did first give Sentence
for him; he pronounced him Faultless on the Bench, before he delivered him up
to Execution. When they went to apprehend him, they came out as against a
Thief, Matthew. 26.55. they proceeded against him as a Malefactor, and numbered
him with Transgressors, but could not prove any Article of their Charge against
him, so much as by the agreeing Testimony of their Mercenary Perjured
Witnesses. That which they alleged with greatest truth was, that he made
himself the Son of God, John 19.7. i. e. equal with God, as they understood it,
chap. 5.18. (However the Socinians would mince that Expression now) but this
was far from a Criminal Accusation, or a warrantable Reason why he should die,
as they pretended; For being in the form of God, (of the same infinite Essence)
he counted it no Robbery to be equal with God, Phil. 2.6.

III. How did Christ restore those things which he took not away?

Answ. In General, by his Active and Passive Obedience; for both are concerned
in this matter, and contribute their joint influence toward the great and
blessed Work, of which I am now speaking. As will appear.

1. Christ's doing of the Will of God in such a manner as he did it, was a
greater Honor to God, than ever had been, or could be done before. He did it
in the most exact and sinless manner; the Law of God in his Heart, and copied
out in his Actions, was as perfect as it is in it self. The Commandment, though
exceeding broad, was not wider than his performance of it. This could never be
said of any of the Sons of Men before, since the Fall of Adam; for there is
still a large mixture of Evil with all the Good they do, and their best and
complete Duties will not bear weighing in an even Balance. And as to Adam
himself, before he fell, in his state of Uprightness, there was a vast
disproportion between his Obedience, and the Obedience of Christ. What
comparison between the service of a Day, and a whole Life! What comparison
between the Act of a Creature, and the Acts of the Son of God! There was more
Glory brought to God by his Son's being his Servant but for one moment, than by
all the Angels in Heaven, and Men on Earth being so for ever.

2. Christ's suffering of the Will of God, made a considerable addition to the
Glory of God, which had been impaired by the sin of Man. Hebr. 5.8. Though he
were a Son, yet learned he Obedience by the things which he suffered. This was
admirable; He that teaches Obedience to us, and requires it of us, learned it
himself, and he learned it experimentally; for to learn to obey, is to obey: It
was a Lesson which he practiced, and it was an harder Lesson than in cases
where he was only called to do, for it was by the things that he suffered. This
he refers to in that last famous Prayer of his, John 17.4. I have glorified
thee on the Earth, I have finished the Work, etc. The finishing of his Work was
by dying; this crowned all that he had done and undergone before, and therefore
this was the most eminent and signal instance of his glorifying God. Therefore
when Judas the Traitor was gone out, Christ breaks forth, Now is God glorified
in me; now the hour is coming, John 13.31. Now all his Attributes, Precepts,
Promises, Threatenings, are about to be made more illustrious by my Death, than
ever they have been.

3. Christ has provided for the Justification of the Sinner, by the Obedience
which he fulfilled. By the Obedience of one shall many be made righteous, Romans
5.8. Our Lord Jesus is this One, and Believers are those many; all soand and
true Believers, whether strong or weak. One Christ is able to justify many;
God has declared, That what he has done, is enough for this purpose, Isa.
53.11. Yea it is more pleasing and satisfactory to God, than if every one of
these many had done what the Law calls for from them in their own Persons. As
Christ appeared in Vision to John, with a Garment down to the Feet, Rev. 1.13.
so the Robe of his Righteousness is long and large enough to supply all the
Defects of ours, and cover his whole Body. Here is a sufficient ample
Recompense for our former loss; we gain a better in the room of what we had.
The Righteousness which sin carried out, was a poor, mutable, temporary, fading
thing; now an everlasting Righteousness is brought, in Dan. 9.24. a
Righteousness which cannot be taken away, or by any means wrested from us.

4. Christ communicates that Grace, which is necessary for our Sanctification
also. He finds Sinners in their Blood, but he does not leave them so; he finds
them without God, but brings them to him; he finds them afar off. but makes
them nigh; he finds them haters of God, and one another, but he plants love to
both in their Hearts by his own Spirit: He purifies them to himself, Tit. 2.14.
and forms himself in them. There are no partakers of Christ, but what partake
of God's Holiness by him; they have no saving benefit from him, that are
destitute of this; Isa. 62.12. They shall call them, The holy People,
theredeemed of the Lord. As Christ is the Author of Salvation to them that
believe and obey him, so he is the Author of their Faith and their Obedience;
we receive Grace from him in order to the receiving of him, and walking in him.
There is no spiritual good thing that dwells in us, but what is the effect of
Christ's dwelling there. Souls that are united to his Person, are supplied out
of his fullness; and these are such Supplies as shall never fail, or be cut
off, while we have a being.

5. Jesus Christ has merited for us a present Blessedness in this World. This
necessarily follows upon what has been said; for they that are already in a
justified and sanctified State, must needs be in an happy State; more happy
upon these accounts, than they can be miserable upon any other. Where sin is
taken away, as to its damning Guilt, and ruling Power, no afflictive Evils can
make us miserable, but rather help to increase our Happiness; for the most
uneasy Providence are so sanctified, that it is better than if they were
escaped. It Is a Privilege which we owe to the Blood of Christ, that none of the
Calamities of this Life shall hurt us, but all shall do us good; and it is far
more desirable to be kept in a Wilderness of Trouble under such a Promise, than
to be in a Paradise of Prosperity without it. God deals with Believers as
Children when he chastens them, with Sinners as Enemies when he shines upon
them. Christ has redeemed us from the whole Curse, Gal. 3.13. from the Curse
of temporal Afflictions, as well as everlasting Destruction. He was crowned
with Thorns, as the Fruit of the Curse here upon the Earth, Genesis 3.18. to show
that has born it for us, and born it away from us.

6. Jesus Christ has procured for us a more full and absolute Blessedness in
the World to come. This is what we had forfeited all hopes of, and title to;
but of him we have obtained this Inheritance again, Ephesians. 1.11. Believers are
made happy now by the earnest of it, hereafter they will be more unconceivably
happy in the actual complete possession. Whosoever eats my Flesh, and drinks my
Blood, has eternal Life, John 6.54. Eternal Life and Glory, is the very top
and uttermost point, the head Stone, and the full blown Flower of a Creature's
Felicity; when you have said this, you can go no higher; now to assure us the
more comfortably of our arrival to this at last, we have the pledges and
beginnings of it here; but the way of our receiving them is to be considered:
It Is by eating the Flesh, and drinking the Blood of Christ; by Faith in the
Lamb slain, in our Passover Sacrificed; for his Flesh could not have been
eaten, nor his Blood drunk, if he had not died. It Is the death of Christ which
we must lay hold upon for Life and Salvation; the Kingdom which he appoints to
us, is founded here; for (as one says) Christ has purchased by his Death all
the Legacies bequeathed in his Testament, which no other Testator does.

IV. Why did Jesus Christ make it his Work to restore what he took not away?

1. It was a necessary work, a work which must be done, in order to his being a
Savior. God will have restitution made one way or another; his injured Name
and Honor must be vindicated. It became him, etc. in bringing many Sons unto
glory (yea it would have become him, if he had brought but one) to make the
Captain of our Salvation perfect through sufferings, Hebr. 2.10. It was
agreeable to his Wisdom, Purity, Truth, and Righteousness, that Jesus Christ
should make compensation by his Blood for the Iniquity of M^^. It was not fit,
nor consistent with the Perfections of Gods Nature, that such Indignities (...)
had offered, should be passed by (...), without any notice taken, or (...)
Mercy cannot be exercised to the dispuragement of any other Attribute, he
cannot exile one to the depressing of the rest. In the business of Salvation,
there was something else to be done, besides the magnifying of Grace; God had
said, that be would magnisie the Law, and make it honorable, Isa. 42.21. This
Law had been trampled on by every Child of Disobedience, and therefore to
assert and recover the Reputation of it, Christ must be made under it, perform
what it enjoined, and suffer what it threatened.

2. It was a work impossible for any mere Creature to do; so that if Christ did
not, it could not have been done by any Person besides him. The Scripture
speaks of the wicked Oppressor, that he shall vomit up what he swallows down,
and according to his substance shall the restitution be, Job 20.18. He shall
refund to those whom he has drained by rapine and Violence, as far as his
Estate will go. But what restitution can there be, when all the substance is
wasted? This is our case; we are wretchedly poor, and insolvent, and have
nothing to pay, being reduced by Sin to absolute Beggary; we have stolen away
(as far as was in our power) the Crown from God, and we have ^ined and
plander'd our selves, encroach'd upon the Rights of Heaven, and wronged our own
Souls, and are utterly incapable of making the least atonement for all this.
We can take away, but we cannot restore: When the Servant that owed Ten
thousand Talents to his Lord, was brought before him, and could not pay his
Debt, his Lord commanded him to be sold, Matthew. 18.25. but alas! we are not
worth so much as our Debt amounts to. If Justice should seize us, it must
detain us for ever; we must not only be cast into Prison, but kept there; and
our lying in Hell for ever would not satisfy God, as Christ's suffering once
upon the Cross.

SERMON XVI.
December 15. 1696.
PSALM LXIX. iv. last Clause. Then I restored that which I took not away.


3. JEsus Christ was ordained of God to this work, and in that respect there
was a necessity of his accomplishing it. John 9.4. I must work the work of him
that sent me, etc. This was the work of him that sent him, and therefore he
could not decline it. Christ could not resist the Will of the Father, any more
than he could cease to love him. John 14.31. That the World may know that I
love the Father, as the Father gave me commandment, even so I do. His Obedience
was an Evidence of his Love to God, as it is of ours; though there be no
proportion between his and ours; for no Creatures love to God was ever so
strong, or ever so tried. Cyrus was styled the Man that executed God's Counsel,
Isa. 46.11. but he did it ignorantly, for he knew not God; but the Man Christ
Jesus understood his Work, and who gave it him to do, and designed the
Execution of God's Counsel in it; as an Expression of his matchless Affection
to him. It became our Lord Jesus in the quality of God's Commissioner, To be
faithful to him that appointed him, Heb. 3.2. He was put in trust with this
Business, and he must show his Fidelity in performing it. There is such an
exact Agreement between his and the Father's Will, that when God pleased to
require his Service, he could not but say, Lo I come.

4. Christ had engaged to take this Work upon him; which is a sort of
Engagement that the Scripture, more than once expresses by striking Hands, Job
17.3. Prove. 22.26. So our Lord Jesus had covenanted with the Father before all
Time, to do that which in the fullness of Time he actually came to do. Now this
Agreement, which bears an Eternal Date, could not be disanulled or made void
again; as God the Father had sworn with respect to Christ, and could not
repent, Psalm 110.4. So Jesus Christ having entered into such a Bond, it stood
firm as the Ordinances of Heaven, and he could not go back from the Execution
or Performance of it. If the Covenant of Redemption might have been broken, the
whole Design might have miscarried, the Counsel of Peace had been overthrown,
and all the Thoughts of God to usward had come to nothing. It was upon this
unmovable Foundation, that the Salvation of all the Believers under the Old
Testament was built, as well as those under the New; so that if Christ had not
made good what he undertook, they that were let into Heaven, must have been
cast out. But the Considence that God reposed in his Son could not be so
defeated. He that swears to his own hurt and changes not, is the Character
of a Citizen of Sion, Psalm 15.4. But most eminently true of Christ.

5. The Infinite Love of Christ to Sinners did sweetly incline him to this
Work. His Delights (who was the Wisdom of God) were with the Sons of Men, Prove.
8.31. He delighted in Mercy, and in them as the needy Objects of it, who
otherwise were altogether undelightful. The Bowels of Jesus Christ were
troubled for us; he could not bear to see his whole reasonable Creation in this
lower World, made a Prey to the Devil, without interposing for the effectual
Rescue of a chosen peculiar Number. Our Misery was the Motive to his
Compassion; that swayed him to Acts of Pity, when our guilt would have provokt
him to the utmost Revenge. This is that Love of Christ which passes Knowledge,
Ephesians. 3.19. A Love which is and will be the Matter of endless Admiration, which
the saints in Heaven are always magnifying, but can never fully comprehend.
It Is sometimes called the Grace of our Lord Yesus, 2 Cor. 8.9. 1 Timothy 1.14.
Which is not meant of the Grace communicated to us, but that Grace in him,
which is the Fountain and Spring of all such Communications. We are not only to
consider the Love and Good Will of the Father in sending, but the exceeding
Kindness of the Son in coming; which his Desire of, and Zeal for our Salvation,
promoted him to.

6. Jesus Christ was willing not only to purchase a new Title for us to our
forfeited Blessings, but to purchase a new Title to us for himself. This is
expressly said to be one Part of his Intention and Design; Romans 14 9. To this
end he both dyed, and rose and revived, that he might be Lord both of the Dead
and Living. He was Lord of all upon the old Account of Creation, for he could
not lose his Propriety and Dominion; when Ahaz. Reigned so wickedly and
committed all manner of Abominations, and for that Reason was delivered into
the Hand of the King of Syria, the Lord his God is said to do it, 2 Chronicles.
28.5. The Lord was his God by right still, though he sinfully renounced and
disowned him. But now. Jesus Christ was resolved to be our Lord upon a new
Account of Redemption; that he might lay claim to us, not only as the Lord that
made us, but as the Lord that bought us. We are now the ransomed of the Lord,
Isa. 35.10. His purchased Possession, Ephesians. 1.14. By the Payment of the same
inestimable Price he has regained all that Sin and Satan had snatched and torn
from us, and likewise acquired a further Interest and Right in us, such as will
be acknowledged by all his saved ones to his Eternal Praise.

7. The Powers of Darkness would have been Triumphant, if Christ had not
baffled and defeated them by this glorious Persormance. It was a great
Satisfaction to their Malice and Rage, after they were banished out of Heaven,
and cast down to Hell, to involve all Mankind by one successful Temptation in
the same Ruin with themselves, and so prevent God from rejoicing in any of his
Works on Earth. When Judgment was executed upon them never to be revers't, they
thought it made some amends, that they had drawn the whole Posterity of Adam at
once into the fatal Snare. The Devil gloried over poor miserable Man as his
Conquered Vassal, and lawful Captive; having subdued this undone World to
himself, as a kind of Tributary Province, where he might Drink his fill of the
Blood of Souls. But this Performance of Christ has disappointed him of the
Fruits of that Victory: For he has divided the spoil with the Strong, Isa.
53.12. And destroyed him that had the Power of Death, Heb. 2.14. Jesus Christ
has plucked his Sheep out of the Teeth of the Devourer, and pulled down the
Banners which he had set up, and made him give up his Slaves, as the Fish that
had swallowed Jonah, vomited him alive upon dry Land.

8. Christ knew that his blessed Performance would not only be a Benefit to
Man, but turn to the Advantage of Elect Angels also. At the same Time that he
came about restoring Work for us, he might also do confirming Work for them.
And this their Case required; Angels wanted an Head of stability, as well as
Men a Mediator of recovery; they stood in need of his Support, as well as we of
his Salvation; his Blood was necessary for us as actually fallen, his Strength
necessary to them, because naturally mutable. All Things in Heaven and Earth,
were to be gathered together in one, even in Christ, Ephesians. 1.10. They could not
safely meet in any other Center, but so as to be in danger of being shaken off
again. We that had left our first Estate, were to be reduced and brought back
to it; they that had kept their first Estate were to be fixed and established in
it. Here was a double Work to be done by the same Hand; and the same Hand has
done both; Christ has interposed for our Restoration, and for their Security;
for the remedying of our Apostasy, and the Prevention of theirs. The Heart of
our dear Lord is set upon the multiplying of Acts of Grace, from the Throne to
the Footstool, that high and low may be taken in.

V. Use.

I. Information: Many Things to be learnt from hence. As,

1. If it were Christ's Work to restore what he took not away, we may see a vast
difference between him, and the best of those that were Types of him. Some of
the greatest Types of Christ were in some Things contrary to him, as well as in
all Things Inferior. There was not a more eminent Type of Christ in the Old
Testament, than David, the Person speaking in the Text, insomuch that Christ is
frequently set forth under his Name, Isa. 55.3. and in many other Places. Now
this David was so far from doing as Christ did, i. e, Restoring what he took
not away, that he confesses the contrary of himself, in the Case of his
numbering the People, for which seventy Thousand of them dyed by the Pestilence,
2 Samuel 24.17. He spoke unto the Lord, when he saw the Angel that smote the
People, and said, Lo I have sinned and done wickedly, but these Sheep what have
they done? Let thy Hand I pray thee, be against me, etc. Our Lord Jesus might
have inverted these Words; these Sheep have gone Astray indeed, and turned
every one to his own Way, but what have I done? Let not thy Sword be awakened
against me, but them. They have deserved to suffer, but wherein have I
offended? David's Sin punished upon the People, and the Sins of the People upon
Christ.

2. The unspotted Holiness of our Lord Jesus, is not in the least blemished by
the Imputation of our Sins to him. He is not at all the less guiltless in
himself, because our Iniquities are laid upon him. We may with sufficient
tenderness preserve the Honor of our great Redeemer, as one undesiled, and
separate from Sinners, without departing from this important Truth of his being
made Sin for us; for the Holy Ghost affirms both this, and that he knew no Sin,
in the same Breath, 2 Cor. 5. ult. He was far from being personally conscious
of Sin, yet so far charged with it, as to be accountable in our stead for it.
When the Scapegoat which had all the Iniquities of the People put upon his
Head, was sent away by the Hand of a sit Man into the Wilderness, He that let
him go, was to wash his Clothes; and bath his Flesh in Water, and afterward to
return into the Camp, Lov. 16.26. And so the Priest was to do, after the
sprinkling of the Blood of the Heifer, Numb. 19.7. And the man that burnt her,
ver. 8. To signify a reputed uncleanness, though there was none really
inherent. One of the Ancients (Augustine) applies the Words following the Text,
ver. 5. to Christ in this very Sense; they were his Sins as he bore them,
though he did not commit them.

3. This serves to clear and vindicate the Righteousness of God in his severe
dealing with Christ. His engaging to restore, made the Case the same, with
respect to the Equity of the Divine Dispensation, as if he had taken away. He
undertook as our Surety, and so the Debt was looked upon as his own, though if
you abstract from the Consideration, of his Suretiship, he owed nothing. As
Judah said to Jacob, when he entreated that his Brother Benjamin might be sent
with them to Egypt; I will be Surety for him, of my Hand shall thou require
him; if I bring him not to thee, let me bear the blame for ever, Genesis 43.9. So
Christ undertook for the Sinner to God; at my Hand shall thou require all that
is due from him; let my Life go for his Life, let my Blood be taken in the Room
of his, and accepted as a Ransom for him. Now the Case being so, though God
spared not his own Son, he was not unjustly rigorous. His Son acquits and
justifies him in all that he inflicted on him; Psalm 22.1, 2, 3. My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me? why art thou so far from helping me, etc. But
thou art Holy. So John 17.25. He gives him the Title of righteous Father.

4. This shows the Reason of Christ's Silence, when he was upon his Trial, at
the Bar of Men. Mark 15.3, 4, 5. The Chief Priests accused him of many Things,
but he answered nothing. And Pilate asked him again, saying, Answerest thou
nothing? Behold how many Things they witness against thee. But Jesus yet
answered nothing; so that Pilate marvelled. It was strange and astonishing to
him who knew not the Cause, and might well be so. There are various Reasons
assigned for it, it was foretold that he should be oppressed and afflicted, and
yet be Dumb and not open his Mouth, like a Lamb brought to the slaughter, Isa.
53.7. He would do nothing to hinder his own Death, when his Hour was come; but
I conceive the main Reason to be, that he stood in our Place, who were truly
guilty, though he was Innocent; our Months were stopped, Romans 3.19. And therefore
he would not open his, as he could have done; our Cause was such as could not
be pleaded, it was capable of no Defense; we had nothing to say, why Sentence
should not pass upon us; and therefore he as representing us, silently
submitted to Condemnation.

5. This also intimates the Reason of the unshaken Confidence of Christ in the
worst part of all his Sufferings and Desertions. He knew, that he had not
personally deserved them, and could not be always put to undergo them. If he
had taken away, what he came to restore, it would have struck a fearful damp
upon his Spirit, when he entered into those Clouds, and was drinking of the
bitter Cup. Guilt breeds a great deal of Terror and Diffidence in the Mind, so
that a Man knows not how to bear up under his Troubles, nor yet to expect an
aescape out of them. But our Lord Jesus having only the Chastisement of our
Peace upon him, and being to make Expiation for no faults but ours, had no
Fears or Doubts to make him stagger; his Faith never faulter'd, but held on in
the most vigorous Exercise to the very Last. He could boldly make those
challenges, which the Prophet does in writing of him, Who will contend with me?
Let us stand together; who is my Adversary? Let him come near to me, Isa. 50.8.
He knows what Grounds he suffered upon, and what would be the Issue of his
Sufferings; that the Prince of the World had nothing in him, and Death could
not have long Dominion over him.

6. If Christ has made Restitution, then Remission is unquestionably sure. Sin
has been Condemned in the Flesh of Christ, therefore the Believer must be
certainly absolved. God is as righteous now in forgiving, as he would have been
otherwise in punishing. He can do it now without any Impeachment of his
Justice, Violation of his Truth, or Reflection on his Holiness; yea all these
Attributes sway him to forgive; because there is full Satisfaction made, all
his Demands are answered, and he can exact no more; Payment is accepted, the
Surety is discharged and taken from Prison, and so your Indemnity infallibly
obtained on the most honorable Terms. The Believer's Sins are therefore as
surely blotted out, as the Unbelievers are written down. It Is observed by some,
That the Trumpet of the Jubilee was ordered to begin to sound on the Day of
Atonement, and then every Man had his Liberty, and returned to his Possession,
Lev. 25.9, 10. So has Christ by his atoning Sacrifice proclaimed our Release.
The Scapegoat sent into the Wilderness, never came back; but (as some say)
thrown off from a steep Rock, and notice given by blowing of Horns throughout
the Land. The Gospel gives the like comfortable Notice to us, that Christ has
absolutely procured our Pardon, and Sin once pardoned, shall never be
remembered against us.

II. Exhortation.

1. Let none rest contented without Christ. They that can be satisfied in the
want of him, never consider what he came about, and of what Concernment that
is. When God calls for his Dues, and proceeds in a legal Manner against you (as
he will do, for you are under the I aw, if not under Grace) How will you render
them to him? Or where will you borrow? Who can lend you so vast a sum, as is
requifite to be laid down? Whither can you fly for help, above or below, in
Heaven or Earth. To which of the Saints will you turn? Who among them all can
by any means redeem his Brother? They will tell you, that they have not enough
for themselves, they must have perished without relief from Christ, as well as
you, what a dreadful reckoning will it be, when the Books are opened, the whole
score cast up, and all your Arrears strictly inquired into? When instead of
appeasing God by sufficient Restitution, you must look to be repaid by him with
implacable Fury? Bethink your selves of your Condition, all you that are far
from Righteousness: Think what it is, For your Iniquities to be before the Lord
continually, Psalm 109.15. Whereas by coming to Christ, They would be all
removed in one Day, Zech. 3.9.

2. Take heed of detracting from Christ, who does so much for you. He that
repairs all our Losses for us, will not give the Glory of it to us, and woe be
to us, if we assume the least Part of that Glory to our selves. It Is Honor
enough to us to be free Receivers, but it is a disparagement to Christ, if we
presume in any Respect to be rightful Purchasers. This is to commit a piece of
unpardonable Theft, to add to all our other Violences. When God has raised up
such an Horn of Salvation for us, Luke 1.69. Shall we say, That we have taken
to us Horns by our own Strength? Amos 6.13. Is the Iniquity of our heels too
little for us, that we must back it with such Pride of Heart? Has the Work of
Faith any Virtue or Power in it self to justify, or is it the Dignity of the
Object, that Faith lays hold upon? Does our New Obedience make any recompense
to God for our Old Sins? Does any Man in the common Affairs of humane Life
imagine to clear himself from former Debts, by paying those of a later Date? is
our Repentance any Reparation for our Offense? That Is the Duty of a sinful
Creature, without the help of any new (supposed) Law to make it so; Light of
Nature teaches, that it is a Sin to detain what has been wrongfully taken, Job
20.10.

3. Let all that have Christ, be excited to Glory in him. It Is that which they
not only may, but ought to do, Isa. 45. ult. The humbling sight of Sin should
not hinder or lessen our Holy Rejoicing in his Salvation. It becomes every one
that believes in Jesus, to lift up his Face without Fear, and without
Confusion; Christ has Prayed against it; ver. 6. of this Psalm, Let not them
that wait on Thee oh Lord, be ashamed for my sake, etc. If there be any Cause
of shame remaining to a Believer (as a Believer) Christ's Work must be
imperfect, and the reproach will lie at his Door. It Is a part of our gratitude
to Christ to commend him to the World, as one mighty to save. Thus he is daily
to be praised, Psalm 72.15. As he did not hide God's Righteousness within his
Heart, so neither must we, Psalm 10.10. Our Tongues are to Publish his
Righteousness, and make honorable mention of it, Psalm 71.16. It is not more
our Privilege to be invested with it, than it is our Duty to confess it, and to
take all fit occasions of magnifying him for it.

4. Remember your increased Obligations of faithful Subjection to Christ. It
would be vilely disingenuous; and inexcusably Presumptuous to take
encouragement from this Doctrine to run up new scores. They that can be guilty
of such ill behavior toward Christ, and wax so wanton against him, show
plainly, that they have no real Part in him. He that has not the Spirit of
Christ is none of his; Romans 8.9. And does this kind of Carriage discover any
Thing of the Spirit of Christ? No surely, but on the contrary, the Spirit of
the Devil, who would stain the Glory of our Holy Redeemer, by setting him forth
as the Minister of Sin. God will not bear such abominable silth upon the
Foundation of his laying; even a Man would not suffer his Kindness to be so
perverted and abused, but express his just Resentment of it. If we Sin through
weakness, we have an Advocate ready, but if we Sin wilfully, there is no more
Sacrifice to be offered; confident Debtors that Care not how they Live, nor
what they spend, are not to be countenanced; those Bankrupts whom Christ has
once reinstated, are made very Cautious afterward.

5. Learn not to Repine at any of your deserved Chastenings. Straggling Sheep
can have no Reason to complain, when they pass under the Rod, considering how
the good Shepherd was smitten. How can such dry Trees as we are fly in God's
Face, when he is hewing of us with gentle strokes, if we did but bear upon our
Minds, how the Green-Tree was cloven in sunder! Know thou that God exactest of
thee less than thine Iniquity deserves, Job 10.6. Thy Afflictions are
moderate, and God deals with thee in Mercy, rather than in Judgment; and thou
have need of these Things to bridle or reclaim thee, but our Lord Jesus was
more roughly handled, who was worthy of the highest Expressions of Love, and
never could be cast out of the Bosom of the Father. Christ was not indebted to
the Justice of God, and therefore Typisied by an Heifer upon which no Yoke ever
came, Numb. 19.2. And yet how was he prosecuted at the suit of Heaven it self!
Therefore when God deals so favorably with us real Offenders (as he does
indeed at the worst, if we compare our Sufferings with Christ's) we should lay
our Hand upon our Mouths, and calmly bear his restrained Indignation.

6. Follow the steps of Christ, by being meek and patient as he was, under the
sharpest Exercises from causeless Enemies. The having of Truth and Justice on
our side will not warrant unruly Clamor and Contention. It Is much better in
many Cases for a Man to give up his own Right, than to behave himself unseemly
in the Defense of it, so as utterly to break the Bond of Peace, and stain the
Credit of his Christian Profession. The Church of Corinth was therefore
condemned for going to Law before the Unbelievers, for the smallest Matters;
and the Apostle puts it to them; Why do you not rather take wrong, and suffer
your selves to be defrauded? 1 Cor. 6.7. It Is one of the glories of Christ's
Disciples to lie down with quietness under the worst of Injuries from
unreasonable Men, when they cannot regularly help them, i. e. without Sin and
Scandal. In the Case of our good Name (which is more valuable than great
Riches) when Things are laid to our Charge which we know not, there ought to be
an asserting of our Innocence indeed, but yet a bearing of Reproach; we should
disown the guilt, and yet submit to the dishonor. Thus Job would not remove
his Integrity, nor let go his Righteousness (Chap. 27.5, 6.) and yet says, That
if his Adversary had written a Book, he would take it on his Shoulder, and bind
it as a Crown to him, Chap. 31.35, 36. This is to imitate the Temper and
Practice of our Blessed Lord, who readily restored what he took not away.

SERMON XVII.
February 23. 1697.
GAL. IV. vi. And because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his
Son into your Hearts, crying, Abba, Father.


THE main design of this Epistle is to obviate the dangerous insinuations of
the false Teachers, who had crept into the Churches of Galatia, and vehemently
urged Circumcision, and the keeping of the Law, as necessary to Men's
Justification and Salvation. The beginning of this Chapter is particularly
levelled against this Principle; for here the Apostle shows that the abolished
Ceremonies of the former Dispensation were properly suited to their minority
and infant State, which required Instruction in spiritual Mysteries by carnal
Resemblances, but that now Christ by his actual appearance in humane Flesh, had
obtained our Freedom from all those Yokes, and put us into a fuller possession
of the Rights of Children, even of such as are come to Age, and grown up to
riper Years. This is the point which he is pursuing in the Text; And because
you are Sons, etc. or to prove that you are Sons, and dealt with accordingly.

In which words we have something premised, and laid as a Foundation, and some
things proposed as the Effects and Consequences of it.

1. Something premised and laid as a Foundation, [Because you are Sons.] Here
the Adoption of Believers is positively asserted, as a thing in present
possession. There are indeed some further Fruits of our Adoption, yet future
and expected; so the Redemption of our Bodies from the Grave at the end of the
World, is styled the Adoption which we wait for, Rom, 8.23. because the
Resurrection to Glory will be an eminent declaration of our Adoption, as Christ
was declared to be the son of God with power, by his rising from the dead,
chap. 1.4. but still our Adoption it self is not deferred till then; the
Scripture affirms the contrary, 1 John 3.2. Beloved, now we are the sons of
God. So in this Epistle, chap. 3.26. You are all the Children of God by Faith
in Christ Jesus. As soon as we come home to God by believing, we are taken into
this Relation; for the Household of Faith is his select peculiar Family.

2. Some things proposed as the Effects and Consequences of this; partly with
reference to the Act of God the Father, and partly with reference to the Act of
the Spirit.

1. As to what concerns the Act of the Father, who is plainly meant in that
Clause; [God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts.] Here we
may consider the Person spoken of, the act respecting this Person, and the
Objects that have the benefit of this Act.

1. The Person spoken of; The Spirit of his Son; i. e. the Spirit of Christ. So
he is called Romans 8.9. 1 Pet. 1.11. This Character is given him on this
occasion for various reasons.

1st. Because it is the same Spirit which was in Christ, and which is in all
Believers. That one Spirit which abode upon him, rests upon them also. Though
he had a greater Fullness of the Spirit, yet they in their measure are filled
with him too.

2dly. By the effectual Operation of this Spirit, Christ is formed in us, and
we conformed to him. He fashions the whole Church of the Firstborn into the
lively Similitude of God's only begotten.

3dly. To intimate Christ's procurement of this Blessing for us. We were
predestined to the Adoption of Children by Christ, Ephesians. 1.5. Election is
attributed to the Father, but the Son is the Purchaser of what we are elected
to. Hence he is said to give power (or right) to become the Sons of God to them
that receive him, John 1.12. and it is by virtue of our union to him that we
recover our lost relation to God; all the Children of God are given to Christ,
written in his Book, and ransomed by his Blood; for he redeemed us, that we
might receive the Adoption of Sons, ver. 5. of this Chapter.

4thly, To teach us, that the Spirit it self is procured for us by Christ. They
that have not the Spirit, are such as have not the Son; for an Interest in the
one, does infallibly carry along with it a participation of the other. Those
Rivers of living Water, by which the effusion of the Spirit is expressed, flow
out of his pierced side: The Holy Ghost had never been sent down from Heaven,
if the Son of God had not desecended first to prepare his way.

2. The Act respecting this Person. God has sent forth. The same word is used
with respect to the Son, ver. 4. this act is ascribed to God several times in
Scripture, Psalm. 104.30. John 14.26. and it imports not any change of place, as
if he were more distant from the Father when he is thus sent, than he was
before (for he is Omnipresent, Psalm 139.7. and of the same undivided Essence
with the Father) but it notes only his Commission for some special Work in and
upon the Creature.

3. The Objects that have the Benefit of this Act; Into your Hearts; i. e. into
the Hearts of them that believe. Two things are signified by this;

1. That the Work here intended, is an inward Work: Ezekiel. 36.27. I will put my
Spirit within them. And therefore it is secret, and does not minister to
Vainglory, or carnal Boasting. The Testimony of the Spirit is privately given
between him and us; and the new Name is that which no Man knows, but the
receiver himself.

2. It Is a saving Work. The Residence of the Spirit is appointed not in the
Brain, by common unsanctified Gifts, such as Hypocrites may be endowed with,
but in the Heart, where all the Habits of Grace are planted, and from whence
all the Issues of Life proceed.

2dly. As to what concerns the Act of the Spirit, [Crying, Abba, Father.] Here
we may examine how the Spirit is said to cry in our Hearts, and what it is
which he does cry.

1. How is the Spirit said to cry in our Hearts, when he is sent forth into
them? Ans. Even as God is said to know, when he makes others know; Deuteronomy. 13.3.
So the Spirit makes intercession for us, Romans 8.26. in helping us to Pray for
our selves; and therefore it is a vain and feeble Argument which some Socinians
would bring from this and the like Texts against the Deity of the Holy Ghost.
Matthew. 10.20. It is not you that speak, but the spirit of the Father that
speaks in you: i. e. Though your Tongues utter words, yet they could not do
it without his assistance and direction, as the principal necessary Cause; As
in this Epistle, chap. 2.20. I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me. The
Apostle corrects himself, not as if he were not the true and proper Subject of
spiritual Life, but to show that Jesus Christ was the Spring and Fountain of
it. So here the Spirit sent forth into our Hearts is said to Cry, because they
cry through his gracious Influence. The Holy Ghost teaches us to pray, but
strictly it is we that pray in the Holy Ghost, Jude 20.

2. What is it which the Spirit does cry? Abba, Father; i. e. Father, Father.
This Repetition may be upon two accounts,

1. To intimate that both Jews and Gentiles are equal sharers in this Blessing
of Adoption; Therefore the Apostle makes use of two Words in two different
Tongues to express the same thing. Abba being a Syriack word, which was a
Language then commonly known among the Jews, and that which we render Father,
beinga Greek word, which was a Language then commonly used among the Gentiles.
Though a Learned Critic (Capellus Spicileg.) has taken much pains to prove
that Abba is a Greek word also, and so applied by the Apostle in this place,
alluding to the manner of little Children, when they first begin to speak and
call after their Parents, which in all Languages, as well as the English, isn
earest to the same sound with this word, Abba.

2. To note the strength and vehemence of desire. The doubling of words does
frequently signify this in Scripture. Our Lord, in the Garden, when he offered
up prayers and supplications, with strong cries and tears, (as the Apostle
speaks, Heb. 5.7.) makes use of those very words, so repeated, Mark 14.36.
Abba, Father, take away this cup from me. So on the Cross, My God, my God, etc.
So when Elijah was caught up, Elisha saw it, and cried, My Father, my Father,
etc. 2 Kings 2.12. And the foolish virgins that came when the Door was shut,
cried, Lord, Lord, etc. Matthew. 25.11. All which Passages speak a passionate and
extraordinary con cernment of Soul.

There are several things which may be learned from hence, which I shall but
mention, though seasonable enough in an Age so much corrupted by the revival and
industrious Propagation of old Errors.

As, 1. That there are Three Sacred Persons in the Blessed Godhead, the Father,
Son, and Spirit; all of them held forth to us at one view, in the compass of
this single Verse, yea in that single Clause, God has sent forth the Spirit of
his son.

2. The Spirit is not a Quality, or Operation, but a Person that has a true
and real subsistence of himself; else this Phrase of being sent forth, could
not agree to him.

3. This Spirit proceeds both from Father and Son; for he is sent by the
Father, and he is the Spirit of the Son. There is an Order among the Divine
Persons, though no priority of Being; and according to that Order there is an
ineffable mysterious communication from the First and Second Person to the
Third. But the chief thing is this:

Obs. The great Gospel Privilege of a Believer's Sonship is not only discerned,
but improved by the help of the Spirit of Christ.

Here, I. Show that a Believer's Sonship is a great Privilege.

II. That it is a Gospel Privilege. III. How this is discerned by the help of
the Spirit. IV. How improved by his help. V. Use.
I. To show, That a Believer's Sonship is a great Privilege. This will appear
in six things.

1. It Is a Privilege of God's everlasting Kindness; which is more durable, and
therefore more valuable than Life it self. The Favor of God is never wholly
withdrawn from those that are once his Children by Adoption. Goodness shall
furely follow them all their Days, and continue toward them to Eternity.
Earthly Parents may abandon, and be alienated from their own natural
Offspring, but God will not, yea cannot forget them. A Son abides in the House
always, John 8.35. he shall not be disinherited, nor turned out of doors, nor
the entail of Covenant Blessings be cut off from him. He is brought into a
Relation which shall not be destroyed, and dignified with a Name which shall
never be blotted out. If God is pleased to Adopt us, it is certain that he has
loved us from the beginning, and will to the end.

2. it is inseparably attended with regenerating Grace. Both these Privileges of
Adoption and Regeneration, do constantly go hand in hand. There is a real and a
relative change togehter. As the Fathers of our Flesh communicate not only
their Names, but Natures to us, so here is a new Birth, as well as a new Title.
When God calls us into this honorable State, he begets us of his own Will; and
at the same time that we contract such an Alliance to him, we are also born of
him, John 1.13. It would be a far less Privilege to be a Child of God, if there
were not a Divine renewing in the Spirit of our minds connected with it. To
remain upon the dead stock of the old Adam still, is a miserable Curse which
would mar the Blessing; but thanks be to God it is not so.

3. The Sons of God are under the Exercise of sparing mercy. There is a
sweetness in the Compellation of Father, which agrees to the tenderness of God
in dealing with his Children, Mal. 3.17. I will spare them as a Man spares his
own Son that serves him. He does not mark their Iniquities, nor revenge them
as he might. He does not reckon with them for every Offense, nor rebuke them
for any in hot displeasure. He does not strike them with an Arm like God, but
chastens them with the Rod of Men. His free Compassion overcomes his deserved
Severity; he would be just in doing, what, out of indulgent pity, he leaves
undone. How many wanderings of theirs does he pass over? what abatements does he
make, when sin is visited upon them? and how gently does he lift them up, after
he has cast them down?

4. They are Objects of a peculiar Providence; both in respect of Care, by
preserving them from Ill, and, in respect of Bounty, by supplying them with
Good.

1. In respect of Care, by preserving them from Evil. His Children have a place
of Refuge, Prove. 14.26. such an one as others have not. They whom God takes as
his own, are received into his Almighty Protection, which the rest of the World
can have little ground to hope for. To such the Promne belongs, and to such
only; He shall cover thee with his feathers, and under his wings shall thou
trust, Psalm. 91.4. what a Charge did David give to all his Officers concerning
his Son, (though at that time in Rebellion) Beware that none touch the young
man Absalom, 2 Samuel 18.12. God is more solicitous for the safety of all his,
and therefore he is said to carry them in his Bosom, where nothing truly
hurtful can befall them, Isa. 40.11.

2. In respect of Bounty, by supplying them with Good, even all that is
necessary and convenient for them. Whoever want, his Children shall not; he
knows what they need, and when they need it, and always devises means for
their seasonable Relief. He calls Heaven and Earth to take notice of this; Isa.
1.2. I have nourished and brought up Children. There is a Table prepared for
the King's Sons, at which his Mephibosheths eat, 2 Samuel 9.11. God has
eminently undertaken for their certain and undoubted maintenance; there is an
Emphasis upon it; Verily thou shall be fed, Psalm. 37.3. rather than not have a
Seed to serve him, he will raise Children out of Stones; rather than they starve,
those Stones shall become Bread.

5. They are made joint Heirs with Christ, which is extraordinary indeed, and
yet follows upon our being Children, Romans 8.17. No Children of God, but what is
entitled to a glorious Inheritance, and (which makes it much more mavelous)
they are made to inherit with our Lord Jesus himself. God calls them into the
Fellowship of his Son, 1 cor. 1.9. to partake of the same Glory which is given
to him, to possess the same Kingdom which is appointed to him, to sit upon his
Throne, and reign in Company with the Lamb for ever and ever. As if it were not
enough for us to reap the Benefits of the Sufferings of Christ, we shall share
in his Advancement: the depth of his Humiliation was purely for our sakes, the
height of his Exaltation will likewise turn to our account.

6. They have the best and most useful Service from all Creatures, in the
invisible and visible World, both those that are above them, and those that are
below them.

1. Creatures that are above them do Service to them. Angels disdain not to be
their Guardians while they are here, as they are to be their more intimate and
perpetual Associates hereafter. Are they not all (without exception, the
highest Orders of them) sent forth as ministering Spirits, on the behalf of the
Heirs of Salvation? Heb. 1. ult. Who but they can look to be thus attended?
Angels of Light do gladly minister to the Children of Light; they are deputed
by our Heavenly Father to keep us in all our ways, and at last to convey us
home.

2. Creatures below them, are directed and overruled to serve them also. Every
one in God's great House on Earth, shall (though perhaps without your
knowledge, and against your will) promote the Interest of those that are
designed to dwell in Heaven. As all things are put under the feet of Christ,
our elder Brother, Ephesians. 1.22. so we by him recover as much of our lost
Dominion, as we have real occasion for. The whole Creation is more subject to
the Heirs of God, than to the common Men.

2. To show that this Sonship of Believers is a Gospel Privilege. It is so in a
twofold sense, by way of opposition to the Law of Works, and by way of
composition with the times of the Old Testament. Consider it either way, it is
truly and strictly Evangelical.

1. In Opposition to the Law of Works. No Soul was ever invested thereby with
this blessed Privilege of Adoption. This is plain, because,

1. The Law works Wrath, and nothing else, Romans 4.15. It speaks no Favor to
any Son or Daughter of Adam; it breaths out Threatenings, but is utterly silent,
as to Promises. The Language of the Law is Judgment without Mercy, extremity of
Vengeance without any mixture of Kindness. Therefore it is said, that as many as
are under the Works of the Law (who are in the first Covenant, and adhere to
it, and rest upon it) are under the Curse, (who are in the first Covenant, and
adhere to it, and rest upon it) are under the Curse, Gal. 3.10. Adoption
through Grace, is perfectly concluded by the Law; it will never make Men
Children of God, but pronounces them Children of Wrath.

2. The Law convinces of Sin and Guilt, but gives no Righteousness; therefore
Sonship cannot come by the Law. For Adoption presupposes Justification, and is
consequent upon it. The Children of God are all Righteous, with a Righteousness
that perfectly answers the Legal Demands, viz. the Righteousness of Christ, For
in him shall all the Seed of Israel be justified, Isa. 45.25. But now all the
natural Seed of Adam, before they are adopted to God, are Condemned for want of
such a Righteousness. The Law Sentence goes forth against them, and takes hold
of them, as Guilty Sinners, that have broken the Commandment, can never keep it.

2. in comparison with the Times of the Old Testament. It Is true, the Believers
in those times were the Sons and Daughters of God, and they challenged their
Privilege; Isa. 63.16. Doubtless, thou art our Father, but yet it was in so
defective a degree, that they seemed more like to Servants than Sons, and were
trained up under suitable Discipline. Hence the Apostle says, ver. 7. following
the Text, Wherefore thou art no more a Servant, but a Son; implying, that thou
have been in a kind of servile, but art now Translated, in these New Testament
Times, into a more filial, State. Our Privilege of Sonship, under the Gospel,
excels in Two Regards,

1. As to clearness of Manifestation and Discovery. The Children of Princes and
great Persons many times know little of the Honor and Hopes which they are
born to, till they arrive at some competent maturity: So the Ancient Believers
understood a great deal less of Divine Benefits by Jesus Christ, than we do
now. They (like Moses) had a Veil upon their Faces, we behold with open Face,
if compared with them. They were not strangers to the Covenant of Promise, but
their acquaintance with the things promised fell very short of ours. All that
is freely given us of God, is now made more known, and placed in a better Light.

2. As to Fullness and Amplitude of Enjoyment. The Merit and Influence of
Christ's Death in all Points extended backwards, as far as the First Ages of
the World, wherein any Believers lived; but the Fruits of it then did not so
abound, as since his coming. The Spirit was shed abroad and poured out then,
but not so richly and liberally as now. He was given then more sparingly, now
in a larger measure. And consequently their Fruition of this blessed Sonship
was not equal to ours; though they had such a Privilege, they could not use it
with so much advantage. They were like Heirs in Childhood, that have only some
smaller allowance during that time; we are like those upon the edge of Manhood,
who have more of their Estate in their own Hands.

III. How is this Gospel-Privilege discerned by the help of the Spirit? How do
we come to know that we have it, through the sending of him into ours Hearts?

Answ. In six Propositions.

1. The Spirit of God in his dealing with Souls, does not ordinarily begin as a
Spirit of Adoption, but rather as a Spirit of Bondage. This seems to be hinted,
Romans 8.15. You have not received the Spirit of Bondage again to fear; but you
have received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father. This was
written to actual Believers, those that were called to be Saints; and their not
receiving of the Spirit of Bondage again, after they had received the Spirit of
Adoption, supposes they had so received him before. The Spirit of Bondage and
Adoption, are one and the same Spirit, distinguished only by various
Operations, noting two different Effects of the same Cause. Now usually the
former of these does precede and introduce the latter; while the Spirit is
making use of the Law to bring us to Christ, we see our selves in a miserable
undone Condition, when he has fully brought us to Christ by the Ministry of
the Gospel, the Scene is altered, and we perceive our selves to be the Seed
which the Lord has Blessed. Strong Cordials are not so fit to be immediately
poured into foul Stomachs: There is a shaking which goes before the
Establishment; a making of Trouble before the speaking of Peace; a Storm raised
in the Soul before a comfortable Calm: As Manasseh was taken first among the
Thorns, and bound in Fetters, and carried to Babylon, and then knew the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 33.11, 13. And as Joseph was sold for a Servant into Egypt, and laid in
Irons there, which made way for his Enlargement and Preferment, Psalm 105.17,
18. etc. so does our Exercise under a Spirit of Bondage tend to Liberty by the
Spirit of Adoption, if we are the Called according to God's purpose.

2. The time of our continuance under a Spirit of Bondage, before we receive
the Spirit of Adoption, with the degrees and measures of its working, is very
different and uncertain. Some know more of the Terrors of the Lord than others,
and some are held longer in Prison before they are brought out; though no Soul
knows more, or is held longer, than God sees needful to its thorough
Humiliation. We must be laid low, and yet we shall not be quite sunk. God's
wounding and healing of our Spirits is not always performed with the same
speed; as all Convictions are not alike sharp. God does not limit himself in
this case to any stated Rules which are known to us, but acts as he thinks fit,
toward various Persons. He has said he will not contend for ever, but yet we
cannot punctually tell how long he will contend. His dealing with one Soul must
not be alleged as the exact Pattern of his Dealing with another. Some
Dispositions are more rough and stubborn, some sins have been more hainously
aggravated; perhaps their Chains may be the heavier, and not so soon taken off.
Common Parents consider the Tempers and Crimes of their several Children, and
proportion their Rebukes accordingly.

SERMON XVIII.
March 9. 1697.
GAL. IV. vi. And because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his
Son into your Hearts, crying, Abba, Father.


3. THE Spirits usual way of evidencing our Sonship to us, is nbot by any vocal
Testimony, or immediate Revelation. Every Servant must not look to be as his
Lord in this respect, who had the Spirit of God visibly descending upon him at
his Baptism, with a voice from Heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, etc.
Matthew. 3.16, 17. What sudden Divine Suggestions to this purpose, filling the
Soul in a moment with extraordinary Joy, may be sometimes afforded to some
peculiar Persons at peculiar seasons, I will not dispute; it may be, when a
Soul is under strong and violent Temptations from Satan, to throw up all its
hopes; or after long Attendance upon God in some soleme secret Duties, or
before our Entrance upon some very difficult and hazardous public Services;
but such things are not commonly to be expected. God does not tie or confine
himself to ordinary means, but yet he generally makes use of them, and works by
them. It Is possible some may be wone without the Word, 1 Pet. 3.1. but yet the
most are born again by the Word, chap. 1.23. so it is possible, that the Spirit
may in some cases reveal himself to our Comfort without the Word (though never
against it) but this is not the Method which he commonly takes.

4. The usual way of the Spirit in the declaring and confirming of our Sonship
to us, is by a particular powerful Application of Gospel Promises to us, and an
illustration of his own Fruits in us.

1. By an Application of Gospel Promises. There are many Promises to the same
Effect with that, 2 Cor. 6.18. I will be a Father to you, and you shall be my
Sons and Daughters, etc. This avails but little to us, till by a Spirit of
Faith we are enabled to take hold of it; it is great and precious in it self,
but we are not at all the richer, till it is applied and set home with a mighty
power upon the Soul; then it is an inestimable Treasure, a Mine, a Spring of
everlasting Consolation. The Spirit takes of Christ's, and shows them unto us;
not only Christ's things, but Christ's words too; and that word among the rest,
John 14.8. I will not leave you comfortless, Gr. Orphans. Such a word as this
is enough, if he do but imprint it.

2. By an illustration of his own Fruits. These are the Marks of our Adoption
which the Word refers us to, and so the Spirit speaks according to the Word, in
helping us to argue from them. As the Grace of God in Truth, is by his
Operation, so the discovery of the Truth of Grace, is by his Light reflected
upon it; that Christ formed in the Soul may be even felt, as when the Babe
leaped in Elizabeth's Womb, at Mary's Salutation, Luke 1.44. The Spirit of God
submits his witnessing Act to be tried by what he has wrought in us, which is
no more dishonor to him, than it was to Christ, who required the Jews to
believe him for his Works sakes, John 14.11. As Jacob's Sons pointed him to the
Wagons which Joseph sent, for a proof that he was alive, Genesis 45.27.

5. The Spirit of God is very Arbitrary, both in the giving and continuing of
his Divine Testimony. He is an infinitely free Agent as to both; He shines as
well as breaths upon whom he pleases, and when he pleases.

1. The Spirit acts Arbitrarily, after a Sovereign way, in the giving of this
Testimony concerning our Adoption. The Liberty of the Divine Will appears in
the Communication of Grace, and yet more in the dispensing of Comfort. The
Spirit of God is not at our command, any more than the Wind which Christ
compaes him to, and which God is said to gather in his Fists, Prove. 33.4. and
to bring forth out of his Treasure, Jer. 10.13. He is not such a Witness as Men
may summon and produce to clear and strengthen their Cause in Humane Courts,
who sometimes are obliged under certain Penalties to appear and give in their
Evidence. There can be no necessity laid upon him; as God sometimes holdsl his
peace and is still, when he might answer by terrible things, so the Spirit of
God might be silent in our Hearts, when he cries, Abba, Father.

2. The Spirit Acts after the same Arbitrary manner in the continuing of this
Testimony, after it is once given. He can weaken and abate it, he can suspend
and withdraw it, at his own Pleasure. He that bears Witness at one Time, may
not do it at another. Evidences may be darkened and obscured, which were very
bright and plain; hidden Manna, like that in the Wilderness, is not constantly
gathered every Day; but very often is like that Vessel, in Peter's Vision,
which was let down thrice to the Earth, And then received up again into Heaven,
Acts 10.16. This makes the Ebbings and Flowings in our Hopes and Joys.

6. The Spirits testifying of our Adoption is therefore distinct from our
Adoption it self, and not indispensibly Essential to it. The Truth of the
Relation does neither include, nor depend upon our Knowledge of that Relation.
A Man may be really a Child of God, and not know himself to be so by the
infallible Declaration of the Spirit of God; he may have (as Job had, Chap.
16.19) A Witness in Heaven, and a Record on high, and yet want a legible Copy
of it in his own Bosom for his present Satisfaction. The Spirits witnessing is
not that which makes us the Children of God, but supposes us to be so before;
he Witnesses that we are Children, and therefore we are not the less Children,
though he should not Witness it. We should lose the Comfort of our Sonship very
much indeed, but the fundamental Privilege it self would remain however.
Things which for a while are not perceived to be, do not therefore cease to be;
we may be taken into the number of the Sons of God, and yet want the
Manifestation of our being such ( Romans 8.19.) I speak not this to discourage
any in the least from looking after the clearing up of these Matters as much as
can be to their own Souls, but to prevent those from being too much
discouraged, who are yet kept in the dark by God; that they may not conclude
positively against themselves, but rather take Courage with the Church under
the hidings of God's Face; But thou art our Father, Isa. 64.7, 8.

IV. How is this Privilege of a Believer's Sonship improve'd by the Spirit's
help? The Text seems to have a special Reference to Prayer, and to our
Challenging and Pleading of this filial Relation in that Duty. I shall
endeavor the opening of this Point in these eight Things.

1. That the Spirit of Christ is particularly promised and given as a Spirit of
Supplication, Zech. 12.10. His Influence is eminently needful in this Service.
We should never sind in our Hearts to Pray one acceptable Prayer to God
throughout our Lives, if the Spirit did not put it into our Hearts first. We
cannot speak to God in any Language which he will hear, upon any occasion
whatsoever, without the Spirits Direction. They are all vain Words, which are
not of his Teaching; the froth and scum of Man's Invention, which however
esteemed among Creatures here below, bears no Price at all in Heaven. Every
Petition which the Father receives, is dictated and drawn up by the Holy Ghost.
God never inclines his own Ear, but when he thus prepares our Hearts: Except
this Advocate be at Work in us, there is no finding of Audience with him. And
therefore they that profanely renounce all Supplication in and by the Spirit
(as some have done) may as well go a little further, and lay aside all
Supplication in general; for whatever Prayer they pour out, is as Water spilt
on the Ground.

2. Effectual Prayer, such as the Spirit teaches and helps us in, is put up to
God as a Father. Jesus Christ is a Pattern to us; and if we examine the style
of his Prayers, we shall find, that they are all grounded upon this Relation.
Mat. 11.25. I thank thee, oh Father, etc. which Title is repeated, ver. 26.
Even so Father, etc. John 12.27. Father, save me from this Hour. Father,
glorify thy Name. And no less than six Times over, Chap 17. Again in the
Garden, Mat. 26.39. O my Father, if it be possible, etc. Yea, some of his last
Words upon the Cross were in the same strain, when he came to give up the
Ghost, Luke 23.46. Father into thy Hands, etc. And that we might not think,
this was proper and suitable to him only, the Directory which he gave to his
Disciples, is so likewise: After this manner Pray ye, Our Father, etc. Mat.
6.9. When the Scripture speaks of making Supplication to our Judge, Job 9.15.
We must understand it of Praying that he would not deal with us as a Judge,
Psalm 143.2. Enter not into Judgment, etc.

3. The Praying Dispositions of Children are first infused into them by the
Spirit. Every Babe in Christ is furnished with them, and as he increases in
spiritual Strength and Stature, they grow up with him. Children naturally apply
themselves to their Parents for what they want, rather than to other Persons;
and this also is natural to all the Children of God. It Is a part of their new
Nature, which is the Work and Product of the Spirit. He that has not a Divine
Principle in him, which leads him to call on the Father, deserves not to be
called a Christian. As Soon as the Soul is born again, it cries, and its cry is
immediately to him whom it is born of. This cry is renewed every Day, several
times in a Day; for there is an Habit of this kind emplanted in the Soul, which
puts forth it self in frequent Acts. The Spirit's quickening is always
accompanied with inward groaning; so that, where no such groans are, we may be
sure that Death has Dominion still, and the Man has not begun to Live.

4. The Spirit fills the Mouth with Arguments in the very Act of Prayer, such
as are fit to be used and urged to a Father. Holy and humble Argumentations
with God, are truly the very sinews of Prayer, wherein its great Strength lies.
It does not so much consist in the bare proposing of our Requests to God, as in
the alleging of proper Pleas for God's answering and fulfilling of them. Such
as that of the Church, Isa. 63.15. Where is the sounding of thy Bowels, and of
thy Mercies toward me? are they restrained? This is Connected with their.
Claim of God as a Father in the next Words twice, ver. 16. A fatherly Relation
speaks Tenderness and Compassion, Psalm 103.13. Like as a Fasther pitieth his
Children, etc. Whoever are void of Pity, Fathers are wont to put on Bowels; or
if the Fathers of our Flesh should be unnatural, the Father of our Spirits
cannot be so; and therefore this was a very apt and agreeable Plea, which the
Spirit of God has Registered for us. Whatever you need to have done, entreat
of God to do, as becomes a Father.

5. The Spirit enables us to go to God as a Father, with Confidence; for whom
can Children repair so freely to, as to their own Parent? Whom can they with so
much certainty expect Relief from, as from him that begat them? Therefore as we
have Access by one Spirit unto the Father, Ephesians. 2.18. So we are said to have
boldness and access; or access with boldness, Chap. 3.12. The Command of God is
to ask in Faith; to trust him and depend upon him for the seasonable
Accomplishment of all our regular Desires; and this dependence is as much our
Duty, as Subjection is; and it is every whit as difficult, yea as impossible to
be performed, without the help of the Spirit. It Is far easier to utter many
thousands of Petitions before God, than to lift up one to him believingly. But
when the Soul is strengthened with all might by the Spirit in this Duty, all
the workings of unbelief are instantly subdued; Doubts and Fears of our
Acceptance and Success are made to vanish; like Shadows that fly away upon the
Appearance of the Sun.

6. The Spirit instructs us how to Address our selves to God as a Father with
becoming Reverence. There must be a mixture of this with our Considence, or
else we abuse our Privilege, instead of improving it. The same Spirit is a
Spirit of the fear of the Lord, as well as of Faith, Isa. 11.2. We are not to
make so bold with God, as not to stand in awe of him. The Freedom which God
allows us in his Presence, is not a rude Familiarity; this is not Child-like,
for a Father ought to be respected by those that descend from him. He must be
considered as a Superior, and honored accordingly; and the more Kind and
Indulgent he is, the more Honor is due. Any behavior that betrays a slight
esteem, or a presumptuous Contempt of God, is offensive to him; and they that
carry themselves so, have Reason to try and condemn the Spirit which they are
acted by. He is our Father in Heaven, and we his Children on Earth, Eccles.
5.2. He sits upon a Throne, and we must remember that we Worship at his
Footstool.

7. The Spirit stirs up filial Affection to God in Prayer. This makes it a
delightful Exercise, as indeed it should be. Do Children count it a burdensome
Task to go to a Father, or are they not rather glad of the Opportunity of
Converse with those that are so dear to them? A Slave indeed has an Aversion
to the Presence of his Lord, as the Bondwoman, When Sarah dealt hardly with
her, fled from her Face, Genesis 16.6. But when a Child has to do with a tender
Parent, it is quite contrary; it is sweet Employment to pour out the Soul into a
Father's Bosom. We set about it with Pleasure, and a Pleasure which exceeds the
Fruition of any Creatures whatsoever. The Spirit of Adoption is a Spirit of
Love; and this Love breaths out it self in Holy Desires to him. The Soul loves
to commune with him, for his own sake, even though we could suppose; that there
were no pressing occasion for it; it loves to visit him not only in Trouble,
when Necessity drives, but at all other Times, being drawn by internal Motives.

8. The Spirit helps us to Pray with unwearied Fervency. It behooves us so to
do, when we are dealing with a Father, who will certainly be won and prevailed
upon, how deaf or regardless soever he may seem to be for a Time Dull and
stupid formality does not suit with the Relation wherein we stand; where we
look for cold Entertainment, it is apt to cool our Requests; but Esau's Opinion
of his Fathers Favor, made him the more earnest for his Blessing, Genesis 27.34,
38. The Children of God are baptized with Fire, their Hearts burn within them,
and it would be strange, if their Words should freeze. Theirs is not an
Artificial Zeal, which is quickly spent; but a Zeal which holds out, till the
desire comes; and by this means they are always Conquerors; and as it is said of
I uther (Iste vir potuit apud Deum quicquid voluit) they can do what they will
with God; they will take no denial, but wrestle and strive, till they have
obtained. All this is done by the Assistance of the Spirit of our Father.

V. Use.

I Information.

1. The Love of God is to be seen and admired in our Adoption, as much as in
any Thing besides: The Love of the Father in predestinating us to it, the Love
of the Son, in procuring it for us, and the Love of the Spirit in testifying it
to us. It Is God's loving us as Children, which is the Foundation and Root of
all our Love to him as a Father; for his Love descends, before ours ascends.
It Is mavelous that God should answer to any such Name, when we call him by
it, and that he should give us any such Name himself, the Apostle breaks forth
into a kind of Ecstasie and Ravishment of Spirit, when he considered it; 1 John
3.1. Behold, what manner of Love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we
should be called the Sons of God? That in the Place, where it was said to us
Gentiles, Ye are not my People, it should be now said, You are the Sons of the
Living God? Hos. 1.10. Romans 9.26. Are such vile Prodigals as we, Worthy to be
called his Sons? Luke 15.21. That cannot be supposed; nor is it for want of
other Objects; that he bestows this Favor upon us. He has an Eternal Son, in
whom his Soul delights, whom he possessed with Infinite Joy before all his
Works of Old; or this Favor might have been directed to fallen Angels; but God
has preferred us Inferior Creatures to that which they are excluded from.

2. The Dignity of Believers excels all the Titles of Honor in the World; it is
of a more glorious Nature, and confirmed by a greater Testimony. By Faith,
Moses refused to be called the Son of Pharaoh's Daughter, though Pharaoh was a
mighty Prince, Heb. 11.24. It pleased David to be Son-in-law to the King before
he was so, but he found little Comfort in it afterward, 1 Samuel 18.26. These
Relations to the greatest of Men, are poor trifling, mean and empty Things, in
Comparison of Believer's Relation to God. Magistrates are called Children of
the most High, because they bear some little faint Representation of God's
Authority, Psalm 82.6. But the least of Christ's little ones are God's Children
in a sublimer Sense. It Is Ten Thousand Times more honorable to be a Child of
God, then Lord of the whole Earth.

3. Walking after the Commandments of Men is a very ungrateful requital of God.
Certainly we owe most Duty, where we receive the greatest Privilege; and what
can Men do for us, to be compared with what God has done, that we should pay
any Homage to them, in Opposition to him? It Is basely disingenuous for Children
to regard what others say, more than the Injunctions of their own Parents. The
Sense of this unspeakable Benefit of God's adopting us to himself, is enough to
restrain us from yielding Obedience to Men, that is inconsistent with our
Obedience to God. This is the meaning and scope of that Caution given by
Christ; Mat. 23.9. Call no Man your Father upon Earth, for one is your Father,
which is in Heaven. That one God whose Children we are, has the only Supreme
Title to our Allegiance.

4. The possibility of Assurance, one would think, should be without all
Controversy. To call it in Question, is to give the lie to this very Text, and
to cast a blasphemous Reproach upon the Witness of the Spirit. It Is matter of
rejoicing, to have the single Testimony of our own Conscience for us, 2 Cor.
1.12. For Conscience (as one says) is like a kind of Echo which makes our
spiritual Actions resound, after they are past and gone from us; but when we
have the concurrent Testimony of the Spirit of God, this makes our Joy a great
deal more full, Romans 8.16. The Spirit it self bears Witness with our Spirit,
that we are the Children of God. The Spirit is more present and conversant with
the Soul, than the Soul with it self, and is better acquainted with its State;
He knows every Child of God by Name, and therefore is best able to make us
know, if we are such; if an Angel from Heaven were sent to tell us, it would
not be so sure, The Spirit that bears Witness of those things, is Truth in
the abstract, 1 John 5.6. Some may be deluded by a lying Spirit, instead of
him, but does it follow, that there must be no Persuasion which comes of him
that call us? Because there are Counterfeits in the World, are there no
Realities? So, the Assurance of the strongest Believer's may not be complete
perhaps, but is it therefore not true? Our Graces, the Fruits of the Spirit,
are all imperfect, but that does not make them false and feigned; and
Perfection in Comfort is above the standard of this Life, as well as in
Holiness.

II. Exhortation.

1. Enquire into your own Adoption. It Is not a Privilege common to all, see
whether you have just Cause to apprehend that it is yours. The World has a mixed
Multitude in it; there are Sons of Belial, and Children of the Devil, as well
as of God, 1 John 3.10. There are Strangers and Dogs, as well as Children. And
there be many who are called the Children of God, and are not so indeed; being
such only by visible external Profession, as they were, Genesis 6.2. We deceive
our selves, if we are satisfied with this, for this will be of no more
Advantage to us, than the National Adoption which once belonged to the Jews, is
useful to them; with Respect to which the Apostle positively says, They which
are the Children of the Flesh, are not the Children of God, Romans 9.8. Think not
that it is enough to be Christians outwardly (any more than to be Jews
outwardly) but look after a real Change of State.

2. Apply your selves to God for this Benefit, if yet destitute of it. Consider
what miserable helpless Creatures you are in your present Case, like a wretched
Infant that is cast out into the open Field, in the Day that it is born, Ezekiel.
16.5. Go and bemoan your Case at the Foot of God; And as Abraham said to him,
Lord God, what will thou give me, seeing I go Childless, Genesis 15.2. You may
much better say, what will thou give me, seeing I go Fatherless? What can
thou give that I can receive any Comfort in? Tell him, that you can never call
your selves Happy, till you can call him Father, and that you desire nothing
besides this, in Comparison of it. The Chief of Sinners may take Encouragement
from that blessed Text, Jer. 3.19. Justice seems to argue against it in the
former Part of the verse, and Mercy concludes for it in the latter.

3. Take heed of grieving the Spirit, you who have this Benefit, that you may
not lose the comfortable Sense of it. This depends upon his sealing Work; and
therefore provoke and offend him not, if you would keep the Impression clear,
Ephesians. 4.30. Two Things are especially grievous to the Spirit, which we should
beware of, neglecting his Motions, and opposing his Testimony.

1. Neglecting his Motions. When he stirs us up to seeking of God, and any Act
of Communion with him, we should stir up our selves. It is a part of the
Character of God's Children, to regard the Spirit's Conduct, Romans 8.14. As many
as are led by the Spirit of God, etc.

2. Opposing his Testimony. The indulging of unbelief in our own Hearts, is a
Contradiction to the Spirit's Witness. He is sent forth to cry, Abba, Father,
unbelief says nay, God is not so unto me. It will be helpful to Souls in such
Temptations, to look to God as the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, for this
will bring them to Eye him as theirs also. See John 20.17. Ephesians. 1.2, 3. That
Promise seems to concern both Christ and the Believer too; Psalm 89.26. He
shall cry unto me, thou art my Father, etc. You may venture to say that after
Christ, which otherwise you could not.

4. Evidence the Truth of your Sonship unto others. Make it appear that there
is indeed a substantial Difference between you and the Children of this World
in every Thing that has a respect to Sin and Duty. If you do as others do,
they will have Reason to suspect that you are not what you pretend to be. The
Jews were not to disfigure themselves, like other People, because they were the
Children of the Lord their God, Deuteronomy. 14.1. Let your spot therefore be the spot
of his Children; let his Image be seen upon you, as well as his Name, that you
may (like them, Judge. 8.18.) Resemble the Children of such a King. You must be
Followers, and Imitators of God, Ephesians. 5.1. Or else you will give occasion to
Men to think you a spurious Brood. You must be blameless and harmless, and
without rebuke (exemplary and inoffensive) in the midst of a perverse Nation;
for so are the Sons of God, Phil. 2.15. Disorderly Children are a shame and
scandal to their Parents; therefore Credit the Relation wherein you stand, by a
strict and regular Deportment. Particularly,

1. By a sober and thankful use of every Mercy. Wanton Prodigals that wast
their Substance and mispend their Portion, are a dishonor to God's Family, and
deserve to be renounced. Your Father expects that all which is given by him,
should be improved for him. Men reckon it barbarous and unnatural, if their
Children turn Rebels against them with the Estates which they bestow upon them.

2. By a patient and humble bearing of every Affliction. Not that a Fathers
Anger is a Light thing, and to be despised; they must be very profligate that
think so; but all his Rebukes should be received with great Submission. Nor
must they drive us from him, but make us come the nearer, and cling the faster
to him; considering that God's Corrections endured in a right Manner, are
Proofs of our Legitimacy, Heb. 12.6, 7, 8.

3. By a reconcilable and forgiving temper toward the worst of Men. Mat. 5.9.
Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be called the Children of God. So
ver. 44, 45. Love your Enemies, bless them that Curse you, do good to them that
Hate you, etc. That you may be the Children of your Father which is in Heaven,
etc. For this is to transcribe his Pattern, and do as he does.

4. By living in Love with all our Holy Brethren. They do not walk worthy of
such a Relation as this is, that show any Unchristian bitterness, or
unreasonable strangeness toward those that are of the same stock with
themselves. Let us check our selves in this Case with those Words of the
Prophet, Mal. 2.10. Have we not all one Father? Why do we then deal
treacherously every Man against his Brother? To Conclude, Brotherly Kindness is
the necessary Duty of all God's Children, and a necessary Token to convince all
others that we are so.

SERMON XIX.
May 18. 1697.
EPHESIANS IV. vii. But unto every one of us is given Grace according to the
measure of the Gift of Christ.


AS it is the Apostle's manner in his other Epistles, to mingle Exhortations to
Holiness, with Explications of Faith, so here, having in the three former
Chapters of this Epistle given some account of the Gospel Doctrine, he does in
the three latter stir up to suitable Practice. In the beginning of this Chapter
he presses worthy Walking with respect to those Instances of Humility,
Meekness, and Christian Forbearance, as things which have a special Influence
in the furthering of Unity and Peace. To enforce this, he makes use of two
sorts of Motives.

1st. He argues from several things which are one and the same in the Church of
God; which do all tend to fasten and engage us to one another: ver. 4, 5, 6.
There is one Body, and one Spirit, etc.

2dly. He argues from those things in which there is a diversity, viz. The
Graces of Believers; for their Diversity is also an Argument to Love and
Concord. This is the Subject of the Text, But unto every one, etc. The manner
of proposing this Argument, with the Particle But, plainly shows that the
Apostle here designs to prevent an Objection, from God's unequal Distribution
of Grace, which corrupt Nature is very apt to make an occasion of Division,
whereas indeed, if well considered, it is rather a strong and powerful Bond of
Union; for seeing every one has his several Graces from God, and no one has
all, it follows, that we are mutually indigent of each others Assistance, and
ought to be mutually Useful in affording it; if one has that Grace which
another wants; and if one wants what another has, they should therefore agree
to be helpers of their Brethren in Christ; all Grace being dispensed by the
same Benefactor, proceeding from the same Author, and referring to one general
End.

In the Words we have Four Particulars.

1st. The thing spoken of, [Grace]: This is a word which has various
Significations in the Scripture: Sometimes it is put for Grace in God, his Mercy
and Kindness, Favor and good Will, in opposition to our own Works, or any
thing in the Creature; so Ephesians. 2.8. We are saved by Grace, etc. So we read of
the Election of Grace, Romans 11.5. and Justification by Grace, chap. 3.24. For
this is the Foundation and Principle of all that God does for us; we must still
cry, Grace, Grace to it. Sometimes it is put for the Doctrine of Grace, i.e. The
Gospel which is truly and strictly so Gal. 5.4. You are fallen from Grace. 1
Pet. 5.12. This is the true Grace of God wherein you stand. Sometimes it is put
for the Fruits and Effects of the Grace of God in us, and they are twofold,
Common Gifts, or special Graces.

1. Common Gifts; which Salvation may be separated from. Thus Paul expresses
his Call to the Apostleship often, by the Grace given to him, Romans 1.5. Chap.
15.15. 1 Cor. 3.10. Gal. 2.9. Ephesians. 3.7, 8.

2. Special Graces; such as always accompany Salvation, or carry Salvation in
them. Thus a charitable Disposition to relieve the Needy, has the Title and
Character of Grace, 2 Cor. 8.6, 7. It Is probable that Grace may include both
Senses, but I shall choose to speak chiefly of the latter.

2dly. The way of Communication, [Is given.] It Is not due or owing to us; God
is not obliged to impart any thing to us, but he freely promises, and freely
bestows it. He freely gives us all things, Romans 8.32. 1 Cor. 2.12. it is all
voluntary, that which he might have righteously refused to do. Of his own Will
he first dispenses the Grace of Conversion, and afterward for our progressive
Sanctification. His Justice does not bind, but his Goodness moves him to it. If
he had left all Mankind lying in Wickedness, as well as those whom he passed
by, he had been a God without Iniquity. There was no reason why he should
Restore what we had lost, and Repair what we had defaced, but because he would.

3dly. The Persons that are the Receivers, [To every one of us.] i. e. Either,

1. To all actual Believers, that are or have been since the beginning of the
World. To every one that now has Grace, or that ever had it, it was and is
given. So some interpret John 1.9. Every Man that comes into the World, and is
enlightened, is enlightened by him. Or,

2. To all his chosen Ones, even to the end of the World. All that are given to
Christ, shall receive Grace from him. Whom he did predestinate, he also will
call, Romans 8.30. They to whom Grace was given in the Eternal Purpose of God
before the World, shall be most certainly partakers of it in time.

4thly. The original Spring or Pattern of it, [According to the measure of the
Gift of Christ.] This may be taken either way,

1. As denoting the Spring of this Grace: i. e. according to the Liberality and
Munificence of Christ, and in the measure which it pleases him to give. This
Construction is favored by the next words, which are a Citation of Psalm.
68.18. He gave Gifts unto Men.

2. As intimating the Pattern of this Grace. Christ is not only the Giver, but
the Exemplar of it. There is some Correspondence between the Grace in Christ,
and in us. So some understand that, John 1.16. Grace for Grace. As there is a
Shadow and Reflection in the Glass, which answers to the real Face; as in a
well drawn Copy, there is a resemblance of that which it is drawn from; and as
the printed paper contains the Stamp and Signature of those Letters which are
set in the Press, so there is some kind of analogy and likeness betwixt
Christ's Grace and ours.

Observe. There is a Grace given by Christ to every one that belongs to him,
bearing some proportion and similitude to that which was conferred upon
himself. Here, I. Show what Purposes this Grace serves for. II. Wherein it
appears to be given. III. How given by Christ. IV. After what Manner given to
every one that belongs to Christ. V. What Proportion and Similitude does it
bear to his Grace. VI. Use.


I. What Purposes does this Grace serve for?

Ans. All is included in these two Things.

1. For the fixing of Holy Principles. This is what the Apostle calls the
establishing of the Heart with Grace, Heb. 13.9. There can be no steady walk
with God, till this is done. If we be not transformed by Grace in the renewing
of our Minds, all other Changes and Alterations signify nothing, and will come
to nothing. This only infers a real change of the Man; for the Man is,
according as his Principles are, and sooner or later they will be Operative,
and discover themselves. A gracious Person is one endowed with gracious Habits,
and settled in a gracious State. It is the Seed abiding in us, which
denominates us truly alive to God, or else we are no better than Carcasses at
the best, that are covered with Flowers or embalmed with Spices, to keep them
from being noisome and offensive to others.

2. The producing of Holy Actions. Where Principles are first fixed, these
Actions flow as a pure stream from a clear Fountain. When the Sinner is turned
into another Man, he naturally steers another Course. And when he is under the
Dominion of Grace, he is not so apt to be drawn aside by contrary Temptations,
as one that is got no further, than the external Rules and Precepts of
Morality. It Is only the Grace of God, which effectually teaches to deny
ungodliness and worldly Lusts, Tit. 2.11, 12. This is the prevailing Antidote
against practical Atheism, and all manner of licentiousness and sensuality.
Hereby we serve God acceptably, Heb. 12.28. And hereby we have our Conversation
in the World toward other Men, so as to gain the rejoicing Testimony of a good
Conscience, 2 Cor. 1.12. Such Fruits of Righteousness does the Root of the
Righteous always yield.

II. Wherein does this Grace appear to he given?

Ans. Two ways.

1. If we consider the Matter in general; it must needs be given, because the
Creature is in no Capacity to claim it as a debt. For,

1. The Man that has no Grace, can do nothing to deserve it. Nothing that is
done by the strength of Nature, can Merit the infusing of a supernatural Power.
Nature and Grace differ in kind; and Grace is of a kind more Superior to
Nature, than Heaven is to Earth. There is no Affinity or Comparison between
Flesh and Spirit, and consequently none between that which is born of the
Flesh, and that which is born of the Spirit, John 3.6. What we bring forth in a
State of Sin, is all after our own likeness; and can this qualify us for being
Created again after the likeness of God? All antecedent Dispositions and
Preparations rise no higher than the carnal Standard; they are still but dead
Works, which fall infinitely short of a Divine quickening. If Glory is not to
be procured by the most vigorous Exercises of Grace, much less Grace by the
utmost endeavors of Nature.

2. We are so far from deserving Grace, that naturally we do not desire it.
Wheresoever Grace is sincerely desired, the good Work is begun. To will is not
present with us, till God has wrought it. Whoever covets to partake of God's
Holiness, does in some Degree partake of it already. There is an Enmity and
Opposition in corrupt Nature to the Work of saving Grace; instead of asking and
seeking after it, we refuse and reject the offers of it, and rise up in Arms
against it, before God has subdued us to himself. How can we suppose that the
Old Man should ever crave to be crucified, and reigning Sin affect to be
deposed? We may as well think, that the Devil should wish the Subversion of his
own Kingdom as that unrenewed Nature, and sinful Flesh should desire the
Destruction of it self.

3. We are so far from naturally desiring Grace, that we are not deeply
sensible of our want of it, till God has made us so. By a deep Sense, I mean,
a feeling Apprehension both of our being destitute of Grace, and being undone
without it. Now this is impressed by the Spirit of God, wherever it is.
Graceless Persons either do not know their Condition to be so sinful, or not so
miserable, as it is; they think themselves to have, what they have not, or else
they are Content to want it, as if there were no need of having it. How then
can he deserve a Cure, who fancies himself so whole, that he has no occasion
for a Physician? Or who thinks himself bound to bestow an Alms upon one that is
too Proud to beg; and will not own his Necessity, but says, he is Rich enough?
This is our Case with Respect to God.

2. If we examine the Matter more particularly; there are several express
Instances in Scripture, which make it out to us. As

1. The Spirit of God, who is the immediate Operator of all Grace in us, and
therefore called the Spirit of Grace, Zech. 12.10. Is said to be given us, Romans
5.5. 1 John 3.24. Or else it is impossible, that ever we should receive him.
Receiving implies a giving, A Man can receive nothing, unless it be given him
from Heaven, John 3.27. And therefore the World cannot receive the Spirit,
because he was never promised, nor is he given to the World, Chap. 14.17. Jesus
Christ is not more the Gift of God to poor Sinners, than the Spirit is; they
are both equally glorious Persons, and unspeakable inestimable Gifts. The
Communication of the Holy Ghost is as great an Act of Bounty in God, as the
Exhibition of his Son.

2. The New Nature, which is inclusive of all Grace, is represented in
Scripture as a Gift, Ezekiel. 36.26. A new Heart will I give you, etc. I will give
you an Heart of Flesh. This new Heart, and Heart of Flesh does vertually
comprehend in it every Grace, for all the habits of Grace are infused at once,
not successively one after another; they are all really inherent when we are
first made new Creatures, though not all on a sudden eminently visible. Now
this new Heart which constitutes a new Creature, is absolutely given; so the
Covenant runs. God does not say, I will give it you, upon such and such Terms,
if you do thus and thus, but I will give you, etc. If it were a suspended
conditional Promise, it might never be performed.

3. Saving Knowledge, which is coupled with Grace, 2 Pet. 3.18. And is indeed
it self a Grace, is given. So God says, I will give them an Heart to know me,
Jer. 24.7. And Christ tells his Disciples, Unto you ic is given to know the
Mysteries of the Kingdom, etc. Mat. 13.11. It Is rich Love and Mercy which makes
the difference in this Case between some and others; between those who remain
blind, as they are Born, and those whose Eyes are opened, and that have the
Veil upon their Hearts taken away. They to whom this Knowledge is given, and
they to whom it is not given, are alike unworthy of it, and alike incapable of
attaining it themselves, He that gives us natural Light for the guidance of our
Bodies, does as truly give spiritual Light for the Conduct of our Souls.

4. Faith is the Gift of God, Ephesians. 2.8. As it is styled his Work to intimate
that his Power is the Cause, so it is called his Gift to intimate that his
goodness is the Motive. Unto you it is given to believe, Phil. 1.29. The Grace
of Faith is communicated to us with the same freeness as the Object of it is;
and if it were not so, we should live and dye in our Infidelity. Our Lord
positively says, John 6.65. No Man can come to me, except it be given to him of
my Father. We may as well undertake a perfect fulfilling of the whole Covenant
of Works, as pretend to an Ability of receiving Christ, as tendered in the
Gospel. He is set up as the brazen Serpent in the Wilderness, and God gives us
an Eye to look to him, or else we should be nothing the better.

5. Repentance is God's Gift also. There is no Repentance to Salvation, but
what is wrought by the God of Salvation. We may as well imagine, that Light
should of it self Spring out of Darkness, and sweet Waters issue from a bitter
Fountain, as that any such Grace should be the natural Product of our
Impenitent Hearts. There is no hope of an Heart desperately Wicked (as the
Heart of every Man by Nature is, Jer. 17.9.) unless God is pleased by his
Almighty Virtue to Work the Cure, and with an irresistible Hand to turn it to
himself, 2 Timothy 2.25. In meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if
peradventure God will give them Repentance, etc. No Instruction will do, if he
against whom they Sin, do not give them to repent.

III. How is this Grace, the Gift of Christ, as the Text affirms it to be?

Ans. In six Things.

1. All Things are delivered unto him by the Father; to him as Mediator, Mat.
11.27. All things are given into his Hand, John 3.35. And he has the disposal
of them, according to his own Pleasure, he may withold or dispense every
Thing, as he sees good. The Son quickens whom he will, Chap. 5.21. He is
empowered to give Eternal Life, Chap. 10.28. Chap. 17.2. And this Eternal Life
is founded in spiritual. Now the groundwork is his, as well as the Head-stone;
the first fruits of Grace, as well as the Harvest of Glory; the Gift of
Righteousness it self, as well as the Crown of Righteousness. Chap. 4.14. The
Water which I shall give him, shall be in him, a Well springing up into
Everlasting Life. Christ has so large a Trust and Commission from the Father,
that nothing is excepted out of it.

2. The giving of Grace is one of his essential Royalties, as a King. To give
only corruptible Things, is to give as the World gives; the Men of high Degree
scatter their Favors of that kind among those that are below them; but it
agrees with the Majesty of Jesus Christ to bestow that which is of an
incorruptible Nature, a Principle of Grace and Holiness, in the Hearts of his
People, Acts 5.31. Him has God exalted to be a Prince and Savior, to give
Repentance, etc. He would be a Prince without Subjects, a mere Titular Prince,
if he did not by his own Grace bring them into Subjection and keep them in it.
He never ruled in any Heart, which he did not first Conquer; rebellious Sinners
would never submit and yield themselves to his Authority, if he did not make
them willing in the day of his Power, Psalm 110.3.

3. Christ is given to be an Head of Influence, as well as of Government to his
Church. Therefore said to be the Head of the Body, Col. 1.18. Now as every Part
of the natural Body derives Spirits from the Head, so every Part of the
mystical Body gracious Influences from Christ. There is an effectual working
from him, throughout the whole, Ephesians. 4.16. And how is this effectual working,
but by the Communication of his Grace to the various Members? This (...) what
Paul experienced, and gives an account of, with Reference to his own first
Conversion, 1 Timothy 1.14. The Grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant, with
Faith and Love, which is in Christ Jesus. Paul's Heart was full of unbelief,
and hatred before, but the prevailing Grace of Christ, in whom he was chosen
before the World, planted Faith and Love in the room of them.

4. It Is the Work of Christ to furnish those whom be unites and espouses to
himself, with Beauty and Ornaments fit for his Embraces; and wherein does this
Beauty consist, and what are these Ornaments, but a Participation of his Grace?
Some are ready to cry, is a deformed filthy Sinner meet to lie in Christ's
Bosom? But I would Reply, who makes the Sinner meet, besides Christ himself? He
can have no complacency or delight in such an one continuing as he is; but his
Manner is to impart a commending loveliness where he loves. As Rebeckah was
adorned with Jewel's of Isaac's giving, Genesis 24.53. So it was granted to the
Lambs Wife that she should be arrayed in fine Linne, etc. of his preparing,
Rev. 19.8. For as the imputed Righteousness of Christ, so the inherent
Righteousness of Saints is his Gift, whom they are married to.

5. Christ has the right of distributing Grace, as the Effect of his Purchase.
He has bought it with his Blood, and therefore may confer it on whom he
pleases; as we know that every one may do what he Will with his own, and what
we buy at a valuable Price, is undoubedtly our own. Upon this score all Grace
is the Grace of Christ; it is his just Propriety, and he has ^^^ain'd it at the
dearest Rate which could be demanded. He gave himself for the Church, that he
might sanctify and cleanse it, etc. Ephesians. 5.25 26. Our Sanctification was one
end of his Sufferings; and as it was he that suffered, so it is he that
sanctifies. Christ merited Grace for us by his Death, and therefore the
dispensing of it is his due.

6. The Spirit of Grace, is sent by Christ, and supplies his Place. John 16.7.
If I depart, I will send him to you. So that he Acts as in Christ's Name, and
on his behalf, and consequently what the Spirit does, may be attributed unto
Christ, and what he divides to every Man, may be very well looked upon as
allotted by Christ, whose Spirit he is; for so he is called, the Spirit of the
Lord, 2 Cor. 3.17, 18. There is the very Heart of Christ in all the Spirits
saving Operations; they are directed by his Infinite Wisdom and Care to all
those whom he laid down his Life for. As he shed forth the Holy Ghost at
Pentecost, Acts 2.33. So the pouring of him out at all Times is his continual
Providence still.

IV. After what manner is this Grace given to every one that belongs to Christ?

Answ. Negatively and Positively.

I. Negatively.

I. This Grace is not given to all by the same Instruments and Means. It Is most
usually by the Word of Grace, but sometimes by the Rod of sanctified
Affliction; it is oftnest by the Sword in Christ's Mouth, but it may be, by the
Fan in his Hand. Ordinarily it is by the Preaching of Christ's Ambassadors; but
sometimes the edifying Discourses of Private Christians may Minister Grace to
the Hearers, Ephesians. 4.29. Again though it be by the same Gospel, yet God makes
use of several Publishers: They whom he sanctifies through the Truth, are
Converted by several Persons. There are many spiritual Fathers; some are
begotten in Christ by the Ministry of one, and some by another.

2. It is not given to all at the same Age or Period of Life: As in that
Parable of the Laborers in the Vineyard, some were called at the third Hour,
some at the sixth, some at the ninth, some at the eleventh. Some are sanctified
from the Womb, filled with the Spirit, like John, from their very Birth; Luke
1.15. Others it may be, wear out almost all their Lives, and are even dropping
into the Grave, before they are brought home to God. Some are planted into
Christ in their tender Years, like Paul, when a Young Man; others not born
again till they are Old, when the evil Days come. And therefore it is not so
material or requisite for us to know, when we felt the first workings of Grace,
as to be sure that we feel it is real workings now.

3. It is not given to all in her same remarkable Circumstances. The Kingdom of
God comes with more Observation into some Souls, than into others. Some are
more gently, others more sharply dealt with; the Travel of the Soul, at the
New Birth, is not with the same sensible Difficulty and Anguish in all Persons.
Some pass from Death to Life, with greater Convulsions, Like that noise and
shaking, when the dry Bones came together, Ezekiel. 37.7. Others are called with a
more still Voice and drawn to Christ in a more soft and silent way. Grace is
sometimes introduced by deep Humiliations, great brokenness extraordinary
disquiet, at others Times it insinuates it self into the Soul, with less of
those Preparatives, and therefore less discernably.

4. It is not given to all in the same Measure. To some more Grace, to others
less. Justifying Righteousness is bestowed alike upon every one, no one is made
more righteous by the Obedience of Christ, than another; but as to the Gift of
sanctifying Righteousness there are vastly different Degrees. Some in God's
Israel, like Saul, higher from the Shoulders and upwards, others like Zacchens,
little of Stature. Some Weak, others Strong in Faith; some eminent for
spiritual Understanding; But there is not in every one that Knowledge, 1 Cor.
8.7. Some are even consumed by their Zeal for God; but all are not such lively
Stones, Song 1.17. The Beams of our House are Caedar, and our Rafters of Firr.
As Beams in God's building bear greatest weight, so Caedar is of greatest worth.

SERMON XX.
June 1. 1697.
EPHESIANS IV. vii. But unto every one of us is given Grace according to the
measure of the Gift of Christ.


2. POsitively.

1. There is some Grace given to every one, which shall never be lost; even to
the least Babe in Christ, the poorest and meanest Believer whatsoever. Also
upon the Servants, and the Handmaids in those Days will I pour out my Spirit,
Joel 2.29. Every Member of Christ, even such as we think to be least
honorable, has this Honor bestowed upon it, to be made a partaker of the
Holy Ghost, and partaker of him so, as never to fall away. For this is a Gift
which is without Repentance, Romans 11.29. As to those that are God's workmanship
in Christ, it never Repents him that he has new made them. Whom he once
effectually draws, he never suffers absolutely to draw back' The Devil may
steal the Word out of Men's Hearts, before it is engraffed there by the Spirit,
but afterward he cannot.

2. There is Grace given to every one, which is of the same kind in every one.
All God's Children, the little ones, as well as those that are more advanced to
greater ripeness and maturity, have the same Divine Nature infused into them, 2
Pet. 1.4. They are all Created again after the Image of God, which as to the
Substance of it, is the same in all, though there be some difference in lesser
Features. They all obtain like precious Faith, 2 Pet. 1.1. The Faith of God's
Elect, is all alike, in regard of its main and principal Fruits. In every one,
it purifies the Heart, overcomes the present World, realizes unseen Things,
though it does not work and act in every one with equal Vigor.

3. There are supplies of Grace given to every one; for as all Creatures do
necessarily depend upon God for their natural Beings, so God's new Creatures
especially for the continuance and increase of their spiritual Life. From the
Day that they first know the Grace of God in Truth, there are further
Communications every Day of more Grace, both in order to Establishment and
Growth. How much soever God has already vouchsafed it would be of fatal
Consequence, if he should stop his Hand. God is always giving, that we may
retain and improve what we have received before. Hos. 6.3. He shall come unto
us as the Rain, as the latter and former Rain unto the Earth: As the former
Rain which opens the Womb of the Earth to take in the Seed, and as the latter
which serves to plump and swell the Fruit.

4. There is Grace given to every one suitable to their Condition. 1 Cor 7.7.
Every Man has his proper Gift of God, ((...)) a Gift peculiar to himself; one
after this manner, and another after that. As Christ speaks of a saying, Which
all Men cannot receive, save they to whom it is given, Mat. 19.11. Some Men have
less mastery over their Affections, and God by his wise Providence casts their
Lot accordingly. Some are exercised with more Temptations, and such God
furnishes with more Strength to resist and stand against them. Some are called
to more eminent Services, and then God enlarges their Capacity of performing
them. It is still so managed by him who knows our Necessity, that they whose
Condition requires most Grace, have most.

V. What Proportion and Similitude does the Grace given to us, bear to the
Grace which was in Christ? Here Premise a few Things to prevent
misunderstanding, and then State the Truth it self.

1. To Premise a few Things, to prevent misunderstanding. As

1. That Grace in Christ to which the Grace in Believers bears any Proportion,
is to be understood of his Grace as Man, the Grace which was communicated to
his Humane Nature. Psalm 45.2. Thou art fairer than the Children of Men; Grace
is poured into thy Lips. His gracious Words, which often struck the Hearers
with wonder and amazement, flowed from this Spring; and therefore in that
Character which the Spouse gives of him. His Lips are described like Lilies
dropping sweet smelling myrrh, Song 5.13. Jesus Christ as God, was the God of
all Grace, the Original Fountain of it in himself, and Author of it to us; as
Man he was a Vessel that received it by Derivation; it was truly given to him,
as it was given to the first Man Adam. When God created him. And this is that
Grace of Christ, which our Grace does especially resemble.

2. The Grace which is given by Christ to every one of his Members, is not the
same individual Grace which was given to him by the Father. We are not endowed
with that very same particular inherent Holiness which he was, for then we must
suppose him to be divested of it at the same Time. Those gracious Qualities
which were lodged in Christ, cannot be transferred to us, for Qualities cannot
pass from one Subject to another, or belong to more than one at once. The same
Righteousness which Christ fulfilled, is imputed and reckoned to us for our
Justification; as the same Money which the Surety lays down, is judicially and
legally accounted to be paid by the Debtor; but the same righteous Habits
cannot be infused into Christ and Believers, not the same in number, though the
same in Kind. The Case is plain, because the Person of Christ, and the Persons
of Believers are really distinct; they are united indeed, but not by a personal
Union (for then there would be as many Christ's, as there are Believers, whereas
there is but one Lord Jesus Christ) they make up one Mystical Body, but not one
natural Person; therefore his Grace and theirs must numerically differ.

3. The Grace given to Christ, was to serve some special Purposes and Ends,
which the Grace given to us is not adapted for. He was not only made under the
Ceremonial Law, and under the Moral, as others were, but under a peculiar Law,
which concerned himself only, Gal. 4.4. There is a vast Difference between the
Work of Christ as Mediator, and the Work of an ordinary Christian; and
therefore besides the stock of habitual Grace, of which his Manhood was
possessed, he had the Godhead also to support him; and there was absolute need of
it. There was more Service and Duty incumbent upon Jesus Christ, than ever was
upon any mere Creature before or since. The Active and Passive Obedience of
Christ exceeds all that any Man was ever called to do or suffer. Our work under
the Influence of his Grace, has a subordinate Respect to our own Salvation, he
was to work out the Salvation of all his Elect in a way of proper Merit and
Satisfaction.

4. The Grace in him, and in us are not equally perfect; they are not like
Parallel Lines which run the same length. No Believer can pretend to be so full
of Grace, as he was; our receivings are far from coming up to the same measure
with his. Christ had an extraordinary anointing in a larger Quantity; we have
it dropped in Comparison upon us. He as the Sun of Righteousness, Mal. 4.2. We
as twinkling Stars; He as the King of Righteousness, Heb. 7.2. We as Inferior
Subjects. Grace is Christ was like Water in a wide Sea which has no visible
Bounds; Grace in us, is like Water in a little Brook, or a narrow River. Grace
in him, was in sinless Perfection at the first, in us it is never so, while we
are in this World; there are mixtures of sinful Infirmity with all the Grace
which we have or Exercise. He had abundance of Grace clouded with no
Corruption, we compared with him, have a great deal of Corruption besetting a
little Grace.

2. To State the Truth it self, as it is in this Case.

1. The Grace which is in Believers bears some Proportion and Similitude to the
Grace which is in Christ, as it proceeds from one and the same Spirit. The
Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, and make him of quick Understanding in
the Fear of the Lord, Isa. 11.2, 3. All Holy Communications to Christ and us
are the immediate Effects of this Blessed Spirit, the Third Person in the
Godhead. He was sanctified by the Holy Ghost, when he was sent into the World,
so are we, when called out of the World, and translated into his invisible
Kingdom. As Christ gives us the same Glory, Which the Father gave to him, John
17.22. So he fills us with the same Divine Spirit which he had himself.

2. Christ's Grace and ours have one general Scope and Aim, viz. The glorifying
of God. No Grace can be of the right Seed, but what is levelled at the Honor
of the Giver. As it is God's Design in giving it, so it will be our Design in
acting it, if it be acted with Integrity. Christ who had so rich a Furniture of
Grace, sought not his own Glory, nor the exalting of himself: But he glorified
God on the Earth, John 17.4. This is what he had an Eye to in all he did; so
every Believer intends and pursues the same Thing: It Is as much his business to
glorify God, as it is his Pleasure to enjoy him. Grace consecrates even his
natural Actions to serve and promote this noble End; the Actions of Eating and
Drinking, which in others are only performed for Necessity, or else for Lust, 1
Cor. 10.31.

3. As Christ had every Grace, so has the Believer, though none in the highst
Degree. Our Lord Jesus was a complete Copy of universal Righteousness; none
could say to him, as he said to the Young Man, One Thing thou lackest. So as to
the kinds of Grace, they that belong to Christ, are likewise perfect and
entire, wanting nothing, James 1.4. And they stand complete in all the Will of
God, Col. 4.12. they are not endued with some Graces, and destitute of others;
but where one is, there is all. If a a Liar, etc. 1 John 4.20. These Things are
not separable, any more than you can divide Christ from himself. Wheresoever
Faith is, there is Repentance, and new Obedience; that is a Counterfeit Faith,
which is alone; it is Dead, and therefore cannot be true, James 2.17. Saving
Graces are always in Connection; They make up the one Chain on the Spouses
Neck, which ravishes the Heart of Christ, Song 4.9.

4. The Matter of his Grace and ours is the same. The new Creature is therefore
set forth by Christ formed in us, Gal. 4.19. Because of the Agreement and
Conformity betwixt the stamp of God's Holiness upon the Humane Soul of Christ,
and the Souls of them that believe. Hence the same Mind is said to be in us, as
was in him, Phil. 2.5. The same humble, meek, self-denying, self-resigning
Temper. So he that does Righteousness, is Righteous, even as he is Righteous, 1
John 3.7. It Is the same Rule of Righteousness observed by both, and so the same
specifical Work of Righteousness performed by both. That Law which was
perfectly obeyed by Christ, is sincerely obeyed by all that are Christ's. A new
Commandment write I unto you, which Thing is true in him, and in you, 1 John
2.8. That Law which was in his Heart, is in ours, if we be Partakers of Christ;
and that which governed his exemplary Life, will govern ours also.

Use. Many Things follow from hence, both for our Learning and Practice.

1. For our Learning. As

1. If Grace it self be given, then nothing done by the help of Grace, can be
meritorious of Glory. If our first stock, and all our Improvements are from
God, and vouchsafed freely, What Reward can we challenge for any thing we do?
God is so much beforehand with us, that he can never be obliged or indebted to
us; if we were capable of first giving to him, we might expect a recompense and
requital; but (says God) Who has prevented me, that I should repay him? Job
41.11. We do not prevent God with Duty, but he prevents us with Grace; and
therefore we owe all that we can do to God, and a great deal more, we can never
answer the Engagements which we are under, nor discharge the thousandth part of
what he might require from us; so that it is impossible for the least or lowest
Degree of Favor to be due from him. All our returns of Service and Obedience
to God are built upon the Foundation of Grace received, we do but give him of
his own, as David said, 1 Chronicles. 29.14. And therefore the Gift of Eternal Life
cannot flow from distributive Justice, but must be a further Act of undeserved
Bounty.

2. If Grace be given, Glory cannot be denied; for though Glory is not merited
by Grace, yet always entailed upon it, because the same Mercy is the constant
never failing Spring of both. The Lord will give Grace and Glory, Psalm 84.11.
These Things are continually coupled, like the Creatures which entered into
Noah's Ark, two by two of every Kind (Genesis 7.15.) as God never gives Glory,
where he withholds his Grace; so on the other side, where Grace is dispensed,
Glory is never kept back. Indeed Glory is but the perfecting of the Gift of
Grace; the Difference betwixt them is only gradual; Grace is Glory in the Bud,
and Glory is Grace full blown. Therefore the Names of Grace and Glory are
promiscuously given to one another; sometimes Grace is styled Glory, 2 Cor. 3.
ult. And sometimes Glory called Grace, 1 Pet. 1.13.

3. If Grace be given to every one that is in Christ, then every such one is
worthy of our Affection and Esteem. Wheresoever the Truth of Grace is, it calls
for more of our Love and inward Respect, than all the Wealth, and Power, and
Greatness in the World. The smallest grain of saving Faith is more precious
than thousands of Gold and Silver, and it is so precious in all that have it,
that one should not be set up in Competition with another. Every gracious
Person is really amiable and valuable, and therefore a partial Regard to such
or such only, is sinful and groundless. No one is to be preferred, so as that
another should be undervalued; one is not to be had in Admiration and another
in Contempt; but all are to be looked upon as Heirs together of the Grace of
Life. He that sincerely Loves any one for the sake of Holiness (without little
by Respects) will love all Saints on the same account.

4. If Grace be given to every one according to a particular measure, it must
needs be dangerous to attempt more than this measure will extend to. It Is
unwarrantable Presumption to undertake what is above our Reach and beyond our
Strength. Therefore David says, That he did not exercise himself in great
Matters, nor in Things too high for him, Psalm 131.1. He that desires the
Office of a Gospel-Bishop desires a good work, and yet Novices are forbidden
it, 1 Timothy 3.1. with 6. Our sanctified Abilities are only in Part, and designed
of God to fit us for that Place and Calling in which we are. Over-bold
adventuring, where we are uncalled, may expose us to Temptations unassisted.
Peter's rash Zeal in the Garden, was a means of betraying him to sinful
Cowardice in the Palace of the High Priest. The Evangelist therefore takes
notice of his being questioned by a Kinsman of Malchus, whose Ear he had cut
off, John 18.26.

5. If Grace be given from Christ to every one, it is the great concern of every
one to know him, and the main Work of those whom be sends, to make him known.
If he be all, and in all, Col. 3.11. If he be the common Public Treasury, out
of which every Soul is spiritually enricht, and we have nothing but what comes
through his Hands first, we have nothing, if we are ignorant of him. And they
do little Service to the Churches who only bow at his Name, and make no mention
of his Righteousness or Grace; they that pretend to come from him, and are
silent concerning him, seem like to Messengers that have forgot their Errand,
and tell a formal Story which has no Relation to it, and signifies nothing to
them that hear it. Such as expect any share of his saving Benefits, should seek
to be led into Acquaintance with his Person.

6. If there be such a Likeness and Affinity between the Grace which was in
Christ, and which is in those that belong to him, they are no Christians, that
do not Resemble Christ, and that are not Imitators of him. This is that which
makes all real Christians truly glorious, and the Glory of Christ, as the Woman
is said to be the Glory of the Man, 1 Cor. 11.7. She reflects the excellencies
of the Man, so do they the Excellencies of Jesus Christ. As Face answers to
Face in the Glass, so do they to him. They are planted in the similitude of his
Death and Resurrection; i. e. made conformable to both, Romans 6.5. Phil. 3.10.
As they are Created in Christ, so they are Created after his Model. They are
his Brethren, and he the firstborn among them; and as the first in every Kind
uses to be a standard and president to the rest, so is he. Consequently, they
do not abide in Christ, nor are they related to him, that do not imitate his
walk, and follow his steps. We shall never have Bodies like unto his glorious
Body, except we have Souls like his; if we do not bear his heavenly Image now,
we shall not at the last. We deceive our selves with vain Hopes, and others
with a vain Profession.

2. For Practice. To those that are yet graceless, and to them that are truly
gracious.

1. What should they do, that are yet gracless? (For some of that sort may
without breach of Charity be supposed in every Assembly; we never read but of
one so pure, as to be without such a mixture; and that was, when Christ Preached
his Farewell Sermon to his Disciples, John 14.15, 16. Chapters, after Judas was
gone out, Chap. 13.30, 31, etc.)

1. Labor to be sensible of your wretchedness, while entirely under the Power
of Sin, and the Servants of Coruption. If so great and good a Man as Paul cried
out of himself as wretched, because delivered only in part from the Body of
Death, Romans 7.24. How much more miserable must you be, that are not at all
delivered from it? When the second Temple was building, which was greatly
Inferior to the former, God puts it to the People, Who is left among you, that
saw this House in her first Glory? And how do you see it now? Is it not in your
Eyes in Comparison thereof, as nothing? Hag. 2.3. So if any of us had ever seen
the Humane Nature clothed with Original Righteousness before the entrance of
Sin, which was our House in its Primitive Glory, what a woeful ruinous heap
should we discern it now to be?

2. Improve this Conviction to the deepest Humiliation. The most prostrate
Frame of Soul, is always the Foundation which God lays and builds upon. He
gives Grace to the lowly and humble, Prove. 3.34. James 4.6. 1 Pet. 5.5. The
Spirit of God, which descends like a Dove, does usually light upon the Ground,
not upon high and lofty Trees. The first step of Paul's Conversion, who had
been an haughty Supercilious Pharisce before, lifting up himself, as the rest
of that Sect did, was his falling to the Earth, Acts 9.4. Fountains are not
wont to break out in the Tops of Hills; but it is the Method of God in Nature,
to send the Springs into the Valleys, Psalm 104.10. And all Waters run into the
lowest Places; so do the Influences of Grace fall upon those that are most
abased in their own Minds.

3. Go to God in Christ by Prayer for this blessed Gift. It was never denied to
any one that sincerely sought it in this Way. Direct your Prayers particularly
to Christ himself, to whom the Dispensation of Grace is committed. Remember his
Words to the Woman of Samaria, John 4.10. If thou knew the Gift of God, and
who it is, etc. thou would have asked of him, and he would have given, etc.
He is as willing to bestow it, as he is able; believe this, and apply to him
accordingly. We may err in the restraining of all our Worship to the Father, as
if none were due to the Son. Why should not we address as well to our Lord
Jesus to renew our Spirits, as Stephen, to receive his Spirit?

4. Resolve not to be satisfied or dismissed without this Gift. This may be
safely resolved, and it is a Resolution very pleasing to God. If you do but say,
with full Purpose of Heart, as Jacob did, I will not let thee go, etc. He
cannot wrest himself out of your Hands, but you must assuredly prevail. If you
give God any rest, you may look for a Refusal; if you can be Content without
Grace, you will never receive it. The Rich who feel not the Extremity of Want,
are but indifferent Beggars, and therefore God sends them empty away, Luke
1.53. Take hold of God's Feet, and go not from his Throne of Grace, till you
have obtained what you go for.

5. Be found in the ordinary Road of receiving; as the People that brought
their Sick into the Streets, and laid them on Beds and Conches, in the way,
where Peter was to pass, Acts 5.15. They that are desirous of the Alms of
spiritual Wisdom, must attend at Wisdoms-gates, where the Alms are generally
given out. It Is wicked Presumption to expect Grace from God in a careless
neglect of the Means of Grace. They that trust in them, and they that forbear
to use them, are both far from the Kingdom of God. If Faith comes by hearing,
it is our Duty to wait for it in Hearing, and not to think that it should be
wrought by Miracle.

6. Put away as much as lies in your Power, all that tends to hinder this Gift
of Grace. Though you are unable to qualify your selves for it, unable to
prepare the way of the Lord in your own Hearts, yet to do what you are able to
do, is certainly such Advice as you ought to take. You cannot mortify the
inward Love of Sin, but you can keep your selves from many outward Acts of Sin.
You cannot (it may be) overcome some Temptations, when you are in them, but you
can choose whether you'will run designedly into them. Now he that pretends to
look up to God for Grace, and at the same time wilfully obstructs it by his own
contrary Practice, is a gross and shameful Hypocrite.

2. To those that are truly gracious? What shall they do?

1. Do not disown this Gift. This is mistaken Modesty, and real unthankfulness.
We ought not to make our selves Poor, when we have great Riches; as if we were
hired by the Accuser of the Brethren to bear false Witness against our selves.
The Saints that are in Christ Jesus, gratify the Father of lies as much by
saying they have no Grace, as by saying, they have no Sin. For a Man to
proclaim his own goodness is a fault on one Hand, to deny it, is an extreme on
the other Hand. The Apostle has directed us to the true medium, Romans 12.3. I
say, through the Grace given unto me, to every Man that is among you, not to
think of himself more highly than he ought to think, but to think soberly, etc.

2. Be sure to acknowledge it as a Gift. Be not pufft up with that which comes
down from above. If thou did receive it, why do thou Glory, as if thou
had not received it, 1 Cor. 4.7. As we are not to boast of things without our
measure, so things within our measure, are no just ground or matter of
boasting. If God has given that to us which he has not to others, what Reason
have we to be proud of it? If we had earned it by our own Industry and Labor,
Activity and Diligence, we might have some Cloak for spiritual Pride; but as it
is, we have none at all.

3. Take heed of lusting to Envy against those that go beyond you. There is a
sifnul Emulation in holy things; a repining at that wherein we should Rejoice,
a secret Grief that others do so well, instead of an hearty shame, that we do
no better. For the Cure of this, remember all is given; and if your Gift be
less than another Man's, you must not murmur and complain, as if God had done
you any wrong. Bless God that some have the Grace which you want, and by that
means are more serviceable than you.

4. Do not think however that a little of this Grace is enough, or any measure
short of Perfection. Be still crying, Give, give; continue still sucking at the
same (...) till you are filled with all the fullness of (...). This is no evil
Covetousness, but that which is requisite and laudable. We are not only obliged
to endeavor the preserving and cherishing of the Grace we have, but to look
after increase, and the getting of more. And we are encouraged to this, because
the first Grace is a Gift which makes way for more, Mat. 25.29. To every one
that has shall be given, etc.

5. Exercise Faith upon Jesus Christ, for constant Succor and Assistance in
all your Times of Need. Whatsoever Service or Suffering you are called to, you
cannot have occasion for more Grace than he has to impart. He is able to make
all-Grace abound toward you, 2 Cor. 9.8. And let the difficulty be what it
will, his Grace is as sufficient for you, as it was for Paul, under his sore
and grievous Bussetings, Chap. 12.9. How low soever your Stock be, his is not
to be exhausted; and that which is most impossible to your weakness, is most
easy in his Strength

6. Lay out faithfully all that you receive, for the Good and Benefit of
others, as well as your own. It would be better not to be entrusted with any
Talent, than not to employ it to the utmost Advantage. God gives us nothing but
what we are to Profit withal; and it would be sad if we should give the worst
Account of the best Gifts Whatsoever is bestowed upon any Member in Particular,
should be so managed as that it may be some way useful to the Body in general,
1 Pet. 4.10. As every Man has received the Gift, even so Minister the same one
to another, as good Stewar^ (...) etc. The Grace of God is manifold, and (...)
are differing, but all is to be ministered, by us to others, and by others to
us;we are Stewards of his Grace, and if we be not good Stewards, we shall never
be Heirs of his Glory.

SERMON XXI.
August 10. 1697.
DEUTERONOMY. XXXIV. v. So Moses the Servant of the Lord died there in the Land of
Moab, according to the Word of the Lord.


IT is no Diminution to the Authority of these Books of Moses, that this
concluding Chapter must be supposed to be added by another hand; whether by
Eleazer his Nephew, or Joshua his Successor, is uncertain: It Is enough that it
was done with the direction of the Spirit of God, by some Holy Person, whom he
thought fit to appoint for that purpose. Moses had been admonished by God at
two several times, of his approaching Death, Numb. 27.12, 13. and Deuteronomy. 32.49,
50. This Chapter gives an account of his actual Decease. In the foregoing
Verses we have a relation of his going up to Mount Nebo, to the top of Pisgah,
and of the view which he had from thence of the Promised Land; whereupon God
plainly and positively tells him, I have caused thee to see it with thine Eyes,
but thou shall not go over thither, Verse 4. the Prospect of it must satisfy
thee, without the Possession. And this did satisfy the Man Moses, who was very
meek above all other Men; for immediately we read, So Moses, etc. In which wors
we may take notice of three Things,

First, Moses his Honorable Character, [Moses the Servant of the Lord.] This
is the Title which God himself puts upon him a little after, in his Charger to
Joshua, Moses my Servant is dead, Josh. 1.2. and he is so styled in the New
Testament likewise, Rev. 15.3. They sang the Song of Moses the Servant of God.
This seems especially to refer to the eminent Service which he did to God in
his Public Office, as Leader and Governor of Israel. As David for the same
cause has the same Character in the Titles of Psalms 18. and 36. And so
Ministers that are employed in the Dispensation of the everlasting Gospel, are
called in a peculiar manner, The Servants of the Lord, 2 Timothy 2.24. And they
who are Faithful in that Service, are more dignified thereby, than any of the
Profane Princes of this World.

Secondly, Theplace of his Death; He [died there in the Land of Moab:] i. e. A
Land of Enemies, Balak's Country originally, till taken by the Amorites, and
now Conquered by the Israelites. Thus Jacob died in Egypt, a strange Land; and
indeed in some sense we all do so; for in that better Country to which we
properly belong, there is no more Death. Though our Lord has overcome this
World for us, we are but Pilgrims in it; and by Death we pass out of it to our
promised Inheritance.

Thirdly, The true Ground and Reason of it; [Accordig to the Word of the Lord.]
i. e. As God had ordered and enjoined him to do. As Simeon, to whom it had been
revealed, that he should not see Death, till he had seen the Lords Christ, Luke
2.29. when he came and saw him in the Temple, cries out, Lord now let thou
thy Servant depart in Peace, according to thy Word, ver. 29. It cannot be
denied, that this Word of the Lord to Moses, to dle there, seems to be an hard
saying, and he might have raised many Carnal Objections against it. He was now
in a state of Health and Vigor, not wearied and spent by Sickness and Pain, or
the Infirmities of declining Years; his Eye was not dim, nor his natural Force
abated; and he was short of the Age to which many of the Patriarchs arrived; he
was but an Hundred and twenty Years old, ver 7. He had spent very near a third
part of his time in the most Toilsom Employment, bearing the Burden of Forty
Years tedious march through an Howling Wilderness. and yet now when he was upon
the edge, as it were, of Canaan, he must die upon the Mount. When he had gone
so far, another must enter into his Labors, and inherit the Glory of
perfecting the Work; not one of his Posterity (which might be some Satisfaction
to his Brother Aaron, that he was succeed by his Son, Numb. 20.28.) but Joshua
his Servant, one that had attended him, and ministered to him; one that had
envied for Moses's sake, Numb. 11.28, 29. and yet Moses now, upon a much
greater Temptation, does not envy for his sake, but delivers up his Charge, and
breaths out his Soul, by the sovereign and undisputed Appointment of God. And
therefore from this singular and remarkable instance, we may be all instructed
in our own Duty.

Observe. To die according to the Will of God, is a great and necessary Act of
our Christian Obedience. Here, I. Show, How the Will of God is concerned in our
Death. II. What sort of Obedience we are to yield to it. III. Why we should do
so. IV. Apply it.


I. How the Will of God is concerned in our Death? This will appear in several
things.

1. The general Sentence of Mortality pronounced upon fall Creatures, is the
result of the Will of God; the common Death of all Men, since Sin entered the
World, is by a Divine Constitution. Men did, because God has said they shall do
so; because he has resolved and determined it, not merely because they are
compounded of Flesh and Blood, which is a Frame that is liable to be dissolved;
for we were of the same make, as to our natural Substance, in our innocent
State, wherein if we had remained, we should not have died. It is as much in
the Power of God to preserve and defend us from seeing Corruption now, as it
was before; but his Will is otherwise. Death reigns now universally by a Power
given to it from above; He who changes not, has ordained that this Change
shall come.

2. Death has its particular Commission from God, with respect to particular
Persons. As God speaks of numbering men to the Sword, Isa. 65.12. like Sheep
which are picked out of a Flock, and designed for slaughter. So Jer. 15.2. such
as are for death, to death; and such as are for the sword, to the sword, etc.
The Destroyer cannot come near, but only where God has devoted and set apart
for Destruction beforehand. Hence those distinguishing Dealings of Providence,
not only with them under the same Roof, but in the same Bed; one taken, and the
other left, Luke 17.34. The Pestilence which walks in darkness, is guided by
God to seize only upon such as he has marked out; and it never touches any one
whom God will spare, though Thousands and Ten thousands fall besides him, Psalm
91.7.

3. The Circumstance of Time in dying is fixed and settled by the Will of God.
As we read how Christ knew that his hour was come, that he should depart out of
the World to the Father, John 13.1. so every Child of God has such a
determinate hour, yea minute, though we know not ordinarily of its coming, as
our Lord did. Every one has his set time of removing out of this earthly
House, which can neither be hastened nor delayed. Every one has his Portion and
Share of Life it self, as well as of the Comforts of it, assigned by God, and
when that Portion is exhausted, we are truly full of Days, whether we have
lived long in the World, or a little while. No Man can die till then, and after
that it is impossible to live. It is certain, that to this point we shall come,
and as certain that we shall not go beyond it.

4. The place of our Death is limited by the purpose and pleasure of God, as
well as the of our Habitation, while we live. He prescribes not only when, but
where, our Spirits shall reutrn to him. He calls (as it were) to every Man out
of Heaven, though not so audibly as to Moses, saying, Die thou there; upon that
spot of Ground thy Carcass shall fall; as God said concerning Ahab with
reference to Naboth's Field, which he had gotten by Murder, I will requite thee
in this plat, 2 Kings 9.26. One perhaps is struck in a Religious Assembly,
another in his Closet, one in the City, another in the Field, one at Home,
another Abroad; but all exactly in that place which was allotted by God's
eternal Decree. Our Lord could not be hurt in Herod's Jurisdiction, because his
last Stage was to be Jerusalem, Luke 13.33.

5. The means of our Death are disposed and managed by God; whether natural, or
violent, or casual means. Whatsoever it be which brings us to the Grave, it is a
Messenger of his sending. When the Manslayer kills another undesignedly, God is
said to deliver the other into his hand, Exodus 21.13. so when bloody Men seek
after our Lives, it is as true that God delivers us into their hands also, if we
fall into them. Him being delivered by the council and foreknowledge of God,
you have taken, etc. Acts 2.23. There is no Distemper which proves mortal to
us, amongst the many that we are incident to, but what therein executes the
Orders of God. He who has appointed such an Event, does likewise appoint those
things, whereby it is brought about. Diseases in the Body, as well as Storms in
the Air, fulfill his Word.

6. The manner of dying, as to Slowness or Suddennes, Ease or Pain, is directed
by the Will of God. Some are snatched out of the World, as Israel went out of
Egypt in haste, and cut off by a quick surprising stroke, like Sodom's
overthrow, in a moment: Others have a lingering Departure, and the Pins of their
Tabernacle are loosned and pulled out by degrees. God is the Supreme Orderer of
both, for he takes away as he sees good, Ezekiel. 16.50. Some slide out of the
World, like Rivers of Oil, which run smooth and soft, without any Bands in
their Death; and others die with Agony and Torture, as if the Soul were rent
and torn out of the Body, like the casting of the dumb Spirit out of the Child,
Mark 9.26. And who knows not in all these, that the Hand of the Lord has
wrought this?

II. What sort of Obedience we are to yield to the Will of God in this Case?
Here show, what is consistent with it, and what are the proper and due
Qualifications of it.

First, What is Consistent with this Obedience, which may seem opposite and
repugnant to it?

Answ. 1. The use of natural Remedies for the preservation of Life consists
very well with our Obedience to God in dying, it is the manifest Will of God
that we should use them, when his secret will is not to prosper them. When we
know not how he will do with us, we know not what he has required us to do for
our selves. A diligent Application of Recovering means, may be accompanied with
our dutiful submitting of the issue to him. It Is no Rebellion against the Laws
of God to follow the Rules of the Physician, even in our last Sickness, before
we know whether it will be our last or not The Distempered Body ought not to be
neglected, though the departing Spirit is to be resigned. The Body is such an
Handmaid to the Soul, that, it must not, like that Egyptian Servant, be
carelessly left, when it falls sick, 1 Samuel 30.31.

2. Conditional Requests to God for sparing Mercy, are not inconsistent with
this Obedience. Absolute Requests indeed are not allowable; to ask Life in a
peremptory Manner, whether it be the Will of God to grant it to no, is as
sinful, as it is vain; but to ask it, with a becomeing Subjection to his unknown
good Pleasure, is what he approves, though he denies to answer. Our Lord
himsself entreated the passing of the Cup from him, if it were possible, or if
his Father were willing, Luke 22.42. So long as there is hope, there is Room
for Prayer, yea many Times against Hope, Prayer has prevailed. While we are
under God's Hand, we cannot tell, but that he may hear; when we find that the
unalterable Decree is gone forth; we are to cease, like those Disciples, when
Paul would not be persuaded, saying, The Will of the Lord be done, Acts 21.14.

3. A zealous pursuit of Holy Designs for the Service and Interest of Christ,
to the very last, is consistent with our Obedience to the Will of God in dying.
It behooves us to be carrying on Religious Projects, as long as we live, though
we should yield to dye before we have accomplished them. Though David was told,
that he should not have the Honor of building an House for God, yet he
continued his vast Preparations for it, till the Time that he fell asleep.
While we have any being, we should be aiming at further usefulnes, continuing
and drawing the Schemes of more good Works, whether God will give us
Opportunity for the performance or not. It will be our Glory to dye with such
Work upon our Hands; for no Man ever yet, but Jesus Christ was able to do, all
that was in his Heart to do for God, [Mr. N. Mather.]

4. The strugglings of Humane Flesh against the bitterness of Death, though
never altogether Innocent in us, as in Christ, will consist with our Obedience
in dying. Nature cannot receive such a Sentence in it self without some
Aversion, though Grace overcomes and subdues it. Nature will look upon Death as
an Enemy still, though Grace looks upon it as Conquered. The Mind so far as it
is renewed, is entirely given up to God, but the Sanctification of the Spirit
Soul and Body being still imperfect, there will be some remaining Reluctancies.
These, though not excusable from Sin, are nevertheless reconcilable with
Sincerity. The dying Acts of Believers are not free from guilty weakness, and
yet are unquestionably done in greatest Uprightness. There is something which
pulls back, but a stronger Principle which draws them forward.

2. What are the due and proper Qualifications of this Obedience? Ans.

1. It includes a quiet expecting and waiting for God's Call. Obedience to God
in dying must not spring from an impatient Discontent of Living; for then it is
no Obedience, but real unruliness of the Spirit, seeking Deliverance before the
Time from some burdensome Evils, wherewith we are oppressed. Persons under long
and great Afflictions, are very apt to say, It is enough now oh Lord, take away
my Life, as Elias, 1 Kings 19.4. But whatever our Exercises be, it is not
enough, till God thinks meet. This is a venting of irregular Passion, not an
act of Duty. Rebeckab cries, I am weary of my Life, because of the Daughters of
Heath, Genesis 27. ult. But nothing will justify such weariness, till our Time to
dye is fully come. A discharge should be acceptable when God is pleased to give
it, but not be rashly sought out of the appointed Season.

2. An humble bearing of God's fatherly displeasure, if there should be any
Tokens of it upon us in our Death. We have an hint of this from the very Case
of Moses here, Chap. 32.51. Because you trespassed against me among the
Children of Israel, at the Waters of Meribah-kadesh, etc. Because you
sanctified me not in the midst of them. This one Sin and Miscarriage of Moses
in the Conduct of the People, is called to remembrance by God, when he is going
out of the World; and therefore as the Lord on whose Hand the King of Israel
leaned, was to see the Plenty in Samaria with his Eyes, but not to Eat thereof,
2 Kings 7.2. So Moses now was to behold, but not enjoy, the good Things of this
pleasant Land. God had threatened to kill him a great many Years before, for
neglect of Circumcision to his Child, Exodus 4.24. And now actually summons him
to dye, as a Rebuke for his unbelief; for indeed this was the Sin that lay at
the bottom; Numb. 20.12. Because you believed me not, etc. Zacharias was struck
Dumb, above nine Months for not believing the Angels Message, Luke 1.20. But
Moses must lose his Life. God had once passed by great unbelief in him, Numb.
11.21, 22. But this was not to escape without Corection. and yet it is born, as
from a Father without Complaint.

3. A final Farewell to this World, and to those Things particularly, which are
apt to render a stay in it most desirable. When God calls us forth, we must
take our leave as Persons that are never to return, as long as the present
Frame of this World endures. The Places which we now possess, are to know us no
more, and we are to know them no more. Every one at such a Time, may say as our
Lord did, Now I am no more in the World, John 17.11. I must reckon my self, as
one, that shall have nothing more to do with it, as one that is going to be
everlastingly removed at the greatest distance from it, and to be no further
concerned in any thing, which has the least Reference or Relation to it. Such
Thoughts are to govern and influence our Minds, in the Performance of this
dying Act of Obedience to God.

4. A quitting and abandoning of this mortal Flesh, as that which is not to be
reassumed, till it puts on Immortality at the Dissolution of all Things It Is
indeed a great Trial of Obedience, to part with such an old and intimate
Companion, which has been joined and knit by the closest vital Bands, it may
be, for Twenty, Thirty, Forty, or Fifty, etc. Years together; but it is a trial
which our Obedience must be approved in. This Body of Flesh, as it now is, is
to be given up as a Sacrifice to the Devourer; that which so much Pains and
Cost is bestowed upon, which so many Creatures are destroyed to support and
maintain, is to be Meat for Worms, corrupted and dispersed we cannot tell
where. Under the Apprehensions of Death's feeding upon it after it.

5. A willing Surrender of our Souls into God's hands, from whence they
originally came. Death is expressed by God's requiring the Soul, Luke 12.20. now,
in compliance with this great Demand of God, the Soul is to be yielded up; God
commits this Treasure to us while we live, and he expects a Resignation of it
when we die. But this must be with free and full Consent, or else it is no
Resignation, and consequently no Obedience; for that which is forced and
constrained, is as none in God's Esteem. He sees into the secret Springs and
Motives of every Act; and that which we do, merely because we cannot avoid it,
will be to him as it were not done; for God's taking away of the Soul, is his
Act, only the delivering of it up can be ours. To die, because we must needs
die, because we cannot keep alive our own Souls, and have no power to retain
our Spirit, is consistent with the highest Disobedience, and Rebellion against
God. But when our Wills fall in with the Appointment of God, and we choose to
die, when God orders that we should, this is truly to die at the Commandment of
the Lord, as Aaron did, Numb. 33.38. Here is Freedom and Necessity going hand
in hand; as 2 Pet. 1.14. Putting off notes Freedom, and must notes Necessity.

6. An awful and serious Preparationto give an account of our selves to God.
This is as necessary as dying, Romans 14.12. Every one of us shall give Account,
etc. And we cannot die according to the Will of God, without some suitable
Preparedness for it. There is no true obeying of providential Calls to any
Service here in this World, without some previous Dispositions in our own Minds
wrought by the Grace of God, for its performance: As when Paul was put upon
remembering the Poor, he tells us, it was that which he was beforehand forward
to do, Gal. 2.10. So it is here, as to departing out of the World; we cannot
obey God as we ought in it, except we are competently fitted for it. If we die
in the Lord, it supposes that we are ready to die; and we are not ready, unless
our Accounts be so.

7. A thankful Entertainment of our dying Lot, as a real Privilege. If we are
in every thing to give Thanks, we are to do it in this Case, as well as any
other. Yea, there is more cause for doing it at Death, than at any season or
time of Life going before it. there is no Act of Obedience which deserves to be
more cheerfully performed, than this, nor so cheerfully as this. It becomes as
christian to be glad, when he can find the Grave; to go down into it, not as a
Condemned Prisoner, but as one who is a Triumphant Conqueror. If there be
matter of Joy, when we fall into diverse Temptations, how much more when we are
going to be freed from all? If we are to Rejoice in the hope of Glory, when
farthest off, how much more when upon the Borders of Fruition?

8. A vigorous Exercise of Faith with respect to an unseen State, when God is
leading us forth to it. All Obedience must be the Obedience of Faith, flowing
from it, and impregnated with it; Faith is to run through every Duty of our
whole Lives, or else no Duty would be accepted; but especially we are to die in
Faith. And there is great need of our doing so; for we have no other Evidence
of invisible future Things, but only our Faith. thomas, who would not believe
what he saw, John 20.25. tells Christ, We know not whither thou go, John
14.5. It Is indeed an unknown Land, and the way through which we pass to it is
dark and gloomy, without the enlightening Discoveries of Faith. This alone will
clear up all; and so it is with every Believer, as with Abraham, Hebr. 11.8. By
Faith, when he was called to go out into a place which he should after receive
for an Inheritance, obeyed, not knowing whether he went.

SERMON XXII.
August 24. 1697.
DEUTERONOMY XXXIV. v. So Moses the Servant of the Lord died there in the Land of
Moab, according to the Word of the Lord.


III. WHY we should thus die in Obedience to the Will of God? There are many
Reasons for it.

1. God is Supreme and Absolute Lord. He has the highest Proprietyin us, and
the most unlimited Dominion over us. Behold as the clay is in the Potters hand,
so are you in my hand, O house of Israel, Ezekiel. 18.6. He forms every Vessel as
he pleases, and is at liberty to break his own Workmanship without control; so
the same God whose power produces, has a right to dissolve our Substance. He
is the Father of our Spirits, and they are his peculiar Offspring, and
therefore ought to be entirely at his Command: He created and infused them, and
on that account may justly call for them, whenever he will. It Is but like the
Stream's going back to its Fountain; like the Rivers returning turning to the
Sea, whence they came, and the Sun's hasting to the place where he arose,
Eccles. 1.5, 7. We know nothing of God as we ought to know, if we know not
this, that God has a far greater Interest in us, than we have in our selves:
And that it belongs to him, and not to us, to govern and appoint all those
things which do concern us. It was almost in the same breath that David said,
Thou art my God, and my times are in thy hand, Psalm 31.14, 15. We destroy his
Deity, if we deny his Sovereignty; we renounce him as our God, unless we submit
to him as Lord of our Lives. If he may not determine the Period of Life, why
should he manage any of the Affairs of it? And if we exclude his Providence,
why should we admit his Being?

2. We have the Character of God's Servants, and profess Subjection to him; but
we contradict this Character and Profession, except we die in Obedience to the
Will of God. It Is observed, that Moses is never called the Servant of the Lord
in all his life time, till now that he came to die; because hereby he did most
remarkably approve himself such, though he had performed many great and
excellent Services to God before. He that is another Man's Servant, must be
content to be called off from his present Work and Station, at his Master's
pleasure; they that are under the Yoke, are not to be the Disposers of their
own Time; or rather we may say, they have no Time which is their own, but what
is allowed them. We are under a stricter Law to God, and he that calls Himself
a Christian, does thereby acknowledge it; we are not our own, but the Lords,
both living and dying, and therefore there is as much reason for our dying, as
for our living to the Lord, and as little reason for our dying, as for our
living, to our selves, Romans 14.7, 8. It was Paul's earnest desire and hope,
that Christ should be magnified in his Body, whether by life, or by death,
Phil. 1.20. And this became him, as a Servant of Christ, ver. 1. For we are
falsely so called, and assume a Name which our Pactice does not agree to, if his
Will be not a Rule to ours in every thing, and particularly in this grand and
important Point of Life and Death.

3. OUr Lord Christ, when he took upon him the Form and Quality of a Servant,
was our Example in this Case. He became Obedient unto death, even the death of
the cross, Phil. 2.8. A Death so circumstanced wih the most tremendous
Aggravations, as we can never be called to be obedient to, yet he did not
refuse or decline it, as he might have done, when his Hour came. His Life was
not taken from him, but he laid it down of himself, because he had received
such a Commandment of the Father, John 10.18. It was a free and voluntary Act;
he gave up the Ghost in the strictest sense, as is plain from all the Passages
going before his Death. It was in the prospect of its near approach, that he
said to his, Disciples, Arise, let us go hence, John 14.31. The words were
spoken, where Christ had celebrated his last Supper, but the place which he
speaks of removing to, was the Garden, where he knew that he should be betrayed
and apprehended. Chap. 18.4. Jesus knowing all things that should come upon
him, went forth, etc. He boldly and cheerfully met the Enemy, whom he could
easily either have shunned, or defeated. He was able to escape this Death, but
would not; and therein is a pattern to us, who have no such power.

4. God never give a Commission to Death, nor lays his command upon us to die,
but when it is really the fittest Season for us to obey him in it. To speak
strictly, an untimely Death is never permitted by God; we are never suffered to
die, when it would be better for us to live, Infinite Wisdom and Grace will not
permit it; and he that resigns himself to their Conduct, is sure to die, when
it is best that he should. The Scripture is express, Psalm 116.15. Precious in
the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints. This may be most clearly
expounded and understood by comparing with Psalm 72.14. (which is a Psalm for
Solomon, as Type of Christ) He shall redeem their Soul, etc. and precious shall
their Blood be in his sight; so precious, that when it is fitter to be spared
than spilt, he will certainly preserve it. Though God can kill or keep alive,
as he will, he does not act after an Arbitrary manner; he never turns a Saint
to destruction, when it would be good for him, that his Soul should be held in
Life. We do not indeed see the Grounds and Reasons of God's acting, and
therefore our Thoughts are not as his Thoughts, but it would be very strange,
if we must not trust God further than we yet see, because we shall see
hereafter, though not now.

5. In our Obedience to this command of God, there is the greatest reward.
There is a great Reward in the doing of every one, but above all in this.
There Is no Act of Obedience so profitable to our selves as this, if we consider
the Glory, Honor, and Peace which immediately follows. If a Servant desires
the Shadow, Job 7.2. Why should we be unwilling to enter into our Rest, and
receive our full Reward, when our Work is done? Can we think that our Services
would be so well recompensed by a perpetual stay here? it is impossible to think
so. When the Master is come, and calls for us, (as John 11.28.) we cannot but
know, it is in order to our unspeakable Promotion and Advancement. The Arrows
which Death shoots, though they kill, yet they are directed and designed in
greater Love, than Jonathan's to David, which were to prevent him from being
killed. Death may seem formidable at a distance (as one says) like Esau to
Jacob, but is very friendly when it comes nigher to us, and does us the kindest
Office, which to have undone, would be our greatest loss. Though it did no more
than case us of the grievous weight of indwelling Sin, that is a matchless
Benefit; for if we had not mortal Bodies, we must have immortal Corruptions.

6. This is the concluding and crowning Act of our Obedience to God in this
World. It Is the complete finishing of our whole Work here; when we have done
this we have no more to do on Earth. Now how incongruous, and unseemly, how
reproachful and dishonorable would it be, for a Man to live many Years in a
course of Duty, and then spoil all by Disobedience in the last Act?
Undoubtedly, the Man whose Heart is perfect and upright with God, shall never
be left to do so: If we have been truly Faithful to the Death, we shall not be
Rebellious in it. But however Exhortations and Arguments are of use to the
best, through the efficacious Concurrence of the Spirit with them. He that
lives to the Will of God, cannot be said to persevere finally, unless he dies
according to that Will also. We do not follow God fully, if we start and fly
back just at the end of our Race, when we should lay hold upon the Prize. I
know thy works, and the last to be more than the first; was Thyatiras's
Commendation, Rev. 2.19. God expects that at the last we should outdo all which
we have done before. If we have run well, it is pity that the last step should
be the slowest.

7. This being the last Act of our Obedience here in this World, will have the
greatest Influence on those whom we leave behind us. As the last words of dying
Persons are apt to make the deepest Impression upon surviving Friends, so their
last Acts are most likely to encourage Imitation. When we forget most of the
Passages of their Lives, we remember their Deaths, and are ready to take our
measures from thence. And indeed the Holy Ghost calls upon us especially to
mark the End of the perfect and upright Man, Psalm 37.37. and to consider the
End of their Conversation, whose Faith we are to follow, Hebr. 13.7. The End
here, signifies the close, the issue of their Conversation; Now where this is
unimitable, it will obstruct our following of all that went before, how good
soever it were. This will still stick most upon their Minds, that should take
Pattern from our Faith and Obedience, and tend to dishearten them from walking
with God, if after a Life of service we should flinch and faulter in the last
Extremity; it may tempt some to believe, that God is an hard Master, and that
we too late begin to think him so. Whereas an holy submissive Death will have
all the contrary Effects.

8. This is an Act of Obedience, from which God's chiefest Favorites on Earth
are not exempted. If this were a Cup which passed from every one else, and were
only filled out to us, it might be more bitter to drink of it and sinful Flesh
might have the more to say against it; but God lays no other Burden upon us
herein, than what all his Saints, excepting two, have born from the beginning
of the World; yea, even those two, underwent a Change in their Translation, in
some respects, we are sure, equivolent to Death. Are we so much better than our
Fathers, than the many Thousands which have gone to Heaven the same way, that
we should expect any peculiar Privilege? Are we greater than Abraham, who is
dead, and the Prophets, who are dead? whom do we make our selves? as the Jews
said to Christ, John 8.53. Does God deal worse with us, or require more from
us, than from all the Excellent of the Earth? Why must not we give place to
others, when God thinks meet, as others have made way for us, that successive
Generations may still go and come? That Life which we are prone to complain of,
as too short, it is probable has been longer than many; and the shortest is
certainly longer than we deserve that it should be.

9. It Is an Act wherein God's Saints on Earth outdo the Obedience of Angels in
Heaven. This is a mighty Honor to us, that we are capable of honoring God by
dying according to his will, which is out of their Power, for they die not.
It Is their bright and glorious Character, that they do his Commandments, Psalm
103.20. but this is a command which they cannot do, and which they were never
tried with. They have no such Bodies as we have, to be separated from; and by
the Settlement which God has made, mere spiritual Beings cannot taste of
Death. Now this is a thing worthy of our Ambition, to bring more Glory to God
than the highest Angel can; for a Saint of God would seek to excel all
Creatures. It Is no Trial to Angels, to execute the orders which they receive,
in comparison of what Moses did here in the Text; and yet it is astonishing to
read, how familiarly he hears of his own Departure; there was no noise, no
striving, no trouble in the case; God only says to him, Go up and die, and he
does it; as when the Prophet Elijah had Food set before him, and was invited to
arise and eat; to which an hungry Man in a barren Wilderness, would need very
little persuasion. To which of the Angels did God say thus at any time? Our
Mortality gives us an opportunity of obeying, which they want.

10. All the Obedience which we have to yield after this to God in Heaven, will
be (like that of the Angels) most easy and delightful. Glorified Saints are
doing endless Service, but there is nothing of Labor or Difficulty in it; nor
can there be the least degree of aversion or unwillingness to perform it. When
we have once poured out our Souls into the Bosom of God, we shall launch into
the pleasant Enjoyment of Eternal Praise; and so far as we understand the
Worship of the Church above, this will be the whole business, that we shall be
exercised in; A business which will contribute greatly to our Blessedness.
There is a great deal of weight and force in this Argument, if we think
seriously upon it; how hard and painful soever the work of dying be, all our
work afterward will be entire and perfect; like crowding through a strait Gate
into a spacious Mansion, where we are to walk at Liberty for ever. How desirous
soever the Flesh is in any of us to be delivered from Death, no Soul can be
excused from that Work which is consequent upon it; we could not be so happy in
Heaven, if we were not so employed; as to be kept out of Heaven by an
Immortality here, and be most miserable.

IV. To Apply this. By way of Information, and Exhortation.

First, Information.

1. It is a great Act of Indulgence in God, to spare us, as he many times does
from Death; since that dying is so great and necessary an Act of our Obedience.
If God had let loose his hand, and cut us off many years ago, it would have
been our Duty to acquiesce in it; but by his Favor (as David said of his
Mountain) our clay Cottages do yet stand. How many Mercies, National and
Personal, have we lived to partake of, which we might have been sent to our
Grave without, and as we could not have resisted the Will of God, if it had
been so, so we ought not to have repined against it. In how many lesser things
has God very often gratified his Servants, by prolonging their Days, wherein
he could have denied them, without doing them any wrong? As the Life of old
Jacob was lengthened out above Twenty years (as some compute) after he had
given up his Son Joseph for dead, to see him living and Governor of Egypt Genesis
46.30. So David saw his Son Solomon peaceably seated on his Throne, before he
fell asseep, 1 Kings 1.48.

2. If it be our duty to be Obedient to death it self, how much more should we
submit to all those Evils, which are previous to death? We are to Suffer
according to the Will of God in every thing, 1 Pet. 4 19. Or else, how do we,
like David, fulfill all his will? Acts 13.22. and if in that which is great,
surely we must not stick at that which is less. I do not only mean Sickness and
Weakness, etc. which are the usual Harbingers of Death, but all those other
Troubles and Afflictions which we are born to, and which we may naturally
expect some share of, while we are in this World. He who cannot patiently part
with any Comfort of Life, when God takes it away from him, is very ill-disposed
to yield up Life it self, at the Call of God. Are we to obey God in dying, and
do we not think our selves obliged to bear these Calamities, which Providence
sends upon us while we live? Are we to drink of such a Cup at last, and can we
think that we do well to be angry, and discontented at any thing which befalls
us in the way? These Things are inconsistent.

3. How irregular are the workings of our Affections, with respect to those
that are fallen asleep in Christ? God seldom or never removes any of our
Friends, especially if publicly useful Persons, but that we are ready
secretly, at least, to wish, that they had not died, when they did. We know not
how to restrain our selves from such desires, and yet in desiring it we are
like Peter when he talked of making Tabernacles on the Mount, who knew not what
he said, Luke 9.33. We do not only wish their Infelicity, whom we pretend to
love and value, but we make our selves Rebels in Heart against God, we wish in
plain terms, that our Wills might have stood in opposition to his, and that our
blind mistaken Judgments might have been allowed to overturn or alter his Wise
and Righteous unerring Counsels.

4. How blessed should their Memories be above all others, who are most
eminently Exemplary in the performance of this Duty? Going out of the World, as
Moses did, is like the burning of rich and fragrant Spices, which leave a sweet
Perfume behind them. It Is observable, that God did that to Moses, who died
according to his Word, which he never did for any one before or since, verse 6.
And he buried him in a Valley in the Land of Moab, etc. Though there was none
to accompany his Body to the Grave, yet God's peculiar Undertaking for his
Interment, by the Ministry of Angels (as may be reasonably supposed) was ten
thousand times more Honor to him, than the pompous Funeral of the Patriarch
Jacob, when he was carried with so vast a Train of Mourners out of Egypt into
Canaan, Genesis 50.9.

Secondly, Exhortation. Labor to learn this Lesson well, of Obedience to the
Divine Will in the Point of Death; and that you may do so, take these
Directions.

1. Make death familiar to you by frequent forethoughts of it. Those things
which surprise us most, we are usually least submissive to God in; but what we
expect and look for, we are gradually reconciled to. If we propose a long Life
to our selves, and put away the remembrance of Death, we shall certainly make
our dying work so much the harder. It Is necessary not only to think that our
Change must come unavoidably at last, but that it may come quickly in a very
little time. If we live longer than we think, we shall live the better; but if
we die sooner than we think, we shall die the worse. If God has made our days
generally as an hand breadth, Psalm 39.5. we should measure them out
successively by an hairs breadth, that when we are at our utmost bounds, we may
quietly drop away.

2. Look beyond death, while you are looking for it. Let not that terminate
your Sight, which in it self indeed is a doleful Melancholy Object. Consider
the Excellency of the Life to come, which takes place immediately upon the
conclusion of this. We shall not die for ever (as those words should be
rendered, which we read, shall never die, John 11.26.) though we die once; and
there is nothing here so amiable and perfect as in that World we are going to.
If a view of that Canaan sufficed Moses, which he was never to possess, how
much more satisfactory will the prospect of that Heaven be, where we are to
dwell eternally? the seeing of our absent glorified Redeemer there, will help
us in our following of him thither, and does distinguish us from the common Men
of the Earth, John 14.19.

3. Look upon all the Enjoyments of this present Life with such an holy
Contempt and Scorn, as they deserve. If we be not dead to these things before
hand, we shall not know how to part with them at Death. If we lay up our
Treasure here, it must needs be troublesome and grievous to renounce and quit
it. He that would obey God cheerfully in his going hence, must not think that
any of the things that are here beneath can make him happy; and therefore the
Heart should not be set upon them. It made Rachel and Leah willing to go to
Canaan, that they had no Expectation left in Padan-aram, Genesis 31.14.

4. Make have with your living work, which God gives you to do, with reference
to the saving of your own Souls, and the serving of your Generation. A Man must
be strangely stupefied, and hardened in a false peace, that can be content to
leave the World, before he has answered the End, and dispatched the Business,
for which he was born into it. A comfortable Death does not suit with a
slothful and careless, an useless and unprofitable Life. He that has neglected
his Duty to himself, or to others in his place, may very well b backward and
unwilling to die. Job begs that it would please God to destroy him, and cries,
Let him not spare, for I have not concealed the words of the Holy One, chap.
6.9, 10.

5. Clear and State your Accounts every day; set them in Order, for their
Confusion will cause your Distraction, when you come to die. Seriously examine
and reflect upon your daily Walk and Course, and do not leave those
Miscarriages to be budled up in a general Repentance, when they are forgotten;
which when they are fresh, you may and ought to be particularly humbled for.
The more diligent and exact we are in this case, the less Advantage will Satan
have against us. A Man can but (scarcely die well (as the Apostle speaks of
being scarcely saved, 1 Pet. 4.18.) who has any thing else to do when his hour
comes.

6. Beware of grieving the Spirit, and clouding your own Comforts. Though full
Assurance be not absolutely necessary to the yielding of this Obedience in
Death, yet our Obedience must needs be very defective, where some degrees of
Assurance, or good hope through Grace are not gotten and maintained. It Is very
hard to resign, without some Evidence that God will receive us; very hard to
let go our Temporal Life, when we can lay no hold upon Eternal. therefore the
Advice is needful, Jude 21. Keep your selves in the Love of God; do nothing
that may tend to prejudice or weaken your sense of it.

7. Live upon the Death of Christ, as the only Foundation of your warrantable
Trust. Though you do walk before God in Truth, you will find the need of
something else to depend on, for your Title to Glory. Some think that there is
a Gospel Mystery in Moses's dying short of Canaan, and Joshua's leading the
People into it; viz. to intimate to us, That the Works of the Law will bring
none to Heaven, but Christ by his Blood has opened our way to it. He that
builds his Hope of Salvation upon any thing which he has done, must either
perish, or pull down all again.

8. Look up to Heaven for Divine Instruction in this great Point. It was
Moses's Prayer to God, so teach us to number our days, that we may apply our
Hearts, etc. Psalm 90.12. The numbering of our Days aright, is no Vulgar
Arithmetic, nor can we learn it without a more than ordinary Tutor. No Man
ever died like Moses here, according to the Word of the Lord, but what was
taught of God to do it. He that gives out the Command, must guide our Spirits
to obey it. If we can do nothing for God of our selves, least of all can we die
to him without him.

SERMON XXIII.
October 1. 1697.
HEBREWS VII. xxv. Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost,
that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make Intercession for them.


THE Glorious Office of the Priesthood of Jesus Christ, is the Subject of great
part of this Epistle; and the Apostle's main Scope and Design, is, to show the
superlative Excellency thereof beyond the Legal Priesthood, which he does at
large in various respects. In the two immediate foregoing Verses, he compares
Christ with the Priests under the Law, in reference to their Mortality. Verse
23. They truly were many Priests (many, one after another) because they were
not suffered to continue, by reason of death; they were dying Men, and how well
soever they discharged the Duty of their Places, yet in a few Years they left
it to those that survived them, and knew it no more themselves; the Ministers
of the Old Testament had their appointed time, when their Breath went forth,
and returned not again, as you find that the Ministers of the New Testament
have now in their Generation. But, ver. 24. this man, (or this Christ, the
Anointed of the Lord, whom the Apostle here speaks of, for the word Man is not
in the Original, but supplied by our Translators) because he continues ever,
has an unchangable Priesthood; his Office does not pass from him to another,
he has no Successors in it, whom the Exercise of it is committed to, but he
still manages it in his own Person, and will perpetually do it. Hereupon that
comfortable and encouraging Inference and Conclusion is drawn up in the words
of the Text, Wherefore he is able, etc. Whcih words, if they were to be cast
into our usual Forms of Argument, would run thus; He who ever lives to make
Intercession, is able to save to the uttermost; But Jesus Christ ever lives,
etc. Therefore he is able, etc. There are many important Truths lying in this
Text, but all may be brought within the compass of this one.

Observe. Christ's eternal Life and Intercession in Heaven, in an infallible
Proof of his Infinite saving Power. Here, I. I shall enquire into the Thing
which the Apostle undertakes to prove, The infinite-saving-Power of Jesus
Christ. II. Into the Evidence which he proves it by, The Eternal Life and
Intercession of Christ in Heaven. With the distinct Uses which may be made of
both these.


I. As to the thing which the Apostle here sets himself to prove, viz. The
infinite-saving Power of our Lord Jesus. The Text it self will lead us to the
opening of two Things under this Head; The nature of this Power, and the extent
of it; How he is able to save, and how far, even to the uttermost.

First, With reference to the nature of this Power, How is Christ able to save?
This may may be stated in the following Propositions.

1. There is a Power which belongs to Christ, as he is God. In this, as in all
other Divine Perfections, the Second Person is equal with the First. Rev. 1.8.
I am the Almighty. The very same unlimited boundless Power appertains both to
the Father and the Son. Therefore when Christ had asserted, That none should
pluck his sheep out of his hand, John 10.28. he confirms it by this, That his
Father is greater than all, and none is able to pluck them out of the Father's
hand, ver. 29. Now if any should go about to deny the Consequence, the next
words will clear it, I and my Father are one, ver. 30. If my Father is greater
than all, so am I; if he be able to secure and preserve the Sheep, so am I, for
he and I are one; we are one in Essence and Nature, and so all the same
glorious Perfections which are inherent in him, are in me likewise. But this,
though it be a great Article of Faith, and a great support to Believers, does
not seem to be that which the Apostle has so much an Eye to in this place; for
he is now speaking of his Ability to save, under the Notion of our High Priest.

2. There is a given delegated Power, which belongs to Christ as he is
Mediator; a Power received, and entrusted with him, from the Father. God's
laying of help upon him for us, implies the furnishing and qualifying of him to
afford and dispense that help to us. So we read, Psalm 89.21. With whom my hand
shall be established, mine arm also shall strengthen him. Again, Isa. 42.1.
Behold, my Servant, whom I uphold, etc. There was such a mighty Presence and
Influence of God with and upon his Son Jesus Christ, in the Execution of his
Mediatory Office, as enabled and empowered him to all that this Office
required. Therefore he attributes the Work which he did to the Father, and
calls them the Works of the Father, John 10.37. and argues from them, as plain
convincing Testimonies, that the Father had sent him, chap. 5.36. The Power
which he had from God to do such things, was a demonstration of his Commission.
The Son of himself, considered in this Capacity, as the Father's Servant and
Messenger, dispatched from Heaven, about the great Business of our Salvation,
could do nothing, ver. 19. but his God was his strength; he that appointed him
this Service, gave him Ability to perform it.

3. This Power of Christ is determined by the Father's Pleasure. It pleased the
Father, that in him should all fullness dwell, Col. 1.19. All Fullness, therefore
a Fullness of Power, as well as Merit; but we must suppose it to be all exerted
and put forth, as is pleasing to the Father also. The Power given unto Christ,
can never be thought to be employed by Christ against the Mind and Will of him
that gave it. God and Christ go hand in hand (as it were) in all their mighty
Acts of Grace, with one consenting Will. John 5.21. As the Father raises up
the dead, and quickens them, even so the Son quickens whom he will; not in
opposition to the Father's Will, but in conjunction with it. He came not to do
his own will, but his that sent him, chap. 6.38. It was his delight to do this,
and impossible that he should do any thing contrary to it. This does not import
any insufficiency or weakness in Christ, but the regularity and exactness of
his Obedience.

4. Christ's saving Power with respect to us, takes in his Sovereignty and
Dominion over all Creatures, which is for our Advantage. We have the benefit of
his universal governing Power, in order to our Salvation. He that is exalted to
be our Savior, is a mighty Prince, whose Kingdom reaches ever where, to every
thing that he has made. He that carries his Lambs in his Bosom, has all the
things in the world put under his Feet; he has all the Wolves that would tear
and destroy them, in a Chain, and they cannot touch so much as the Fleece of
any of his Sheep, without his permission. All power is given unto him in Heaven
and in Earth (yea, and in Hell too) Matthew. 28.18. He has power over all flesh,
John 17.2. whether Devils and wicked malignant Spirits, over all that seek our
burt, or that give us any cause of Terror. He has a Command over all
Creatures, that disposal of all Events, and he can make every one of these, not
only not to hinder and obstruct, but positively to promote and further our
Salvation. The whole Administration of the Affairs of Providence, which is
committed to Christ, serves to this very purpose.

5. The saving power of Christ, to all that have experience of it, does
necessarily include a great and extraordinary mixture of Compassion. We must
conclude his Pity equal to his Power, and united with it, or else no Soul would
ever be saved by it. His infinite Ability to relieve us, would be of small
Comfort to us, if he were not touched with a feeling of our Infirmities. We
have an hint of this, chap. 2.18. He is able to succor them that are tempted,
(the same Greek word both there and in the Text.) Now it is manifest from the
Context there, that Christ's being able to succor, implies not barely a Power,
but a fitness and readiness to do it, a compassionate Inclination, by reason of
his being tempted. Now though Christ be no longer so tempted, for he sits on
the right hand of the power of God, Luke 22.69. yet his Bowels are the same. If
he wanted those Bowels, his Power would be dreadful; we could only look upon
him as our Destroyer, able to cast us Soul and Body into Hell, able to inflict
Wrath upon us to the uttermost; but we could have no thoughts of Peace, or
hopes of Mercy.

6. There is a destructive Power of Christ, which always does and must
accompany this saving Power. In magnifying his saving Power to us, there is a
necessity of letting out his destructive Power against our Enemies. If he saves
our Lives and ransoms them, what follows? O Death, I will be thy Plague; O
Grave, I will be thy Destruction, Hos. 13.14. We cannot be delivered from
Death, but Death must be unstung, and consequently destroyed. This is the last
Enemy, but all the rest are dealt with in like manner, Hebr. 2.14. That through
death he might destroy him, who had the power of death, i. e. the Devil. The
chosen and called of God cannot escape, if the Devil do; if they obtain
Salvation in Christ, he must be destroyed; not as to his Being, but his Power.
And the Works of the Devil must be destroyed also, 1 John 3.8. There must not
remain so much as one of them; as is said of that total overthrow of the
Egyptians in the Red Sea, when the Israel of God were saved out of their hands,
Exodus 14.28.

Secondly, With reference to the extent of this Power, How far is Christ able
to save? The Text makes the Answer, even to the uttermost. (...). There are two
things intimated by this Phrase, The Perfection of that Salvation which Christ
is able to work, and the duration of it.

1. His being able to save to the uttermost, notes Perfection. He is able to
save fully, absolutely, and completely; so that nothing more needs, or can be
done. Christ without us, and Christ in us, does all that belongs to this work
of our Salvation. He gives a right to Salvation, and a meetness for Salvation:
He justifies perfectly, he Sanctifies wholly; what the Law could not do, that
he as the End of the Law (not a destroying, but a perfecting End) has done.
Particularly,

1. He saves from all Sin; or else that indefinite expression could hardly be
saved from an Equivocation, which the Spirit of Truth abhors: Matthew. 1.21. He
shall save his People from their Sins, i. e. from all their Sins, not one
excepted (for as to the unpardonable Sin, he saves his People from that
preventively, because none of them shall ever be suffered to commit it.) He is
able to save from the greatest Sins, as from the least; from Sins of the
blackest Aggravation, and the deepest die. He saved our first Parents from
their first Sin, which being a leading Act of Rebellion, was a very great one.
He saved several of his Murderers, and they that shed his Blood were washed in
it. He saves from the Sin of Unbelief, which is the worst of Sins, and in those
that are guilty of it now, is really greater than the Sin of the Jews in
putting him to death.

2. He saves from all that is in Sin; from the guilt and filth of it. He takes
out every spot from the Soul, and wipes out every Line from the Score. He pays
the uttermost Farthing, and therefore saves to the uttermost; he discharges
all, and leaves nothing to stand in God's Book against us. His whole Church
shall be presented Holy, and without blemish, Ephess. 5.27. No Corruption is
suffered to domineer, where he comes to save; as Job enters his solemn
Protestation, That no blot cleaves to his hands, chap. 31.7. Blots may be, and
unavoidably will be contracted, while we are in such a polluting World, but
they with whom Christ has any thing to do, soon shake them off again, as Paul
did the Viper which fastened on his hand, and felt no barm, ( Acts 28.5.) Yea at
length, Christ will save from the in being of Sin too; when we quit our earthly
Houses, Sin shall be quite turned out of Doors.

3. He saves from all that is due to Sin, and from all the effects of it; from
Wrath present and to come; not merely from Hell, but from all purely Judicial
Strokes upon Earth too; He does not save from God's loving Rebukes, (for that
would be to our prejudice, and therefore it would be no proper, desirable
Salvation) but from God's furious Rebukes he does. He has Redeemed us from the
Curse of the Law, etc. Gal. 3.13. from the whole Curse, and every part of it.
There is not the least Grain of the Legal Curse in all the afflictions which
Christ's saved ones do at any time undergo. There are chastened as Children,
not persecuted as common Malefactors. They are saved from every thing that
would make them truly miserable; they are exercised with nothing but what shall
do them good; those very Calamities, of which Sin is the occasion, shall be the
means to advance their Blessedness.

2. His being able to save to the uttermost, notes duration.

As 1. The saving Power of Christ stretches it self to the final Accomplishment
of his own Work; Whatever He puts his hand unto, he will give it his last hand;
the Author and Finisher of our Faith, Heb. 12.2. Wheresoever he Designs to
build, it shall not be said, that he is not able to finish; he will give no
occasion for any such Reproach to be cast upon his Eternal Power. He is as able
to bring forth the Head-Stone, as to lay the first Foundation. He carries on
his Designs of Grace through all Hindrances and Oppositions, till he has
conquered and surmounted all; he never leaves off what he undertakes, and is
engaged in, before the thoughts of his heart are finally performed, and all
fulfilled which he had contrived and purposed to do. He is the Omega as well as
the Alpha; he shuts up, as well as opens, the great work of a Sinners Salvation
and Recovery.

2. Christ's saving Power will not be exhausted or diminished to the end of the
World. He will be as able to save then, as he was at the beginning; for if he
was invested with such a Power before he had actually paid the Price of our
Redemption, we have no reason to doubt the continuation of that Power
afterward. If he had saved so many for about Four Thousand Years before he
came and offered up himself, it is impossible that since this Sacrifice, any
should be born into the World too late for him to save. Every successive
Generation yet to come may have the same benefit, as all that are past have
had. So long as the World stands, the Elect of God that are in it shall receive
as freely from Christ's Fullness as ever any did. His Power is the same, without
any Change or Variation in all Ages, Yesterday, to day and to Morrow; Is my
band shortened at all that it cannot redeem? Isa. 50.2.

3. His Power is sufficient for us in our greatest Extremities, while we live
in this World. In our sorest Temptations, and longest Desertions, when like
Peter, we are ready to sink, he is mighty to save still. We cannot be brought
so low by Hellish Rage, and spiritual Darkness, by the Buffetings of Satan, and
the Hidings of God, but that he can lift us up. As the Apostle speaks of the
Jews, who have been broken off by unbelief, and abode in that unbelief so many
Hundred Years, God is able to graft them in again, Romans 11.23. When we are apt
to think, that there is no way to escape, that we must and shall, without
remedy, perish at the last, he has his Almighty Succors at hand, and can in a
moment rescue and deliver us from all our fears. When the Waters are come into
the Soul, he has power to save from Drowning; or else that Prayer was vain,
Psalm 69.1.

4. His saving Power is our present help when we come to die and stand in
Judgment. When we have past through the Changes, Hazards, and Trials of this
Life, the chiefest of all is that which puts a period to Life, and then Jesus
Christ is able to save us in Death, tho he do not save us from it; able not
only to carry us to our hoary hairs, but to go with us farther, when these
hoary hairs are brought down to the grave; able to support us when flesh and
heart, when strength and spirits fail; able to receive and defend our Spirits
at their Departure out of the Body, and give them immediate possession of the
place prepared for them; able to answer for us before the Bar of God, and
shield us under the covering of his perfect Righteousness from all the
Accusations that can be brought against us; in short, he is so well able to
justify us, that even in that day, we may boldly say, Who is he that
condemns?

5. The Salvation which Christ works and displays his power in, endures in its
full force and virtue to Eternity it self. Isa. 45.17. Israel shall be saved in
the Lord with an everlasting salvation: You shall not be ashamed nor confounded
World without end. Again, chap. 57.6. The Heavens shall vanish away like smoke,
and the Farth wax old like a garment, and they that dwell therein die in like
manner, but my salvation shall be for ever, etc. As our Confidence is not in a
God who cannot save, or who can save only in part, so not in a God who can save
only for a limited time, or restrained season. Our God's Salvation lasts as
long as himself, it runs parallel with his very Being. Titus 2.13. The great
God and our Savior Jesus Christ. Those Two Glorious Titles are chained
together in Christ, and you may as well suppose the abolishing of the former,
as the expiring of the latter: He is an eternal Savior, as well as Eternal
God. Thus he saves to the utternmost.

USE.

1. Let us settle our hearts in the faith of this grand Point, against the
assaults of Infidelity in general. Whatever vile, blasphemous and dishonorable
Thoughts of Jesus Christ other persons in the World have, to them that are
saved he is (and ought to be esteemed as) the power of God, 1 Cor. 1.24. There
are Children of Belial now, as there were in the days of Saul, and worse than
they, who cry, How shall this man save us? 1 Samuel 10.27. Making little more of
him than a common, ordinary Son of Man; but to us he should be no less than the
Mighty God; we should respect and honor him as such, and thereby do what we
can to balance the contempt which is thrown upon him by a wretched Generation
that know him not.

2. Let us improve this for the strengthening of our adherence to Christ, and
dependence on him, notwithstanding all that tends to deter and beat us off.
Never give up this Cause, never cast away thy Confidence, but hold fast the
beginnings of it steady to the end, seeing that Jesus Christ can save to the
uttermost. There can be no Lion in any part of the way, between thee and
Heaven, but what he has a sufficiency of Power to deliver and rescue thee
from. Look as far as thou can (says one well) take the largest prospect
that is possible, of all thy Sins, Miseries and Difficulties of Salvation, still
the Power of Christ does extend infinitely beyond all these. We may safely say,
If Christ be not able to succor and help us, we are content to perish; if we
rest there, we are out of danger.

3. Let us oppose the saving strength of Christ to all the united force of
Hell. The Persecutors of our Souls are indeed stronger than we, but they are
weaker than he. We have a Friend in Heaven that can do more for us, than all
our enemies from beneath can do against us. Those Horns are not so able to
scatter God's Israel, as this Horn of Salvation is to defend them. If evil
Angels be greater in power than the best of Men left to themselves, they are
not so great in power as our great High Priest, Jesus the Son of God. When they
have done their utmost to separate a Believer from the love of God, it is not so
much as our blessed Lord has done to keep us in it. Behold, I give unto you
power to tread on Serpents and Scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy,
etc. Luke 10.19.

4. Let this comfort us under the sense of our own impotency. When we consider
how weak and feeble we are, it is cause of deep abasement; when we consider how
powerful Christ is, it is on the other hand matter of strong consolation. There
is a kind of Omnipotency communicated from Christ to those that are in him: I
can do all things through Christ which strengthens me, Phil. 4.13. Though we
are but as reeds shaken with the wind, he can make us Pillars in the Temple of
his God, Rev. 3.12. All that are built upon this sure Foundation, receive
stability from it. Therefore as Abraham considered not the deadness of his own
Body, or Sarah's Womb, being fully persuaded of God's being able to perform his
Promise, Romans 4.19, 21. So the belief of Christ's Almightiness should be mixed
with the thoughts of our own infirmities.

5. Let this relieve and fortify our spirits against the dejecting fears of
our future Apostasy. How little Grace soever we yet have, we shall have as much
as we need, if we belong to Christ; for he is able to make all Grace abound
toward us, nd in us. How defective soever our Sanctification yet be, Christ
has a Stock enough in his own hands to fill up what is behind, that there
shall be nothing lacking at the last. We stagger and reel, and stumble so
often, that we are afraid perhaps, we shall never hold on, and hold out, till
we come to our Journeys end: But ought not this to bear up our hopes, that we
are interested in one who is able to keep us from falling? Jude 24. able to
prevent every Fall, or able to recover and raise us up when fallen?

6. When we come to the Throne of Grace, this Doctrine will furnish us with a
good plea to urge to God, viz. That the Glory of Christ's Power is embarked
with our Salvation. It was such a sort of Argument which Moses went to God
with, when God threatened to destroy Israel, he tells him what the Nations would
be apt to say, Numb. 14.16. Because the Lord was not able to bring this People
into the Land, which he swear unto them, therefore he has slain them in the
Wilderness. So may we say, Lord it will teach the Devil to blaspheme thy Son,
if we should come short of the Rest which thou have promised us; the Powers of
Darkness which have heard his Fame, and felt his hand, will be ready to vilify
him, and cry, Because he was not able to save them he has suffered them to
perish.

7. This may encourage those that are yet without Christ, to come to him; You
are not, you cannot be so great Sinners, but that he is still a greater
Savior. Do not mistake it for your Duty, to aggravate your own Sin, to the
lessening of Christ.

Objection. Though Christ is able to save me, he may not be willing, and then
what am I the better? He is certainly able to do many things which he never
does; and so I may be lost, notwithstanding his saving Power.

Answer. 1. It will do well, if thou art thoroughly got over this Block of
suspecting and distrusting the Power of Christ: We are naturally prone to stick
here, as the Father of the Child, Mark 9.22. If thou can do any thing, have
compassion on us and help us. Therefore our Lord was wont to put the Question,
as to the Blind Man, Mat. 9.21. Believe you that I am able to do this?

2. There is no more doubt of the willingness of Christ to save, than of his
power, where he makes the Soul willing to accept of Salvation by him. When such
a consenting Will is wrought in us, it is an infallible evidence of his saving
Good Will toward us. What was he given of God for, what did he give himself
for, but that whosoever believes on him should not perish? How then can thou
think that Salvation is his strange work, or that he is unwilling to it?

3. Thou can not die in thy Sins, if thou will come to Christ to save thee
from them. It Is impossible that any thing should hinder him from doing this
mighty Work upon thee; if thy unbelief do not, nothing will tie his Hands, but
only that; He never is as a mighty Man that cannot save, but where his mighty
Salvation is called in Question. Therefore imitate their Faith, who were
threatened with the burning Furnace, Dan. 3.17. Our God is able to deliver us,
and he will deliver us. Be satisfied that he who is able to save, will actually
save those that cast themselves upon him.

SERMON XXIV.
October 15. 1697.
HEBREWS VII. xxv. Therefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost,
that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make Intercession for them.


II. AS to the Evidence which the Apostle brings to prove his Assertion by; The
Eternal Life and Intercession of Jesus Christ in Heaven. Here we are to
consider three Things, viz. The Life of Christ in Heaven; His Intercession
there; And the Objects of it, or Persons on whose behalf he lives and
intercedes.

First, The eternal Life of Christ in Heaven. In opening of this, we should
show, That he lives, and that he lives for ever, and how the Conclusion of his
being able to save, is built and founded hereupon.

1. That Christ lives; not only as he is the living God, Hebr. 3.12. and so
eternal Life is essential to his Deity, 1 John 1.2, 15, 20. but he lives as
Mediator, and that very Life which he laid down as Man, he has taken up again,
and possesses it now more advantagiously than before. This was the grand
Controversy in the Apostolical Times, between the Jews and Christians; so
Festus represents it to Agrippa, as a Quarrel about one Jesus, who was dead,
whom Paul affirmed to be alive, Acts 25.19. The Jews would have him to be
really in the State of the Dead still, and that his Disciples stole him out of
the Grave, to give Reputation to their new Doctrine, but the Apostles were
Witnesses of his Resurrection, and preached this wherever they preached the
Gospel; for indeed the whole Gospel would be but an empty Fable without it. If
Christ were not alive, what is become of the Type of the Living Bird; in the
cleansing of the Leper, that was let loose into the open Field? Lev. 14.7.
What Is become of the Type of the Escape Goat that was sent away into the
Wilderness? Chap. 16.21. How have these things received their Accomplishment,
but in the Life of Jesus? It was as necessary for our Consolation and Salvation
that Christ should live, as that he should die. The mere Death of Christ would
profit us nothing; could be no support to us, if he had continued under the
Power of Death. Therefore, as old Jacob was transported with Joy, when he heard
that Joseph was alive, Genesis 45.26, 28. So Job in the midst of his Afflictions,
triumphed and glorify in this, I know that my Redeemer lives, Job 19.25.

2. That he ever lives. When our Lord speaks of his Death, it was matter of
stumbling to the Jews, because (say they) we have heard out of the Law, that
Christ abides for ever, John 12.34. but they erred, not knowing the Scripture.
This was not be understood in opposition to his dying, but as consequent upon
it; for after his Death, and notwithstanding his Death, this was to be made
good, that he should abide for ever. So we find our Lord himself from Heaven
expounding it to John, Rev. 1.18. I am he that lives, and was dead, and behold
I am alive for evermore. The Life which Christ lived upon Earth, was a mortal,
temporary, perishing Life, as ours is, (for he took part of our Flesh and Blood
in the same poor and miserable Circumstances as we do) but the Life which he
now lives in Heaven, is of another sort, of a more permanent and durable
Nature. So Romans 6.9. Knowing that Christ being raised from the dead dies no
more; Death has no more Dominion over him. He cannot die a second time, as
Lazarus did, who after his first Death was raised again, and died again; as the
Body of his Humiliation, even when dead, saw no Corruption, so his glorified
Body, with which he sits at the Right Hand of God, can never see Death. His
present Life is such an one, as swallows up mortality.

3. How is the Inference of Christ's being able to save, grounded here upon his
Living for ever? Answer, Very strongly; for the saving Power of Jesus Christ
shines forth most illustriously in him as living. Romans 5.10. Being reconciled
by his Death, we shall be much more saved by his Life. So Chap. 8. 34. Who is
he that condemns? it is Christ that died, yea rather that is raised again,
etc. If Christ had been held by the Bands of Death, or if it had been possible
for him so to be held, it had been impossible for him to be the Author of
Salvation to any; our Faith in him had been vain, and our hope as a Spiders
Web; whereas now it is firm and established, steadfast and unmovable,
considering that Jesus Christ since his ignominious accursed Death, is raised
up to such a Blessed and Glorious Life. This gives us mighty encouragement in
several respects. For,

1. If Christ had not been able to save, he could not have conquered Death, as
he has done. This one Victory which he has obtained over that Enemy, is a
signal demonstration of his Power; The Grave would have detained him, and must
kept him as the legal Executioner of Justice, if he had not finished the Work
of our Salvation (as to the purchasing part) and done all in dying once. He
could not be discharged, till he had answered all Demands, and when they were
answered, he could be under Arrest no longer, but the Prosecution must cease.
When the Debt was paid, it would have been false Imprisonment, for Jesus Christ
to remain in the Custody of Death; on the other hand, his reviving and breaking
loose from those Restraints, shows, that all the Obstacles of our Salvation are
taken out of the way. Therefore, if we suspect his Ability to save, we must,
with the Jews, disbelieve his rising again, and look upon him no otherwise than
as a dead Man to this very day.

2. Our eternal Life is inseperably connected with the Life of Christ. It Is as
certain that he is our Life, as that he himself lives, Col. 3.4. he will not
Live and Reign without us, but we shall Reign in Life by him. He does not live
merely for himself, but for us, as he did not die for himself, but only for us.
He lives as a public Person, a second Adam, in whom all that belong to him
shall be made alive; as a quickening Head to his whole Body, and to every Member
in particular, John 14.19. Because I live, you shall live also. He asserts our
Life in conjunction with his own; for his Life and the Life of those that are
united with him, cannot be divided. 2 Cor. 13.4. He though Crucified through
weakness, lives by the Power of God; so we likewise, though weak, shall live
with him by virtue of the same Power. Hence it is that the Apostle makes the
great Doctrine of Christ's; Resurrection to stand or fall, with the
Resurrection of Believers. 1 Cor. 15.15, 16. Whom God raised not up, if so be
that the dead rise not; for if the dead rise not, then is not Christ raised.
Either he that quickened our Lord's natural Body, will quicken our mortal Bodies
also, or we must renounce the Faith of both together.

Secondly, The Intercession of Christ in Heaven. In handling this, we should
enquire what is meant by this Intercession; How he lives to this end; how he
ever lives in order to it; and wherein his infinite Ability to save is
evidenced hereby.

1. What is meant by the Intercession which Christ makesin Heaven. That it
differs from the Prayers and Supplications which he offered up in the days of
his Flesh, upon the account of the differing Circumstances of his now Glorious
State, which we must understand it suitably to, is (I think) without all
Controversy; That all Intercession carries in it in general something of the
true nature of Prayer, seems also clear, whether it be managed with or without
the use of words, is a disputed Point. And therefore I shall sum up all that
needs to be spoken to it, in these three things.

1. He appears in the Presence of God for us, Hebr. 9.24. He represents our
Persons there, presents himelf in our stead, and on our behalf, As Aaron bore
the Names of the Children of Israel in the breast plate of Judgment upon his
Heart, when he went into the Holy Place, Exodus, 28.29. And perhaps in Allusion
to this, Christ's speaks of confessing the names of those that overcome, before
his Father, Rev. 3.5. When no one could undertake such a desperate Cause as
ours was, he interposes and stands forth to be our Advocate; when we did not
dare to show our selves before the Throne God, he acts in the place of poor and
miserable Clients, and makes it his Business to sue and solicit for them in
that awful Court of Heaven.

2. He expresses his Will and Desire, that we should partake of all that he
has procured for us. So far his Intercession above agrees with that Prayer
which he made, while he was here below; John 17.24. Father, I will that they
whom thou have given me, be with me, where I am, that they may behold my Glory,
etc. And he who knows what is the mind of the Spirit, interceding in us, does
very well know the mind of Christ, in his making Intercession for us. The
Father knows not only what we want, but what his Son would have for us. In what
way or manner Jesus Christ signifies his Desires to any such purpose, we cannot
be easily satisifed, but that the Desires of Jesus Christ are all really before
God, and regarded by him, we may be very sure.

3. He insists upon his own Blood as a moving Plea. As the High Priest under
the Law was to carry the Blood of the Sacrifice within the Vail, and sprinkle
it upon and before the Mercy Seat, Lev. 16.14, 15. So the Blood of Christ, does
not like the Blood of Abel, cry from the Ground, but speaks in Heaven, Hebr.
12.24. And it is styled the Blood of sprinkling there, as being effectually
pleaded by him that shed it, and the Fruits of it demanded to be bestowed upon
those whom it was shed for. Whatsoever needs to be requested for us, our Lord
Jesus does justly require as due to himself. Our Necessities cannot go so far,
but that his Merits extend still further; and upon all occasions it may be
perfectly and fitly urged by him (though by none else) Father, I am worthy for
whom thou should do this.

2dly, How Christ lives to this End.

1. Vltimately; Christ lives to God, Romans 6.10. His Exaltation issues and
centers in the Glory of God the Father, Phil. 2.9, 10, 11. This was the chief
hope and aim of the Life of Christ, while he dwelt among us here below, and so
it is of the Life which he now lives in the World above. And therefore it must
still be supposed, that whatever other Designs he is engaged in the pursuit of,
they are all subordinate to this. The honoring of the Father is more to
Christ, than the Happiness of any Creature whatsoever, though they may very
consistently be carried on both at once.

2. It Is undeniable that Jesus Christ does not live for this end only, in
Subordination to the Glory of God; but for other purposes besides, which have
all a reference and tendency to that last end. He lives to execute his
Prophetical Office still; for by his Spirit whom he sheds forth, he leads both
his Ministers and all Believers into all Truth, and so declares and manifests
the Counsel of God most effectually to this very day. He lives to execute his
Kingly Office still, in the Holy Government of his Church, and further subduing
of his Enemies; for he must reign, till he has put all under his Feet, 1 Cor.
15.25. And he is to sit upon his Throne of his Glory, as Universal Judge at the
Great Day, when all Nations shall be gathered before him, and Sentenced by him,
Matthew. 25.31, 32.

3. The making of Intercession is a very eminent and considerable Act, which
Christ lives in order to, though it be not his ultimate or only end of living.
I say, a very eminent and considerable Act; for Intercession is a special part
of Christ's Priestly Office; the Priesthood of Jesus Christ did not expire at
his Death, but after Death, when he lived again, he was to transact and
negotiate our Affairs with God. This is the true meaning of that Text, which is
abused and perverted by the Socinians, to countenance their false Principles,
that Jesus Christ was not a Priest, till he came to Heaven, Hebr. 8.4. If he
were on Earth he should be a Priest. The plain sense and import of which
Passage is this, That if Jesus Christ had remained on Earth, he could not have
been a perfect and complete High Priest; if all his Work as a Priest had ended
in what he did on Earth, his Office had not been consummated; for it was
necessary that he should go into Heaven, as the High Priest under the Law did
into the Holy of Holies. When he had obtained eternal Redemption for us here,
it was requisite that he should enter there, in order to the applying of what
he had obtained.

3. How is it, that Christ ever lives to make Intercession. So he is affirmed
to be a Priest for ever; to be made after the power of an endless Life, Verse
16. of this Chapter. As Melchisedech, as Type of him, in a much inferior Sense,
is said to abide a Priest continually, ver. 3.

1. Christ Interecedes constantly, without intermission. He does not, as the
High Priest did it, once a Year, but always. He spent whole Nights sometimes in
Prayer, while he was in this World, but yet it was not his perpetual Work, as
now it is. He intercedes Year after Year, and is never silent on our behalf, so
much as for a moment. As he does not cease to live at any time, so he does not
cease to Mediate with God for us. There never is any demurr or stop put to it;
he never tires or faulters in it.

2. It is not probable that the Intercession of Christ should totally end, at
the end of the World, but rather that it will continue to all Eternity. In some
respects indeed, there will be no occasion or necessity for Christ's
interceding after the last Judgment, to need of interceding for the effectual
Calling of any of the Elect, nor for the pardon of Sin, nor Progress in
Sanctification, nor for the bringing of God's Sons and Daughters to Glory; all
those things will be then actually done, and fully brought to pass; but the
Intercession of Christ will be still needful for the everlasting continuance of
the Glorified in their Holy and Happy State. If the Virtue of the Blood of
Christ could ever be spent, or its Voice drowned, throughout Eternal Ages, what
Security would Saints have for their Abode in Heaven?

4. Wherein is Christ's infinite Ability to Save evidenced hereby? Answ.
Abundantly; because,

1. He perfectly understands every Case which be takes upon him to manage. He
is not ignorant of any of our Matters, but is acquainted with them all, and
does not need our poor defective Representations of them to him. He knows what
the Condition of our Souls requires, much better than we do our selves; so that
we may hope for a Supply of our unmentioned Wants, as well as others. His
infinite Knowledge of our needy miserable State, is an encouraging Token of his
saving Power; for such Perfections always go together.

2. He has a great Interest in the Father, and intercedes with him according
to his Will. He is God's Beloved Son, and they whom he intercedes for, are
beloved by the Father also. He is one that God rejoiced and delighted in,
before the World, one that is as dear to the Father as himself; one that cannot
ask, that God can refuse or deny; for his Intercessions are always agreeable to
the Divine Purposes, and he never craves any thing but what God has certainly
determined to grant. Every one would think himself safe and sure enough of what
he seeks after, if he had such a Favorite to be his Friend in any Earthly
Court.

3. Christ's Intercession does clearly evince the Validity and Entireness of
his Satisfaction. God would not have admitted him to intercede, if he had not
fully satisfied. His Intercession is indeed the virtual Continuation of his
Offering which he once made; and we cannot imagine that God should ever give
way to this, if that had not been a Sacrifice of a sweet smelling Savor to
him. It is because he paid our Debt as our Surety, that he is accepted to plead
the Payment as our Attorney (Charnock.) It is because he is our Propitations,
that he is also our Advocate. He failed not in the first of his Attempts, and
therefore with God's Approbation entered upon the second.

4. Christ is always heard in his Intercession, and carries every Cause hie
Pleads. His Heart's desire is always given him, and the request of his Lips is
not withheld from him, Psalm 21.2. Never was any Supplicant so universally
Successful, as this mediator is. He, as a Prince indeed, has Power with God,
and prevails, without exception one Miscarriage would be enough to damp us; but
when all that he does, prospers, what should we fear? The Altar of Incense,
which signified the Intercession of Christ, as well as the Altar of
Burnt-Offering, which was a shadow of his Sacrifice, had Horns by God's
appointment at the four Corners, Exodus 30.2. with 27.2. to note that strength
of Salvation which Sinners have to flee to, and take hold of.

3. The Objects of Christ's Intercession, or Persons for whom he lives to
intercede. Who are they? The Text directs to the Answer; For them that come
unto God by him. Here we should show, What it is to come unto God by Christ,
and how we are to understand that Christ makes Intercession for such.

1st. What it is to come to God by Christ? Coming to God in the New Testament,
is put especially for two things.

1. It Is expressive of believing; John 6.35. He that comes to me shall never
hunger, and he that believes on me, etc. The latter Clause does without all
Controversy, expound and interpret the former. Unbelief is set forth by the
contrary; Chap. 5. 40. You will not come to me, etc. In this sense there is no
coming to God, but by Christ, i. e. no believing in him but by Christ. The
Sinner must go out of himself, as having nothing of his own to recommend him,
or bring along with him, expecting Salvation from God merely and solely on the
behalf of Christ.

2. It Is expressive of all the solemn Acts of Religious Worship: Hebr. 11.6. He
that comes to God, must believe, etc. The whole Service of God is to be
performed under the influence of Faith, and this Faith must have a respect to
Christ, and be exercised upon him. God is not accessible in any Duty, any other
way. Whatsoever we do, is to be done in his Name, and to have its acceptance
with God upon his account. There is no Spiritual Sacrifice pleasing to God, but
what is offered up by Believers, through the hands of Christ; and there is none
so offered up, but what must needs be pleasing.

2. How are we to understand, that Christ makes Intercession for such?

1. He intercedes for them exclusively: For them and no others, they that are
final Despisers and Rejecters of Christ, and pretend to go to God in the Old
Way of the First Covenant, or any New Invented Ways of their own (which usually
have a strong Tincture of that in them) are such as Jesus Christ has nothing
to do with, and is not concerned about. All that he lives in Heaven to make
Intercession for, are taught in due time, to make application to God by him;
renouncing all other Grounds of Hope and Confidence whatsoever. His
Intercession is limited and restrained to such.

2. He intercedes for them, and every one of them particularly. He calls his
own Sheep by Name, John 10.3. and distinctly remembers 'em all, with their
several respective Cases, of which no two in the World are strictly and
absolutely alike; tho they do agree in many things, yet in other things they
vary. Now Jesus Christ does not remember one, and forget another; nor does his
Intercession run upon Generals only, as if he did no more than commend his
whole Mystical Body to God, but he takes notice of every part. I have prayed
for thee Peter, Luke 22.32. So he does now for you and me, and all that commit
themselves to him; not only Sheep, but Lambs, not only strong but weak
Believers; not only those that are worthy of greatest Honor, but such as are
least esteemed in the Church.

USE.

1. What a woeful condition are legal Worshippers in, who still adhere to Rites
and Ceremonies which cannot save them? The Law having a Shadow of good things
to come, and not the very Image (or Substance) of the things, can never with
those Sacrifices which they offered year by year continually, make the comers
thereunto perfect, Hebr. 10.1. When their Constitution was most flourishing,
and all those external Appointments were kept up to their very height, they had
not an High Priest that ever lived to intercede for them, but were obliged to
the Mediation of Christ; and now they have no Sacrifices, nor Holy of Holies to
carry the Blood of the Sacrifice into, those weak and feeble Grounds of Carnal
Confidence are quite taken away: Moses, in whom they trust, and whose Rules
they pretend to follow, will be their Accuser, instead of being their Advocate,
as Elias made Intercession against Israel, not for them.

2. What a vile Reproach do they cast upon Christ, that employ and make use of
other Intercessors besides him! The Apostle argues Christ's Power to save, from
his living to Intercede; they who advance and prefer others to this Work, do
really charge him with Insufficiency. Has he trod the Wine Press alone, and
is he not able to perform this business of Advocacy alone? Did he redeem us by
himself, and must he have Partners in his Pleading Work? The first was rather
more difficult than this last, and therefore if he must be assisted in this, we
may with more reason suspect his needing of help as to the other; and
consequently we may doubt, whether he himself can be the Author of Eternal
Salvation to us. So that the Antichristian Doctrine, of multiplied Mediators
between God and us, tends to subvert our Faith, and opens the door to
Infidelity.

3. We may learn hence, that Jesus Christ, though taken from us, and made higher
than the Heavens, is not the less mindful of us, or less compassionate toward
us. When the chief Butler was restored to his Place, he forgot poor Joseph in
Prison, Genesis 40. ult. but Christ's Care and Affection is not lessened by his
Exaltation. He has a more tender regard to our Infirmities, than any of our
Fellow Creatures that are still in Flesh, can have; as the Brain (where all the
Nerves, which are the Instruments of Sense, are terminated) is the chief Seat
of all Perception, so the Mystical Body, though one Member may feel the Wrong
done to another, yet the Head is most apprehensive of it. He has left the
World indeed, but is as sollicitous as ever for them that are left behind. John
17.11. Now I am no more in the World, but these are in the World, etc.

4. Our daily renewed Guilt, though Ground of humble Walking, ought not to
destroy our Comfort, or be matter of Discouragement. Christ's Intercession
would not be continued, if there were not continual need of it. Some Men weary
the Kindness of their Friends, by plunging themselves over and over in fresh
Dissiculties; and so they must be delivered again and again; as Prove. 19.19.
This is not irksom or uneasy to Christ; for though we are every moment
Offending one way or other, he does not leave off Interceding; For if any man
sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ, etc. 1 John 2.1.

5. The Preservation of those that are in Christ, is very much owing to the
Intercession of Christ for them. If we receive any Advantage by the Prayers of
one another, how much more by his? What a helpless and hopeless Condition
should we soon be in, if our Lord Jesus did not confirm his Love toward us, by
praying the Father for us! Our standing in the Grace of God, is a Fruit of his
sitting at the right Hand of God. So some interpret, the Life of Jesus being
made manifest in our mortal Body, 2 Cor. 4.10, 11. q. d. We are supported to go
through such Exercises and Trials by the mighty Influence of our Living Savior.

6. Let this embolden us to ask in Faith, and quicken us to Pray with greater
assurance: Having such an High Priest, to introduce us to God, we may
comfortably plead the Causes of our Souls before him. The Prayers of Saints go
up as a Memorial and sweet Perfume, by reason of the Incense that Christ offers
with them. Ask of me, and I will give thee, is the Father's Language to the
Son, Psalm 2.8. as if he were to fetch out the Grace and Blessing of the
Promise by Prayer. And the same terms are proposed to us, Ask and it shall be
given you, Matthew. 7.7. What can we have more? Yea, Christ himself will see it
done, whatever is asked in his Name; he has said it twice, I will see it done,
Matthew. 14.13, 14.

7. Let this be a Motive to us to live to Christ, and plead for him as we can,
while we are here in the World.

1. Let us live to Christ; who thought it not enough (as Mr. Clarkson says) to
lose one Life for us on Earth, but he also improves another in Heaven for us.
What can we do less, then take Paul's Motto, and make it our daily Rule, To me
to live is Christ? Phil. 1.21.

2. Let us plead for Christ; with God and with Men.

1. With God. While he intercedes for us, let us pray for him, i. e. for the
Prosperity of his Concerns here in his lower Kingdom. This is to be
done-continually, and without ceasing, Psalm 72.15. as the Prophet is our
Example, For Zion's sake I will not hold my peace, and for Jerusalem's sake I
will not rest, etc. Isa. 62.1.

2. With Men. Christ's Intercession on our behalf in Glory, will shamefully
upbraid our ungrateful Silence, if we can quietly suffer his Name to be
Blasphemed, and his Gospel scoffed out of the World. Their Confession of Christ
is no better than a Denial, that have nothing to say for him in such a Case.
The Spirit of Christ is his great Advocate here in the World; and therefore if
we walk in that Spirit, Christ's Honor and Interest will be duly regarded by
us.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for Thomas Parkhurst, at the Bible and Three-Crowns in
Cheapside, near Mercers-Chapel.
FOrty Nine Sermons on the whole Epistle of the Apostle Paul to the Colossians,
by Monsieur Daille, Minister of the Reformed Church in Paris. Folio.

Sermons and Discourses on several Divine Subjects; by the late Reverend and
Learned David Clarkson, B. D. and sometime Fellow of Clare-Hall, Cambridge.
Folio.

A Body of Practical Divinity, consisting of above One hundred seventy six
Sermons on the Lesser Catechism of the Assembly of Divines at Westminster; by
Tho. Watson, formerly Minister of Stephen Walbrook. Folio.

The Support of the Faithful in Times of Persecution; or a Sermon Preached in
the Wilderness to the poor Protestants in France. By M. Brousson, an Eminent
Minister, who was broke upon the Wheel at Montpelier, Novem. 6. School. Quarto.

The Fountain of Life opened, or a Display of Christ in his Essential and
Mediatoral Glory; containing Forty two Sermons on various Texts. Wherein the
Impetration of our Redemption by Jesus Christ is orderly unfolded, as it was
begun, carried on, and finished by his Covenant Transaction, mysterious
Incarnation, solemn Call and Dedication, blessed Offices, deep Abasement and
Supereminent Advancement.

A Treatise of the Soul of Man, wherein the Divine Original, excellent and
immortal Nature of the Soul are opened; its Love and Inclination to the Body,
with the necessity of its Separation from it, considered and improved. The
Existence, Operations and States of separated Souls both in Heaven and Hell
immediately after Death, asserted, discussed, and variously applied. Diverse
knotty and difficult Questions about departed Souls both Philosophical and
Theological, stated and determined.

The Method of Grace in bringing home the Eternal Redemption, contrived by the
Father, and accomplished by the Son, through the Effectual Application of the
Spirit unto God's Elect, being the second Part of Gospel Redemption.

The Divine Conduct or Mystery of Providence, its Being and Efficacy asserted
and vindicated; all the Methods of Providence in our course of Life opened,
with Directions how to apply and improve them.

Navigation spiritualized, or a New Compass for Seamen, consisting of Thirty
Two Points of pleasant Observations, profitable Applications, serious
Reflections, all concluded with so many spiritual Poems, etc.

A Saint indeed, the great Work of a Christian.

A Touchstone of Sincerity, or Signs of Grace, and Symptoms of Hypocrifie,
being the second Part of the Saint indeed.

A Token for Mourners, or Boundaries for Sorrow for the Death of Friends.

Husbandry spiritualized; or the Heavenly use of Earthly Things. All these Ten
by Mr. John Flavell.

A Funeral Sermon on the Death of that Pious Gentlewoman Mrs Judith Hammond,
late Wife of the Reverend Mr. George Hammond, Minister of the Gospel in London.

Of Thoughtfulness for the Morrow. With an Appendix concerning the immoderate
Desire of foreknowing Things to come.

Of Charity in reference to others Men's sins.

The Redeemers Tears wept over lost Souls, in a Treatise on Luke 19.41, 42.
With an Appendix, wherein somewhat is occasionally Discoursed concerning the
Sin against the Holy Ghost, and how God is said to Will the Salvation of them
that Perish.

A Sermon directing what we are to do after a strict Enquiry whether or no we
truly Love God.

A Funeral Sermon for Mrs Esther Sampson, late Wife of Mr. Henry Sampson,
Doctor of Physic, who died Nov. 24. 1689.

The Carnality of Religious Contention. In two Sermons Preached at the
Merchants Lecture in Broadstreet.

A calm and sober Enquiry concerning the Possibility of a Trinity in the
Godhead.

A Letter to a Friend, concerning a Postscript to the Defense of Dr. Sherlock's
Notion of the Trinity in Unity, relating to the calm and sober Enquiry upon the
same Subject.

A View of that Part of the late Considerations Addressed to H. H. about the
Trinity. Which concerns the sober Enquiry on that Subject.

A Sermon preached on the late Day of Thanksgiving, December. 2. 1697. To which
is prefixed Dr. Bates's Congratulatory Speech to the King. All these Eleven by
Mr. John How.

The Good of Early Obedience, or the Advantage of bearing the Yoke of Christ
betimes. Octavo.

The Almost Christian, or the false Professor Tried and Cast. Duodecimo.

Spiritual Wisdom improved against Temptation. Duodecimo.

The Vision of the Wheels seen by the Prophet Ezechiel. Quarto.

A Sermon of Unity, or Two Sticks made one. Quarto. All Five by Matthew. Mead,
Pastor of a Church of Christ at Stepney.

Discourses upon the Rich Man and Lazarus. Octavo.

Three last Sermons of Mr. Cruso; To which is added a Sermon on November. 5.
1697. Octavo. Both by Tim. Cruso, M. A.

His Funeral Sermon, preached by Matthew. Mead. Quarto.

The Life and Death of Mr Philip Henry, Minister of the Gospel at Whitchurch,
in Shropshire, who died June 24. 1696. Recommended by Dr. Bates.

David Jones's Sermon in Ember-Week, preached before the University of Oxford.

The Qualifications requisite, toward the Receiving a Divine Revelation. A
Sermon preached in the Cathedral Church of St. Paul, January the 2d. 1699.
Being the First, for this Year, of the Lecture, Founded by the Honorable
Robert Boil, Esquire; By Samuel Bradford, M. A. Rector of St. Mary le Bow.


