Denmark Uindicated: BEING AN ANSWER To a late Treatise called, An ACCOUNT of
Denmark, As it was in the Year 1692.

Sent from a Gentleman in the Country, to his Friend in London.

Corn. Nep. Haec praecipienda videntur lectoribus, ne alienos mores ad suos
referant; neve ea, quae ipsis leviora sunt, pari modo apud caeteros fuisse
arbitrentur.

Terent. Faciunt, n^^, intelligendo ut nihil intelligant.

LONDON: Printed for Tho. Newborough at the Golden-Ball; and Ed. Mory at the 3
Bibles in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1694.

TO HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS The Most Illustrious PRINCE GEORGE, Only Brother to His
MAJESTY, the Present King of Denmark.
May it please Your Royal Highness,
AS true History transmits to posterity the good and bad Counsels not only, but
also the most Famous Actions of Great Men; so Princes, and Men of the first
Rank, seem more particularly concerned in maintaining its Sacred Laws against
such as prompted either by their Vanity or Malice, endeavor too frequently to
pervert the same. I having undertaken in this present Treatise, to vindicate in
some measure the KINGDOM of DENMARK, against a nameless Author, who, (as much
as in him lays) has endeavored to misrepresent the State of your R. H's Native
Country, and the most ancient Rights of your Royal Family in Denmark: I thought
I should appear to the World to be wanting in my Duty to your R. Highness, and
to deviate from that profound Veneration, which I have always paid to your R.
H's most eminent Virtues of Valor, Moderation and Love of Truth; it if I
should have committed this Work to the protection of another, which I was
sensible ought to implore no other, but that of your Royal Highnesses. My chief
aim in this Undertaking has been to undeceive such, as being not acquainted
with the true State of Denmark, might be apt to mistake fair shining
appearances, for the Truth it self; wherein, as I have soughtmore for the
Satisfaction of being approved of by the most understanding sort, than the
multitude (whose applauses I never sought, nor valued.) So, if I have been able
to contribute any thing in this Matter, which may meet with the least
Approbation from a PRINCE, who by his BIRTH, and exquisite KNOWLEDGE of the
Constitutions of his Native Country, and the Prerogatives of his Royal
Ancestors, is the most unquestionable judge of this Vindication: I shall always
esteem it as the greatest honor, which I could pretend to in this undertaking.
Pompous words (the common ingredient of our new-fashion'd Dedications) being
the Scorn of great Souls, ought not to be brought into your R. H's Presence.
But instead of these, I will offer my fervent Prayers to Heaven for the
Prosperity of your R. H. and your most illustrious Family, humbly entreating
your R. H. graciously to accept of this as an unfeigned Testimony of my
constant Zeal for your R. H's Service, and begging leave to call my self,

Your Royal Highness's Most Humble and Devoted Servant, J. C.

A LETTER FROM A GENTLEMAN in the Country, TO HIS FRIEND in LONDON.
SIR,
NExt to the most acceptable News of your health, nothing could at this time
have been more welcome to me in my retirement, than the Book you sent me
concerning the present State of Denmark; which, as it has, with pleasure
revived in me the remembrance of such Matters, as forme^ly I had observed in
those Northern Countries; so the reading of it at such intervals as were free
from the usual jollities of the Christmas Holy Days, has afforded no small
variety to me, when tired with the diversions, this Season particularly allows
us in the Country. I had some days before I received yours, heard a most
advantageous Character of the said Book, from some Gentlemen, who being
Fellows, if not the Heads of a State-Reforming Society in London, were come,
partly to pass the Holy Days in the Country, partly to communicate to their
Friends here, the Results of their grave Debates in their several London Clubs,
and had among other State Censuring Pamphlets (as I understood) recommended
this Treatise as a singular piece, fit to improve the Knowledge of all such as
desired to be instructed in State Affairs. The Truth is, knowing these
Gentlemen to be of a Society, the Members whereof I know not by what ancient
Title, which they deduce even from the times of the Romans, claim a prerogative
of Censuring not only foreign States, but also our own in particular, as often
as Matters do not fully answer the ends of their wise Consultations: I had a
more than common Curiosity, to peruse a Treatise, which they seemed to be so
fond of, even to admiration. But, as soon as I found the Title Page not only
without the Author's Name (which seems so requisite to give an Authority to
Historical Treatises, that I do not see how any body can challenge a belief
from his judicious Reader without it) but also the Printer's omitted; the work
seemed to me at the very first sight, to carry with it a shrewd suspicion, if
not of downright falsehood, at least of an unanswerable partiality. And to speak
freely, when immediately after in the Preface, so disproportionable both to the
nature and ^igness of the Treatise, there appeared to me every where the
footsteps of a conceited Home-breeding, and every Leaf almost stuffed up with
the Praise of This, and the Diminution and Undervaluing of other Countries,
confirmed with far fetched Arguments, devised on purpose rather to amuse and
ensnare, than impartially to instruct the Reader^ I did conclude, that our
unknown Author's inten^ion was to give us a Novel, such as the Turkish Spy, or
the like (wherein of late years some have taken a privilege to intermingle
Truth with their own Inventions, accommodating the whole more to their own
Fancies, or else to the Humors of such as they seek to please, than to the
sacred Laws of History) but not a true and impartial Account of the present
State of Denmark. When soon after my Curiosity did lead me to make a true
comparison betwixt the most remarkable passages related in this Treatise, and
such Matters as either my memory or observations, which I had made some years
ago, when conversant in those Countries, as also the correspondence of my
Friends from thence had furnished me withal; I was sufficiently convinced, that
in the most concerns of Moment our Author had endeavored, by an affected
Style, rather to adapt the whole to his Conceits in the Preface, than the
Preface to the Work. The gross and unaccountable Comparison especially, made
betwixt the Northern parts of the World and the Turkish Government, nay, even
the preferring the latter before the others may. I think, serve, as an
undeniable Argument to all unbiased Persons, That the Author did not intend to
give us a just account of those Countries, but under a Romantic Cover of
Arbitrary Power, to represent Tyranny in its worst shape to the English Nation.
And as this is plainly apparent out of several passages of the said Book, so it
seems to be the only excuse that can be made for these extravagancies and
groundless Aspersions, so little suitable to the rules of true History,
wherewith it is filled up from the beginning of the Preface, to the very
conclusion. Certainly, if this Author's Intention had been to give a
warrantable Account of Denmark, it would have been much more glorious and
consonant to the practice of all civilized Nations, to have imitated the
frankness and integrity of the ancient Romans, whom he seems so much to admire,
and more particularly, that of Tacitus in his Book, which he writ concerning
the Germans in his Time. Those, who see this Author quoted, not only in the
Title page, but also in several places afterward, will scarce believe that any
other, but the above mentioned Reason could induce our Author, to recede so far
from the Method of an approved Historian; and the so much applauded moderation
of him, whom he himself praises as the greatest of Politicians of his Time.
Neither will the difference which some pretend to have found out betwixt those
Times and our Age, be a sufficient excuse for this new-invented way of writing;
since, if our Author had been more taken with an Ambition to imitate Modern
than ancient Writers in this kind, there are not wanting Examples among them of
undeniable Sincerity and Modesty. The Memoirs of Villeroy, and the Letters of
Cardinal D^ Ossat have deserved such praises from the most unbyassed, and
eminent Politicians, that he need not have been ashamed to tread in their
footsteps. Even the Northern parts, where our Author falsely imagines all
Learning to be extinguished, can furnish him with a Pattern of this Kind in
their imcomparable Monzam bano, of the State of the German Empire; according to
which, if he had regulated himself, he would not have scattered such abundance
of ill grounded Reflections against many Illustrious Persons, and had better
deserved the Name of a true Historian. But, if nothing of Foreign Virtue could
be charming enough to our Author, the living Examples either of Sir William
Temple, or of the so much celebrated Dr. Burnet, now Bishop of Salisbury, in
his Observations especially made, concerning his Travels, and published some
years ago, ought to have excited him to deserve the same Character; except our
Author has an in born Aversion to any thing that has the least relation to the
North. To conclude; this Author seems to be a great Admirer, and to have
adapted the whole Work to the Doctrine of some political Doctors among us; who
having gathered their fantastical Notions of a Platonic Government without
Faults, out of such ancient Philosophers, as used to fight Battles in their
Studies, and with florid Speeches infuse their Conceits of Governing into their
Auditors, do very industriously labor to spread their vain Opinion, to the
great disadvantage of the State. And I think, the whole Work may serve as a
convincing Instance, to show the World how difficult it is to shake off such
Prejudices, as are implanted in our tender Age, and have in process of time
taken root with us; so that it is manifest, that (notwithstanding our Author's
Opinion in his Preface) Traveling too late proves sometimes as ineffectual, as
going abroad too young. This being, what in general may justly be said of this
Treatise, I have communicated to you with the same freedom, as I thought was
becoming our Friendship, and the satisfaction I always take in contributing any
thing to your Curiosity.

But the particular consideration of the whole much exceeding the compass of a
Letter, I have in the enclosed Papers set down such impartial animadversions,
as seemed to me necessary toward the explaining of the chief points in the
whole Treatise, wherein if I have added any thing to your satisfaction, it
fully answers the ends of him, who, Sir, always will be

Your affectionate Friend and Servant. January 16. 1693/4.
REMARKS UPON THE PREFACE.
BOOKS without their Author's Names, being like Bastards, who cannot claim the
least Prerogative from their Parentage, ought questionless to challenge no
other Authority but what is derived from their own Deserts. And though it is not
to be denied, but that sometimes the Circumstances of time and place may be a
good Plea to some Authors, who have disguised themselves under fictitious
Names; or else set none at all to their judicious Pieces. Yet it must also be
owned, That whenever they have transgressed the Rules of true Sincerity and
Modesty, and endeavored rather to recommend themselves to the Reader by their
pompous Words, than approved Truth, they have deservedly incurred the Censures
of all Judicious and Unbyassed Persons. If the Author of the Treatise, called,
An Account of Denmark, had made the least Reflection (as he ought to have done)
upon this, certainly he would not have been so much pre-possessed with the
Vanity of his own Inventions, as to believe, That the same, though never so
gaudily dressed up with fine Words, and adorned with fair Suppositions, could
be received as a Truth among the more sensible part of Mankind. But to come to
the Matter it self; Health and Liberty are, without dispute, the greatest
natural Blessings Mankind is capable of enjoying, says our Author at the very
beginning of his Preface. That Health and Liberty, duly considered, are Two
precious Jewels, scarce sufficiently to be valued, has never been questioned in
this part of the World, But since Physicians themselves do not agree in the
true nature of the First, as admitting of several Degrees, and being scarce
ever to be found in its due Perfection; and the Degrees of the Second, being by
all Judicious Politicians, adapted to the several Constitutions of those
Countries, and Inhabitants where the same is to be exercised, our Author would
have done very prudently to have have given us a more clear and satisfactory
Notion of the true Nature of both. So do we see Fantastical Ladies, though
(according to their natural Constitution in good Health) affect sometimes to be
leaner, sometimes fatter; sometimes to nauseate a small Pimple, or even their
natural Color; sometimes imagining (though falsely) I know not what
Indisposition in their Body; and by Vomits, repelling Medicines, and other
destructive Methods, bring upon themselves dangerous Diseases. And how often
the mistaken Rules of Liberty, have proved not only troublesome, but also
fatal, the Histories of all Ages do abundantly testify. It had therefore, in
my Judgment, been more suitable to the nature of an Historical Treatise, and
the Circumstances also of our present Enjoyment of sufficient Liberty, under
the Conduct of a Wise and Just King, to have given a true Scheme of moderate
Liberty, than to represent to us at this time a Romantic Notion of the same,
by fetching the Italian out of his own Country, and transferring of him into
Greenland; for these are his Words: But as an Italian that passes a Winter in
Greenland, will soon be convinced how much Misery he endures, in comparison of
those who dwell in his native Country; so he that knows by Experience the
Trouble of a languishing Sickness, or the loss of Liberty, etc. He need not
have sent him so far, since the Highlands in Scotland would have made him
sensible enough of the Difference; and yet I have known Italians, who would not
change their Habitations which they had in the Northern Parts, with the
fruitful Champaign of the Ferrarese, and other the Pope's Dominions. From hence
he falls abruptly upon the Two different ways of profiting, either by our own,
or other Peoples Experience, and recommending the latter, (and certainly no
body who has common Sense would do otherwise) returns quietly to his beloved
Panegyric of Liberty: Thus he says: Want of Liberty is a Disease in any
Society, or Body Politic, like want of Health in any particular Person. Symb.
CAROLI IV. Imp, Optimum est aliena insania frui.
This Passage I could not forbear smiling at, when I considered with what
Caution our Author had avoided to give the least Limitation of Liberty; though it
is evident, that a proper Epithete would have taken away all occasion of a
sinister Interpretation. Surely he that seems so well versed in the ancient
Greek and Roman History, cannot but remember, that it was the immoderate
Liberty of Greece, the famous Nursery of his so much admired Philosophers;
which was the chief Cause of the Ruin of so flourishing a Country. I speak this
upon the Credit of one, who living in a free Commonwealth, and being the
greatest Admirer and Maintainer of a lawful Liberty, is an unquestionable Judge
in this Case; I mean Cicero; his Words are these: Graecorum totae respublicae
sedentis concionis temeritate administrantur. Itaque ut hanc Graeciam, quae jam
diu suis consiliis perculsae and afflicta est, omittam: Ea vetus, quae quondam
opibus, imperio, gloria floruit, hoc uno malo concidit, liberate immoderat^
atque licentia concionum. And that excess of Liberty is the same in the Body
Politic, what excess of Blood (though else the Treasure of Life) is in a
particular Person; which if not timely taken away, causes Inflammations,
Exulcerations, Phrensies, and other dangerous Diseases; besides what is
befallen the Strasburghers, by their too much nicety of Liberty, in refusing an
Imperial Garrison; those Civil Commotions and Intestine Wars which happened in
our Father's Memory in the Kingdom of Poland, have been convincing Instances,
and that too much Liberty is frequently the Spring of fatal Diseases in the
Government. And when even to this Day we hear of their bloody Debates, where
the Cimmetar often is the chief Argument in their Consultations at the Diet; I
will scarce believe, but that this may instruct any true thinking Englishmen,
how much more desirable it is to enjoy an Equitable Portion of Liberty, than
greedily to follow the Footsteps of such as too often transgress the Bounds of
the same. Travel, says our Author, seems as necessary to one, who desires to be
useful to his Country, as practicing upon other Men's Distempers, is to make
an able Physician: For, though a Man may too frequently see the Misery of such,
as are deprived of Health, without quitting his own Country; yet, (thanks to
Providence) he must go out of these Kingdoms, who would know experim^ntally the
Want of public Liberty. And since next to Providence our present happy
Enjoyment of our legal Liberty, is owing to the Valor and Conduct of His
Majesty; Why then all this stir for Liberty? Could not an impartial Account
have been given of the Present State of Denmark, without a Romantic Preface
filled up with Chimerical Notions? Such a Piece as this would have been very
excusable some Years ago, when we were in apparent Danger of losing both our
Religion and Liberty; And yet at that very time it has been observed, that
those very Gentlemen who generally make the greatest Clamor for Liberty, and
pretend to be the true Proselytes of the Ancient Grecians and Romans, were not
the most forward of maintaining, and publicly asserting it. What concerns the
Usefulness of Traveling, it was, I think, never denied among understanding
Men: and if in representing the same, this Gentleman had avoided the nauseous
Praises of this, and the undervaluing of other Countries, I am certain, it
would have had a much better Influence upon unbiased Persons, than can be
expected from such hyperbolical Comparisons. But let us observe his Words: And
this can be done by no Nation in the World so commodiously a^ the English; The
Affluence of their Fortune, and Easiness in their private Affairs are evidently
greater, than those of other People of Europe, etc. And immediately after; In
other Countries some Princes and Men of the first Quality may have Purses
strong enough to bear the Expense, but few of the midling Sort venture upon it,
etc. This is so manifestly contradictory to the Experience of all Travelers,
that I cannot sufficiently admire how our Author could pretend to put it upon
us. The Panegyric of his Native Country, might have been interpreted as a
pardonable Imitation of his so much beloved Ancient Philosophers; But certainly
he, who can affirm this for a Truth, must never have traveled any where, but
by a direct Sea-voyage from England to Denmark: For if he had taken the Way
thither through Holland, even some of the meanest Capacities in those Countries
in his Journey would have informed him to the contrary. I appeal to all in this
Case, who have made any Observation iu their Travels, especially in France, and
I am sure I can affirm it upon my own Experience, what a Concourse of
Foreigners there used to be some Years before this War in Paris, whereof so few
were in Comparison of the rest, English, that I have often been admiring at it.
And I remember very well, that when my Curiosity afterward did lead me thither
a second time, I made as strict an Enquiry as possibly I could, about the
Number of Foreigners in Paris, (besides those in the Country) where I was
informed by such as in all probability were the most likely to give a true
Judgment of this Matter, That they did esteem the Number of Foreigners there,
to amount of late Years to betwixt sixteen and twenty Thousand; whereof one
half were supposed to be Germans. I have often afterward heard the same
confirmed since, by such as came from thence: and, as I have seen my self; the
most of those live up to the Port of Gentlemen in a Place, where every thing is
very dear to Strangers; we must either conclude, that all those were either
Princes, or Men of the first Quality, or that he had his Supposition, That few
of the midling Sort venture at traveling, from no Authentic Hand. And though
this be more conspicuous in France, and especially in Paris; yet the same may
evidently enough also be observed in other Countries, as in England, Italy,
Holland, and the most Parts of Germany. I have been in the latter of those
Countries conversant for a good many Years, and at several times; and as I
always took no small delight in the Gravity of the German Tongue, so I was very
careful in making the most exact Observations I possibly could; and I must
needs acknowledge, that scarce any Nation in the World bestows more Labor, and
Money upon the Breeding, and thoroughly qualifying their Male-Children, than
the Germans. Not to speak now of the first Degrees of Education (because I
shall say more of that by and by) they reckon Traveling so necessary and
requisite toward the accomplishing of a Gentleman, that those who have not had
the Opportunity of seeing other Countries but their own, must be of Eminent
Quality, if they are preferred to any Place of Moment.

They used formerly to send their Sons especially into Italy, but the
Reservedness of the Italians being not found so convenient toward the
obtaining the Ends of Traveling, the frankness of the French, and the
Necessity there was, in the most Courts of Germany, to be nearer acquainted
with the French Tongue and Affairs, have drawn the Germans more into France of
late Years, than into any other part of the World; though I verily believe,
That if a true Account could be made of Foreigners traveling in Italy and
Holland, nay, even in this Country, (not Merchants) it would be found that near
one Half of them are out of that Country. I appeal to such English as have been
in Holland, and especially at Leiden, whether this Assertion be not manifestly
true there, and those that have duly observed, what great Numbers of
Foreigners, pass only from the Northern parts (so much despised by our Author)
by the way of Hamborough to Amsterdam, and from thence over Brussels to Paris,
will, I believe, scarce question what I said before, concerning the Number of
Foreigners in France. I very well remember, that during the time of some Years,
I was at Leiden, I have often with great delight observed, how they used to
come thither from the most remote Parts, as Prussia, Courland, Livonia, Sweden
and Denmark, (though most of those Countries have their own Universities) and
with great Expense endeavor to correct the Remnants of their home-breeding so
common and mischievous to most Countries. If our Author had followed their
laudable Example, and made his own Observations, instead of writing by hearsay
(as he needs must have done) he would not so easily have undertaken to assert
such a notorious Untruth. As that in other Countries, perhaps Princes and Men
of the first Quality, but few of the midling Sort (for want of Means) venture
upon it. He that will believe this, must be very little acquainted with the
Affluence of the Fortunes of the Venetians, Genueses and Florentines, and the
Dutch are so near us, that no body, but who is purblind may see the Effects of
their Wealth. And though is is not to be denied, but that the German Nobility,
by that Civil War which lasted twenty Years, and was not ended till with the
Peace of Munster, and by other foreign Wars since, has been miserably afflicted
in their Fortunes: Yet the Patricians and Inhabitants of so great a Number of
large and populous Cities, as are to be found on the most famous Rivers, the
Rhine, Danube, Elbe, Weser, and others, have fared much better, and the Damages
sustained have been sooner repaired in that Country, than in most others, by
the great Plenty there is of every thing. Even the Pomp and Multitude of their
Courts, and numerousness of their Armies, for which the Germans have been
blamed long since, are the constant Nurseries of a great many Noble Families,
who raise themselves great Estates, and put out generally their ready Money in
the neighboring great Cities, from whence the Citizens draw as great Advantage
in their Trade; and the Nobility is thereby enabled in time of Want, either to
uphold or to restore the Grandeur of their Families. I know my self, that about
twenty Years ago, a certain Minister of State to the Duke of Holstein Gottorp,
(who is none of the most Potent in those Parts) was esteemed to leave in real
and personal Estate to the Value of 500000 l. viz. to three Sons, who have laid
the Foundation to so many Rich and Noble Families. Notwithstanding all this, we
may without detracting from other Countries say, That the English in general
enjoy as great Conveniences for traveling, as any Nation whatsoever. Our
Situation in the Middle of the most flourishing and civilized Nations of
Europe, and the continual Correspondence we have by our Trade in those parts,
is, (besides the Affluence of our Fortunes) no small Encouragement to an
English Traveller. But the Goodness of our Money, which exceeds much the
current Money of a great many other Nations, is an Advantage which a great many
Foreigners who live remote from us, and are obliged to lose by their Bills from
20 to 30 per cent. would be very glad of.

But that we may not travel beyond out reach, let us see what he farther says
concerning Traveling. The Method which has been generally followed by us, in
sending young Gentlemen to travel, can hardly answer any of these Ends, etc. We
send them abroad Children, and bring them home great Boys; and the Returns they
make for the Expenses laid out by their Parents, are suitable to their Age,
etc. Bu^ the Traveling here recommended is that of Men, who set out so well
stocked with the knowledge of their own Country, as to be able to compare it
with others, etc. Here Here our Author pretends to instruct us how to travel
with Profit; but in such general Terms, that I am sure he that does not know it
without it, will scarcely ever learn it from those Rules. He would have done
very well to have explained what he meant by Children, great Boys, and Men,
since the first are the most improper for traveling, and very seldom either in
this or other Countries sent abroad; and with the latter, if overgrown with
Home-Education, it proves very often near as ineffectual as the first. But though
I cannot well guess what he means by his great Boys; if he understands those of
a middle Age, betwixt Childhood and Manhood, I think they are the most fit to
answer in general the Ends of Traveling. The practice of those Countries
beyond Sea, where Traveling is most in fashion, has sufficiently confirmed,
That the Age of Twenty, or thereabouts, is the most suitable for the first
sending abroad of young People, it being the Age when young Men, first well
instructed at home in the Principles of such several Professions as they intend
to apply themselves to, may well prepared, and yet not too much pre-possessed
with the knowledge of the Constitution and Manners of their own Country,
gradually improve themselves by Traveling. This Rule I have observed to be
generally followed in Europe, and especially in Germany; where, as they travel
most, so they may serve as a Pattern to such as intend to travel with any
Benefit. After they have well instructed their Children in public Schools,
(which are to be found in every City there,) in the Latin Tongue, and
Principles of Philosophy, till coming to the Age of 18. or 19. Years, they
commonly send them to some neighboring University, as well to be further
instructed in several Sciences, and in such Profession as they intend to
embrace; as also to begin to improve themselves in bodily Exercises, as
Fencing, Dancing, Riding the Great Horse, and in Foreign Languages, especially
the French, and Italian Tongues. Thus prepared, they leave Germany, and for the
most part making some stay, either in the several Universities of the United
Provinces, at Leiden, Utrecht, or Groningen; or else in the chiefest Cities,
they endeavor to perfect their Knowledge of such several things as they were
instructed in before. From hence the common Road used to be to France; (some
taking a small Turn into England,) where having staid a considerable time,
sufficient fully to accomplish themselves in the said Tongue, and in such
Exercises as are taught there in great Perfection, they either go straitways
from thence; or else passing through Italy, return into Germany; and taking in
their way the chiefest Courts of the Empire, are then, if they have not
wilfully neglected themselves, esteemed duly qualified to make a true
Comparison betwixt the Excellencies and Deficiencies of their own and other
Countries. So that all we pretended to, says the Author, by the late
Revolution, bought with so great Expenses, (yet not too dearly paid for) was to
be as we were, and that every one should have his own again; the effecting of
which may be called a piece of good Luck; and that is the best can be said of
it. That in our late happy Revolution, Providence seemed to have a particular
Share, is what every body that loves his Country, and this Government, does
willingly own: But that at the best, it should only be a piece of good Luck, I
am to learn yet. As I am well assured that the most sensible Men agree in this
Point, That Providence in our Days acts by Human Means, and not by Miracles;
That what is commonly called good Luck, is generally the Product of such
Counsels and Designs, as are often not so evident to vulgar Eyes: So I cannot
sufficiently admire, that this Gentleman, who has taken upon him the Office of
a Censor of Foreign, and a Reformer of these Nations, should either be
ignorant, or so soon forgetful of the unparallelled Valor, and uncommon Wisdom
of his present Majesty, which was so apparent to all Europe, that I think he
might have with Justice, and a due Respect, mentioned it here. Truly, if by his
Majesty's particular Wisdom, those extraordinary Preparations, as were
requisite for such an Enterprise, had not been carried on with that Vigor and
Silence, in a Country where it seemed most difficult to be effected, that even
the quick-sighted French were deceived; if by his indefatigable Care, the
number of such Forces as were designed for this Expedition, had not been timely
supplied by the German Auxiliaries: If at last by his incomparable Valor and
Constancy, he had not surmounted the very Obstacles of a far advanced Season,
contrary Winds, and Tempests, which would have withheld any Body but Him: I
believe we would before now have been in despair of good Luck in that kind; and
our Gentleman would have had no great Encouragement for such a Preface. And it
is Riddle to me, since every body has his own again, and enjoys it under the
Legal Government of a Wise and Brave King, with the Assistance of the great
Council of the Nation, why some among us should be so busy to vent their
State-reforming Speculations, except they labor on purpose to entail upon us
that Sarcasm which our Author mentions, of the most inconstant Nation in the
World. These are his Words: But must frequent Blood-letting be indispensibly
necessary to preserve our Constitution? Is it not possible for us to render
vain and untrue, that Sarcasm of Foreigners, who object to us, That our English
Kings have either too much Power, or too little, and that therefore we must
expect no settled or lasting Peace? Shall we for ever retain the ill Character
they give us, of the most mutable and inconstant Nation of the World, which
however we do not deserve, no more than England does that of Regnum Diabolorum,
so common in unconsidering Foreigners Mouths. Methinks a Method to preserve our
Commonwealth in its legal State of Freedom, without the necessity of a Civil
War once or twice every Age, were a benefit worth searching for, though we went
to the furthest Corners of the World in quest of it. No Question that such a
Method would not only be worth sear^hing for, but also the most desirable
thing in the World^ But what Method may be the most proper to effect it is the
Difficulty. This I am sure, the Methods which some of our Tavern or
Coffee-house Politicians have taken of late, will not answer the Ends of such a
Settlement. As I frequently converse among Foreigners, so it has often vexed me
to the Soul, to hear what Judgment they will make of our Transactions here; not
but that I often have found it too true: yet it could not but grieve me, that
the whole Nation should bear the blame of a certain Gang of People among us,
who being infected with the Vanity of their own Conceits, (like to those
afflicted with the Yellow Jaundice, to whom Objects are represented under the
same Color as their Eyes are infected withal) spread their corrupted Opinions
abroad, to the great Dishonor and Detriment of the whole Nation. The Character
of Regnum Diabolorum I have very seldom heard, and never, except from such as
were very unconsidering indeed; but as for that of inconstant and most mutable;
I must confess, it is common among Foreigners, even of the best Sense. And for
the Love of God, what milder Construction can any Body make of the Behavior of
such, as, pretending to be the Champions of our Government, revive (in their
Pamphlets) the almost forgotten Names of Whig and Tory, on purpose to renew at
the same time those Jealousies, which within these few Years had brought this
Nation to the very Brink of Destruction. How can we expect, but that not only
Foreigners, but also all understanding Men among us, should look upon such as
worse than inconstant, and mutable, who can so soon forget the past Dangers,
and neglect their present Happiness?

Lucius AEmilius, Live. Hist Romans lib. 44. c. 22.
the Roman Consul, could not forbear in a public Speech which he made to the
Romans, when going to the Macedonian War against Perse^s, to reproach them with
the Liberty they took of leading Armies into the Field, and censuring the
Actions of their Generals over their Liquors at Rome; and what wonder is it, if
it seems the most surprising thing in the World to Foreigners, when they see
some petty State-reformers among us in their Pamphlets to take upon them, and
challenge an Authority in gross terms, and with bitter Reflections, Dialogue
betwixt Whigg and Tory.
to censure not only the Actions of Ministers of State, but also of His Majesty
himself, and the Parliament also, sometimes, if every thing does not exactly
agree with their conceited Rules of governing; and that at a time when both
King, and the grand Council of the Nation are mutually laboring for the
Repose, and Happiness of those Kingdoms. I would ask any body of common Sense,
if one, who has perhaps from others only learned the Rules of Navigation, and
peept a little into the Sea-cards, should pretend to instruct old Commanders of
Ships (how to steer with Advantage, how to avoid such hidden Banks as lay
scattered up and down near several Coasts, and how to manage a Ship in case of
Tempests: would not he deservedly be laughed at by every body, and whether
those, who should trust a Ship to his Management, would not be esteemed to be
out of their wits? Yet these C^amber-Politicians find their Admirers here, and
are vain enough to imagine, that they could manage the Helm of our Government
better than those to whom the same by our Laws is committed, and have given
sufficient proof both of their Fidelity and Ability. And here I cannot forbear
to insert what is related of that great General of the Carthaginians Hannibal,
because it seems to agree in most of its Circumstances, with what I have said
before. Hannibal in the time of his Banishment from Carthage, came to Ephesus,
where at that time was a Famous Philosopher Phormio, much admired, especially
by the Ephesians. Among other diversions wherewith they entertained Hannibal,
they would by all means invite him to hear their so much beloved Philosopher.
Hannibal at last over-perswaded by the Ephesians, went to be entertained with
his Discourse, where the Philosopher with abundance of Rhetoric, begun to make
a long and tedious Sermon of Military Affairs, and the Duty of a General, to
the great content of the Ephesians. The Oration at last being ended, Hannibal
was asked by them, what he thought of their Philosopher, to whom he replied
very freely, that he had in his Lifetime seen a great many old Dottrels, but
had never met with one that was so raving-mad as this old Fellow; which Answer
coming from so great a Man, it is said, put them a little out of Countenance,
but not out of conceit of their Doctor. But to return to our Author^ who,
having attributed our not traveling of late Years to the management of the two
last Reigns, says further thus: It Is not very long ago, since nothing was more
generally believed (even by Men of the best Sense) than that the Power of
England was so unquestionably established at Sea, that no force could possibly
shake it. That the English Valor and Manner of fighting was so far beyond all
others, that nothing was more desirable, than a French War. Should any one have
been so regardless of his Reputation, as at that time to have represented the
French an over-match for the united Forces of England, and Holland, or have
said, that we should live to see our selves insulted on our own Coasts, and our
Trades endangered by them; That we should be in apprehension every Year of an
Invasion, and French Conquest: Such a venturesome Man must have expected to
have passed for a very Travellour, or at least for an ill-natured or unthinking
Person, who little considered what the irresistible Force of an English Arm
was; but our late Experience has reclaimed us from these Mistakes. It were to
be wished, that our late Experience, though never so dearly bought, had qui^e
rooted out so vulgar an Error among us, which had almost proved fatal to these
Kingdoms. But the ignorance of foreign Affairs, the fondness of our own
irresistible Strength, and the want of duly comparing the same with that of our
Enemies, seems not by late Experience it self quite extinguished among some,
who fancy themselves no small Politicians. How many are to be found to this
Day, who vainly boast, that we are not so near concerned in this War, as the
rest of the Allies; that the Sea is a sufficient Bulwark against any Attempts
from France upon us; nay that upon all occasions we are able alone to beat the
French by Sea and Land, without the Assistance of our Allies. This vain Belief
of our own Strength, was the Trap which the French twenty Years ago, when first
they began to bid fair for the universal Monarchy, knew how to make good use
of, to catch us withal at their own time. I remember very well, that coming
some time before the Peace at Nimuegen, out of France: and having had an
opportunity to pass along the Rhine, and afterward through Flanders, where the
Seat of the War then lay: I at my Return hither, would often relate to my
Friends what I thought, and had as an Eye witness, observed concerning the
Strength of France; who, (though else no Favorers of the Court at that time)
were so far from making any reflection upon that matter, that they rather
looked upon it as a false Notion, and the vain Effect of Traveling; so deeply
had this flattering Fancy taken root among the Generality of our Nation here.
At those times it must be confessed, this Opinion might be perhaps excusable,
but I cannot see, under what Color some, who have seen so formidable a French
Fleet a few Years ago in our Chanel, and the Armies of France out number us
almost every where last Year, can pretend to scatter their Pamphlets at this
time, full of vain Suppositions of this Nature. But we must return to our
Author, who by the Example of the Ecclesiastics, encourages us to Traveling
in these words. The Jesuits have brought several Maxims, as well as Sums of
Money from as far off as China, or Japan, thereby improving their Knowledge,
etc. These Men, (whose firm Adherence to the most exquisite Tyranny is
manifest, by their indefatigable Endeavors, in behalf of the French King's
Interests, as formerly of the House of Austria, whilst it was in its Height)
have by these Arts engrossed to themselves, the Education of the Youth, in all
Popish Countries. The Lutheran Priests (who have an entire Dependence on their
Kings and Princes) are entrusted with the like, in those Countries, which
observe the Confession of Ausburg. They also send abroad some of their
hopefullest young Students, several of which may be met with at Oxford,
Cambridge and Paris: The use they make of Travel, being not only to improve
their Knowledge in Sciences, but to learn fit Methods to please their
Sovereigns, at the Expense of the Peoples Liberties, etc. And a little further:
But the same Travel will afford the best Antidote against this Poison, and
teach a Gentleman, who makes right use of it, by what S^eps slavery has within
these last 200 Years crept upon Europe; most of the Protestant, as well as
Popish Countries, having in a manner quite lost the precious Jewel, Liberty.
This cannot be attributed to any more probable Cause, than the enslaving the
Spirits of the People, as a Preparative to that of their Bodies. For since
these Princes think it their Interest, that Subjects should obey without
Reserve, and all Priests who depend upon the Prince, are, for their own sakes,
obliged to promote what he esteems his own Interest, it is plain, the Education
of Youth, on which is laid the very Foundation Stone of public Liberty, has
been of late Years committed to the sole management of such as make it their
business to undermine it; and must needs do so, unless they will be false to
their Fortunes, and make the Character of Priest give place to that of true
Patriot, etc. Indeed they do not forget to recommend to them frequently, what
they call the Queen of all Virtues, viz. Submission to Superiors, and an entire
blind Obedience to Authority, without instructing them in the due measures of
it; rather teaching them, that it is without all Bounds. And in the Conclusion
of the Treatise he has these Words, which we will insert here, because they
are of the same Stamp. p. 258, 260, 261, 262.
It has been a great Mistake among us, That the Popish Religion is the only one
of all the Christian Sects, proper to introduce and establish Slavery in a
Nation; in so much that Popery and Slavery have been thought inseparable. Not
to derogate from the Merit of the Roman Catholic Persuasion, which has been
the Darling of so many Monarchs upon that Account, I shall make bold to say,
That other Religions, and particularly the Lutheran, has succeeded as
effectually in this Design as ever Popery did. It Is confessed indeed, That
Popery would certainly introduce Slavery; but it is denied, That the last
cannot come in without the assistance of the former, etc. In Denmark, as well
as other Protestant Countries in the North, through the entire and sole
dependence of the Clergy upon the Prince, without the interfering of the
Authority of any Spiritual Superior, such as that of the Pope among the
Romanists, through their Principles and Doctrines, which are those of unlimited
Obedience; through the Authority they have with the common People, Slavery
seems to be more absolutely established than it is in France, as in effect it
is more practiced; for that King's Subjects are better treated. And a little
after: But in the Countries I have spoken of, all is swallowed up in the King,
Temporals and Spirituals, Soul, Body, Estate, and Conscience: The Army and the
Priests are Two sure Cards; the Prince that has one of them at his side can
hardly fail; but he that has both depending on him, need fear nothing from his
own Subjects, let him use them never so ill. Here is a general Charge against
the whole Body of the Clergy (except the Calvinists and their Proselytes,
because the English have their Share by and by) concerning the Miseries that
have befallen Europe these Two hundred Years: These (he says) by the abuse they
make of Traveling, corrupt the Youth, of whom they have sole Management;
these, by their entire dependence they have from their Princes; and, by their
Doctrine and Principles, sow the Seeds of Slavery among the People. Thus runs
the Stream of our Author's Eloquence.

But what if we should endeavor to stop the Current? What if the Doctrine of
the Roman Catholics, and especially the Principles of the Jesuits, should
prove rather dangerous than advantageous to absolute Monarchy? If we should
prove, that the entire and sole dependence of the Lutheran Priests from their
Princes, is a Chimera of his own? That they neither have in general, the
Education of their Youth; neither that their Principles and Doctrine are for a
blind unlimited Obedience: That as it is against the Interest of the
Ecclesiastics in those Parts where that Religion flourishes, to suppress the
Liberties, and undermine the Welfare of the People, so it is absolutely false,
That Spirituals and Temporals are swallowed up by their Help or Connivence: And
if this Foundation falls, will not his Doctrine seem to be built upon a very
slippery or sandy Ground? This Gentleman must surely have been very little
acquainted with the History of the Reformation in those Parts, and the
Constitutions of the Empire; as also how often the Protestant Religion there,
together with the Government, has been asserted by Arms against the Emperor,
and all other Aggressors, with the Approbation of the Lutherans, both Priests
and Lawyers. If this had not been convincing enough to our Author, he would
have done well to have looked a little into their and Writings before he
undertook to put Books such Falsities upon the world. But since this Gentleman
has taken upon him the Authority of a Judge, let us see by what Laws he has
condemned the poor Lutherans. And since it is certain that he ought to condemn
them by none but their own, we must look a little back into their Monuments, to
see how they do agree with our Author's Assertion. It is evident, that at the
beginning of the Reformation, Luther and his Associates, had all the Reason in
the World to be cautious in the Doctrine of Obedience, as well to avoid the
Slanders and Reproaches of the Roman Catholics; but espeeially not to open a
Gare to the Licentiousness of some, who they foresaw would take an opportunity
to abolish, together with their Religion, the very Constitution and Order of
Government. And the several Sects of Fanatics, but more especially that cruel
Rebellion in Germany, (commonly called, The Peasants War) were evident Proofs,
that their foresight had not been ill grounded. But let us but cast but one
Eye upon some of their Writings, and we may easily see, that they savor not so
much of blind and unlimited Obedience, as our Author would make us believe. And
to begin with the Sentiments of those very Divines who lived partly at the same
time, partly succeeded in the same place where Luther had begun the
Reformation, and ever since have been very strictly adhering to his Doctrine.
Concilia Theologica Witten^errica Francofurt ad Moenum.
The Councils of the Divines at Wirtemberg, from the time of the Reformation,
till the Year 1664. (when they were reprinted) and dedicated to the present
King of Denmark's Father, after that Crown was become Hereditary,) and also to
the then Electoral Prince of Saxony, will doubtless be accepted of by all
unbiased Persons, as a Rule whereby to judge of the Limits the Lutherans have
set to Obedience. I have therefore thought convenient to translate some
Passages relating to this Point, out of the High German Tongue, and to insert
them as a Pattern of the Lutherans Doctrine of Obedience.

Upon a Question put, Whether Magistrates are obliged to defend themselves and
their Subjects against an unlawful Force, against Princes of an equal Degree,
and against the Emperor, especially in point of Religion; Martin Luther,
Justus Jonas, Martin Bucer, Page 94
and Philip Melancthon, with joint Consent, did answer: That it was an
unquestionable Truth, which ought to be confessed at the last Minute, even till
Death; that it is not only permitted, but also truly and strictly commanded,
that all in Authority owe to God Almighty this Service, to repel all Violence
from themselves, and defend their Subjects against such, as either intended to
impose Idolatry, or a false Religion upon them, or pretended to exercise an
illegal Power over them. And, as the Gospel does confirm (say they) the
Authority of Magistrates; so it does no less confirm the Laws of Nature, and
Constitutions of Governments. There is no question, every Father is obliged to
the utmost of his Power to preserve his Wife, and Children from public
Murder, and there is no difference betwixt a common Murderer and the
Emperor, if he, out of the way of his Office, notoriously exercises an illegal
Power; because open violence takes away all obligation betwixt the Subject, and
the superior Magistrate, jure naturae

So it is the same case if a Superior Magistrate forces his Subjects to
Blasphemy, and Idolatry: so did Constantine wage War with Licinius, because he
would not desist from his Tyranny, though he exercised the same in his own
Territories, All this, as we have said, is without question just, and according
to the Rules of Christianity, which we ought to profess at all times of Danger,
and Death it self. Yet is this not to be understood, but in the defensive Part.

And immediately after, in the Considerations and Instructions concerning what
resistance is permitted; Martin Luther, Justus Jonas, John Bugenhagen, Nicolas
Ambsdorff, and Philip Melancthon, say thus: Concerning this Article, there have
been frequent and hard Disputes among us, but this day we are agreed; That, the
Gospel being a Doctrine of the Eternal Spiritual Kingdom which is in the Heart,
does not reject the outward Form of Government, but rather confirms, and
praises the same: From whence does follow, That the Gospel does not forbid any
natural and just Defense, such as is suitable either to the Laws of Nature, or
Constitutions of a Government, etc. From whence it is evident, that every
Magistrate is obliged to defend his Subjects against others of the same Degree,
or any private Person. But here arises another question, Viz. What is the Duty
of a Prince against his Superior Lord, as the Emperor, in such a Case? To
which we give the same Answer: Because the Gospel confirms Temporal
Governments; therefore every Prince ought to behave himself toward his
Superior Lord, or the Emperor, according to the natural Right, and temporal
Constitutions of the Government. If the Emperor is not a proper Judge, and yet
will, as pendente appellatione, undertake to punish; such his violent Attempt
is, injuria notoria. Now is by a natural Constitution of Governments,
Self-defence, and Resistance against injuriam notoriam is allowable. Wherefore
if the Emperor should act violently, pendente appellatione, concerning Matters
of Religion, or the Peace promised; he is to be esteemed as a private Person,
and the injuria undertaken against the Right of the Appeal, and the promised
Peace, is a public and notoria injuria. But what if the Appeal is passed the
Council? What if Judgment is given according to the imperial Laws, and we are
cast? Can we then with a safe Conscience openly resist our Supreme Lord?
Answer, After we have in a decent, and Christian like manner declared, that we
are willing this Matter should be examined and adjusted, and have clearly
proved the Foundations upon which we have built our Doctrine; and yet the
Council goes on in its illegal way of proceeding, contrary to the very
Foundation of natural Equity, and the Ordinances set down in the Scripture,
viz. That not the contrary Side, but the whole Christian Church is the sole
Judge, all the Proceedings are void; and as it is not to be esteemed a Council,
so the Appeal remains in its due Force. And whatsoever is violently undertaken,
by virtue of such Proceedings, is in truth a public Violence, and notoria
injuria. And suppose, the Pope should seem not to be so violent in his
Proceedings, yet by virtue of his Sentences, endeavor to establish Idolatry,
and commit public Injuries; we believe that it is the Prince's Right to
oppose, and defend themselves against the same.

And to clear this point the better, it will, I think, not be amiss to insert
here also the Answer, which was given by Martin Luther, Justus Jonas, Philip
Melanc thon, George Spalatin, and other Divines, to the Instructions of the
Lawyers at Wittenbergh, concerning Resistance. These are their words: A Paper
has been delivered to us, out of which we see, what the Opinion is of the
Doctors in the Law concerning the question: In what cases it is allowable to
resist the Magistracy. Now because these cases are determined by the Doctors,
and others skilled in the Laws; and we certainly are at this time under such
Circumstances, as will allow us (as they prove) to resist our Superior Powers;
and we having always taught, that temporal Rights should remain in their due
Force and Vigor, we cannot contradict it out of the Scripture, but that we may
defend our selves, if it were against the Emperor's own Person or whoever else
should act under his Authority. And because we are a^ present in great danger,
which seem^ to increase every Day, whereby may happen a sudden Necessity of
Resistance; it will not be amiss not only for our Laws, but also for Conscience
sake, to prepare and arm our selves against any Attempts, which may be made
upon us; as it seems very likely that according to all Circumstances the like
may easily befall us. For what we have hitherto taught concerning not resisting
the higher Powers; we were not sufficiently instructed, that the Laws did allow
it, to whom we also have always taught, that Obedience ought to be given.



And when afterward the Protestant Princes clearly apprehended an Invasion
from the Roman Catholic Party, and especially from the Emperor Charles the V^
Martin Luther, John Bugenhagen, Caspa^ Cruciges, George Major, and Philip
M^lancthon, did not only approve the Protestant League made at Smalkald, but
also the four last, Anno 1546, gave concerning the War against the Emperor,
this following Answer: When we are once certain that the Emperor intends to
attack the States, by reason of their Religion, there is no doubt, the States
have a Right to defend themselves, and their Adherents, etc. Such a Defense is
the same, as if you defended your self against so many Murderers, whether they
be headed by the Emperor or any body else; because the Act is a public
Tyranny, and notoria violentia. And what we may expect from the Spaniards,
Italians, and Burgundians; the Country of Juliers, can and may serve us as an
Example. Wherefore every Inhabitant ought to venture his Life to resist such
Tyranny. And in this case it is also true, that the Prevention it self is just
and allowable, provided we are certain, the Emperor has resolved to invade the
States.



I could have translated a great many more the like Cases; but as the rest have
all followed the Footsteps of those abovenamed Divines, who were the first and
chiefest in the Work of Reformation; so I thought these sufficient to show, how
far different the Principles and Doctrine of the Lutherans, were from a blind
and unlimited Obedience, wherewith our Author so boldly charges them. But that
it may not be objected that our Age has perhaps altered the Opinion of the
Lutheran Divines; Vid. Georgii Dedekennii Thesaurum consilior. Theol. and
jurid. Edit. per Job. Ernest. Gerhard. Jen. 1671.
I will, (besides what may be seen in the abovementioned Book) give you the
Opinion of one of the most famous Lutheran Divines of our Age, Dr. John
Gerhard, in his own Words: Distinguunt, says he, Politici Scriptores (1) inter
Principes Majestatis integrae and potestatis absolutae, qui absolutum Imperium
in subditos obtinent, nec tenentur certis quibusdam pactis, conventis vel
legibus regni fundamentalibus, expressa promissione obstricti; and inter
Principes potestatis limitatae, and pactis, conventis inter ipsos and proceres
regni initis circumscriptae, cui distinctioni respondet ea, quae statuitur
inter subditos meros and mixtos, (2) inter offensionem and defensionem.
Principibus, quorum potestas est limitata, ab illis, qui non sunt mere subditi,
ab ordinibus scilicet regni, resisti, ac violentiam eorum armata manu repelli
posse disputant, id quod sequentibus confirmari posset argumentis. 1. A
Magistratus officio: Magistratui incumbit, subditos contra injustam
oppressionem tueri, ut superius fuit demonstratum. Jam vero ordines regni in
regno electivo, ad quod non nisi certis conditionibus caput est evectum, sunt
loco Magistratus. Non enim sunt mere subditi, sed partem potestatis in
electione summi capitis sibi reservarunt. 2. A Juris naturalis praescripto.
Defensio sui omni jure Divino, scilicet naturali and civili est concessa; Ergo
licet ordinibus regni contra injustam oppressionem se and subditos defendere.
3. Ex mutuae obligationis modo. Ex contractibus nascitur mutua and reciproca
obligatio. Jam vero inter Principem potestatis restrictae, and Ordines regni
electivi talis contractus fuit initus, ut Princeps in leges regni fundamentales
prius juraverit, antequam Ordines, regni nomine, omnium subditorum fidem ipsi
darent. Quod si ergo Princeps ab hoc contractu discedit, Ordines regni ab
obedientiae promissione ipso jure absolvuntur. 4. Ex axiomate Theologico, quod
Evangelium non aboleat politias. Jam vero ad statuta and jura politica hoc
ipsum pertinet, quod Ordines regni vi contractus initi, Magistratui libere
electo, and contra promissionem and sidem datam agenti resistere possint. Vid.
Lutherum Tom. 7. Germanic. Jenensi. Fol. 389. 5. A paritatis judicio. Sicut
principes aberrantes ministri Ecclesiae verbo possunt arguere, consiliarii
sanis consiliis in viam eos revocare: Sic ordines Regni, quibus datus est a Deo
gladius, vi armata ipsius conatibus possunt resistere. 6. Ex probatorum
exemplorum testimonio, 2 Reg. 11. Jojadas deponit Athaliam, 1 Maccab. 2. and
seqq. Judas and reliqui Maccabaei resistunt Antiocho. Constantinus oppugnavit
Licinium, collegam in imperic, Christianos^ persequentem. B. Lutherus in
Scripto ad pastorem Tom. 7. Germ. Jnenesi, fol. 386. addit duo alia exempla,
quod populus restiterit Sauli Jonathanem interficere cupienti, I Sam. 14.
quodque Ahicam and alii principes Israelitici restiterint Regi Jojakim Jeremiam
ad internecionem quaerenti. 7. Ex consequente absurdo. Si ordinibus Regni
denegaretur potestas contra injustam violentiam se ac suos desendendi,
consequens foret, non esse discrimen inter Principes, qui absolutam and
integram obtitinent potestatem, and inter eos, quorum potestas est limitata and
circumscripta, nec esse discrimen inter mere subditos, and eos, qui sunt in
partem potestatis recepti, ac quibus cura boni publici ex part adhuc incumbit,
promissionem illam quam Princeps ante evectionem ad Regnum Ordinibus praestet
nullius esse momenti, cum pro arbitrio ab ea discedere, nec ad impletionem
ejusdem cogi possit, electionem boni principis intuitu boni publici susceptam,
in extremum Regni detrimentum vergere, cum libidini ejus nemo possit resistere.
8. Ex Theologorum and Jurisconsultorum suffragio. Lutherus, Bugenhagius, Justus
Jonas, Nicolaus Ambsdorfius, Georgius Spalatinus, Philippus Melancthon,
Casparus Cruciger, Georgius Major, Justus Menius, Christophorus Hoffmannus,
and^alii Theologi. Jurisconsulti Wittebergenses, Anno 31. Basilius Monnerus and
alii ex Politicis, defensionem sui ordinibus Regni licitam and concessam esse
censuerunt, ut constat ex Scriptis a Dom. Hortledero collectis Tom. 2. lib. 2.
de causis belli Germanici. Sed gravissimae hujus quaestionis decisionem
Theologorum and Jurisconsultorem Collegiis commit tendam, neque quidquam temere
pronunciandum esse dicimus.



Thus far concerning a limited Power: And though he seems afterward not
altogether to agree with the Opinion of such as allow Resistance in an absolute
Government; yet it is apparent enough, that his Arguments are rather intended
against the Jesuitical Principles, and such as makes every body a fit Judge of
the Limits of Obedience and Princely Office, than against all manner of
necessary self-defence, which, among others, may be seen out of these Words:
Cum satius sit a subditis hic peccari in defectu quam excessu, ac durissima
quaevis ab illis tolerari, quam praetextu defensionis principem, de quo
emendationis spes est de solio dejici, ideo Theologus rectius fecerit, si
populum Christianum subjugo tyrannico laborantem ad poenitentiam ac patientiam
hortetur, quam si vim armatam contra vindicis Dei flagella adhibendam esse
doceat. Non existimo negandum, (scribit Brentius in comment. in 1 Samuel 24.)
quin Davidi in regem divinitus electo Saulem tyrannidem exercentem tam
opportune in spelunca oblatum interficere licuerit; sed David maluit fequi,
quod aedificaret, quam quod liceret impune, etc. Et postea: Quod David
perpercit Sauli, magna laud dignum est, and docet, multo honestius esse and
utilius, ut ad evitanda offendicula de jure nostro aliquid remittamus, quam
summum jus prosequamur, etc.



I could not avoid inserting those Passages here, that thereby the Judicious
Reader might the better be able to judge of the Doctrine of the Lutherans
concerning Obedience; and how much the same differs from what our Author has
laid to their Charge; That both their Principles and Doctrine are for a blind
and unlimited Obedience, without instructing their Auditors in the due Measures
of it: And that they send some of their hopefullest young Students abroad, to
learn fit Methods to please their Sovereigns at the Expense of the Peoples
Liberty. It may perhaps be objected, That some of the Lutherans have tied the
Subjects to a much stricter sort of Obedience toward their Sovereigns. But to
this may be answered, That it is very unjust to charge a whole Body with the
Opinions of a few; besides, to those who have perused the Writings of the most
zealous Lutheran Champions for Obedience to Sovereigns, it will be evident
enough, that even these have put Bounds to the same, and always submitted their
Judgment in this Case to the Laws and Constitutions of the Government. I could
give a great many Instances of this kind; but not to be too tedious in a matter
already sufficiently proved, I will only add a few Passages out of an Author,
who living at this Day in the very Resident's place of the King of Denmark;
Hector. Gothofred. Masii Theol. D. and Prof. P. in acad. Hafn. Interesse
Principum circa religionem Evangelicam ad sereniss. ac potentiss Daniae Regem.
Hafniae. 1687
and having dedicated his Treatise to that King himself, is generally thought to
have strained this point of Obedience as high as ever any Lutheran Divine did;
from whence it may appear, whether in the North it self, Spirituals and
Temporals, Soul and Body (as our Author says) are swallowed up in their
Princes, and the Lutheran Priests have their sole and entire dependence from
them. These are his Words in his Dedication to the King.

Nam ut reliqua taceam, quantis laudibus efferendum illud est, quod cum non ita
pridem sanctissimis, aequissimisque legibus Jus Daniae nostrae auctum esse
volueris, primo loco, velut fundamentum juris and felicitatis civium
Augustanam. Confessionem ponas, a qua vel latum unguem recedere nec parentibus
fas sit, nec Imperanti. Facile enim, quae tua est prudentia, animadvertis; ita
Majestatis tuae causam cum gloria Dei conjunctam esse, ut, nisi salva
Religione, salva atque tuta esse non possit. And p. 66. Quare nec Magistratui
quidem competit illud exterius jurisdictionis Ecclesiasticae, ut vocant,
exercitium: Examinare, consecrare, ordinare futuros Ecclesiae ministros. Et
falsum est, per Transactionem Passaviensem vel Pacem Religionis, inter Status
Romani Imperii sancitam, in Magistratum Civilem translata haec esse, aut
transferri potuisse, ut nonnulli putant. Distincta sunt ordinis Ecclesiastici
and politici munia, jura, officia; and quemadmodum Sacerdotibus nihil in
politicis, ita and Principibus nullum in Spiritualibus jus competit. p. 67.
Quamvis enim vocare and constituere Doctores ac Ministros Ecclesiae non minus
etiam ad summos imperantes spectet, quam ad reliqua Ecclesiae membra, imo
potius cum quadam (...) ad eos pertinere videatur, qui praecipuum Ecclesiae
membrum constituunt ac utriusque tabulae legis custodes and nutritii audiun^,
nihilominus tamen nec solius Magistratus est vocare Ecclesiae Ministros,
exclusis reliquis statibus, neque ipsa illa vocatio divinae potestati docendi
and administrandi Sacramenta, quid quam humani admiscet, ut superiorum
autoritate suffulta tantum videri debeat Doctorum Ecclesiae Autoritas. And in
his Animadversions ( a) he says thus: 'De vocatione ministrorum Ecclesiae duo
extrema sunt, inter quae medium tenet Orthodoxia Lutheranorum, nequid vel
ambitioni clericali, vel libidini Principum indulgeatur, sed omnia ordine,
decenter and juxta primitivae Ecclesiae ritum procedant. Caeterum quod jus
vocandi Ecclesiae ministros attinet, divisum illud esse inter tres status, and
ad totam Ecclesiam spectare, toties probarunt nostrates Theologi, ut ea opera
nunc quidem supersedere possim. Disceptari etiam illud solet, anne status
Ecclesiasticus, aut Oeconomicus renunciare juri suo possit, atque illud tacito
quodam consensu delegare Senatui aut Magistratui Seculari. Cujus quaestionis
negativam partem tuetur B. Hulsemannus. And p. 69. he gives us the Opinion of
the famous Puffendorf, in his Book De habitu Religionis Christianae ad vitam
civilem; who says thus: Sed Doctores Ecclesiae ut 'tales, non sunt proprie
officiales Regis sed sunt servi Christi ac ministri Ecclesiae, non Civitatis.
And p. 73. he goes thus on: Male alias apud pontificios audit ministerium
Lutheranorum; eo potissimum nomine, quod omnia Jura sua ac Privilegia divina
and humana Magistratui politico resignet, ab ejus nutu, imperio and voluntate
totum pendeat, adeo ut nulla ipsi nisi parendi gloria relicta sit, sive in
doctrina ipsa sive in legibus quicquam mutari, consultum imperantibus videatur.
In quem finem exprobrare etiam nobis solent illud in Germania tritum dicterium:
Cujus est Regio, illius and est Religio; quasi ex hypothesi Lutheranae
Religionis integrum sit Principi de rebus fidei pro lubitu decernere, quidquid
pro varia temporum and utilitatis publicae ratione visum placitumque fuerit.
Sed calumnia haec est curiae Romanae, eoque a^rocior, quod in nostris
principiis, ne quidem suspicionis locum invenit. Scilicet didicere Evangelici
aequa lance metiri Principum and Ecclesiae jura, nec divellere ea, quae
Christus conjuncta esse voluit: Date Caesari, quae sunt Caesaris, and Deo quae
Dei. Quod si forte contingat nonnunquam Magistratum jure suo in praejudicium
ordinis Ecclesiastici abuti, id non magis doctrinae nostrae imputandum est,
quam omnes alii abusus, scandala and vitia Protestantium, quae toto ore atque
pectore detestatu Ecclesia nostra. Caeteroquin fore putandum non est, ut
illisplaceat alienaeservitu it is jugum, quia tyrannide cleri in libertatem tam
fortiter sese asseruerunt, vel ut aequis oculis aspiciant (...) qui (...)
quondam far non potue runt. But in his 6. Chap. p. 166. he says plainly, That
the Augsburg Confession is the Foundation of the Danish Monarchy. Hac occasion
non possum satis depraedicare Juris Danici sanctimoniam, and cum vera religione
intimam connexionem, quam vel primum caput statim in limine prodit his verbis.
Kongen haver og eene hoyeste Magt over ald Clerisiet fra den hoyeste til den
laveste, at beskikke oc anordne ald Kirk og Guds Tieniste, Mother, Sommenkomst
og Forsamlinger om Religions-Sager effter Guds Ordog den Augsburgiske
Confession, etc. Non potest igitur jus Daniae nostrae nisi cum vera religione
perennare, and si illam tollas, Augusti diadematis gloriam potentiamque imminui
necessum est. Pio igitur and prudenti consilio factum est, ut Augustana
Confessio legum nostrarum constitutionem ingrederetur tanquam certissimum
medium and valorem legibus conciliandi, and legislatoris summam and absolutam
Majestatem sarram tectamque conservandi. Numae Pompilii tempestate ancile
quoddam de coelo decidisse, Romana antiquitas fabulatur, unaque vocem editam
omnium potentissimam: Erit civitas, quamdiu illud manserit. Nec dissimile
responsum Trojanis de Palladio ex Oraculo Delphico datum ferunt: Ejus Civitatis
futurum esse exitium; si Palladis simulacrum, extra moenia portaretur; quo
effectum, ut cives summa cura and sollicitudine rem tanti momenti custodirent.
Non hic fabulas vel oracula memoramus, sed vocem seriam omniumque prudentum
confessione veram repetimus: Erit in Dania, summa and absoluta Majestas, quam
diu Lurana Religio manserit.

I am not ignorant that these latter words may bear a double Interpretation;
yet he that will duly compare the former Passages with the last, will easily
find out the Author's meaning to be, That the Lutheran Priests, as Priests,
have no entire dependence from their Magistrates, but that in Denmark the
Welfare of the Monarchy is inseparable from the maintaining of Augsburgh
Confession. And I admire how our Author, during his stay in Denmark, could be
so overseen, as no^ to enquire more strictly into this Point, before he
undertook to assert a thing of that nature with so much Confidence. As for the
Lutheran Priests in Germany, where that Religion chiefly flourishes, it is
certain, they have in the most places, much less dependence from their Princes;
since in the most Cities and Corporations there the Rights of Patronage are
either in the Magistrates, or else in the Congregation; sometimes jointly in
the Magistrates and Elders of the Parishes. In the Country some of them perhaps
belong to the Nobility, some to the Prince; and so do some Cathedrals; though a
great many Ministers in these latter are chosen by the Canons; and all their
yearly Salaries, Houses, and other Benefices, are ascertained to them out of
such Revenues or Lands as do properly belong and depend, not from the Prince,
but the several Cathedrals and Parish-Churches. Their Perquisites, which
especially in the Cities, commonly amount to more than their Salaries, and in
some places are very considerable, come from Buryings, Baptizing, Confessions,
Prayers in the Churches, and with the sick at their Houses, Marrying and
New-years-Gifts; all which as in those Parts they most absolutely depend on the
Peoples Liberality and Inclination, being rather established by Custom than any
Laws, I cannot see what Color our Author could have for his Assertion, that,
except they will resign the Character of Priest to that of true Patriot, and be
false to their Fortunes, they are obliged to assist their Princes in their
Arbitrary way of governing; it being manifest, that their Vocation (generally
speaking) and their Subsistence as Priests, depend from the People, rather than
their Princes; and they having also their Consistories where Ecclesiastical
Affairs are determined according to the Constitutions of the several Countries;
and in a great many Places Prelates, as Abbots, Priors, and Deans, who are
among the States in their several Countries, it is evident, that our Author's
supposed dependence, without the interfering of a Superior, such as the Pope
among the Romanists, betwixt the Lutheran Clergy and their Princes, is no^ so
dangerous either to the Priests or People, as our Author would fain p^rswade
us, on purpose to lay all the blame upon the Clergy. To effect this the better,
he tells us with a singular Confidence, That also the sole Management of the
Youth is committed to the care of the Lutheran Priests in those Countries,
which observe the Confession of Augsburgh; tho, most certainly nothing is more
contrary to the Truth. I will appeal to those who, as well as I, have made an
enquiry into this Matter, Whether in the public Schools of the Lutherans they
have not found Schoolmasters of other Professions as well as Divines; and though
they are not excluded from that Function, whether they ever were preferred
before others, as being Professors or Students of Divinity? The Nobility in the
Country, and Patritians in the Cities, generally have their Tutors or Domestic
Preceptors, for the Education of their Children (Boarding-Schools being rarely
to be found there;) in the choice of whom they are generally so far from
preferring Divines before others, that they seldom admit of them in that
Station. And when their Children come to the Age of Traveling, or going to the
Universities, it is a general Maxim among them, not to put the Tuition of
their young Men into the Hands of Divines, whose Profession obliging them to a
sedentary Life, and least of all others being accustomed to travel, they do not
reckon these so proper Instruments for the perfecting their Sons, and obtaining
the full ends of Traveling, as those of other Professions, who more frequently
apply themselves to it in those Parts. I am apt to believe that our Author may
be fallen partly into this Mistake, from the necessity and custom which
formerly had obtained in Denmark, when the Nobility having in their Hands all
Places of Profit and Trust; and their Constitution not requiring many Lawyers,
Divinity was the only Profession, out of which they were obliged to choose
persons for the Education of their Youth. But besides that Matters are much
altered since in Denmark, as to this Particular, it would have been but
prudence to have inquired more strictly into this Point, as to the Customs of
other Lutheran Countries, before he made it the Foundation Stone of his
Doctrine of Slavery.

If this Gentleman would have taken into due Consideration the Protestant
League made immediately after the Reformation at Smalkald; the ensuing War with
Charles the V. the Transactions at Passaw; That long and most cruel War which
was for 30 Years together carried on in Germany, betwixt the Protestants and
the Roman Catholic Party, and the Peace thereupon concluded at Munster, and
Osnabrugge; besides what not so many Years ago happened in Hungary, under the
Conduct of the Counts Serini, Nadasti and Franquepani, and is to this Day
continued by Teckely, (the Heads of which League were chiefly Lutherans, and
their Pretensions both for Religion and Liberty) he could not have committed so
gross an Error, as to impute an unlimited blind Obedience both in their
Principles and Practices to the Lutherans.

And to clear this Point the better, I cannot but relate some Passages which
happened in our Memory, in the Electorate of Brandenburgh, betwixt his
Electoral Highness, and some Lutheran Ministers, out of which it will easily be
understood, whether the Northern parts of Germany are so much infected with
blind Obedience, as this Gentleman imagines. The Business happened thus:
Frederick William the present Elector of Brandenburgh's Father, being of the
reformed Religion, which they call commonly the Calvinian, was for establishing
an Agreement betwixt the Lutherans and Calvinists. There were at that time two
Factions among the Lutherans; The first of such, as were strictly, and with
some austerity adhering to the first Rules of the Reformation, were called the
Wittenburgh Faction, or sometimes Calovians, from one Dr. Calow in the said
University, Professor of Divinity, who was a fierce and implacable Enemy to the
Doctrines of one Dr. Calixtus, and others in the University of Helmstadt, who
were for moderating and reconciling the religious differences in Germany. The
former had for a considerable time, both in their Sermons and Writings, been
very vehement against the Calvinists; the later had dealt with them more
mildly, for which reason they also had undergone the rigid Censures of the
Wittenburgh Divines in the Country of Brandenburgh. The Calixtines therefore,
and Calvinists, with the Assistance of some of the States of Brandenburgh were
very desirous to bring the former to a more pliable Temper; and the Elector
being willing to establish a better Understanding, took an opportunity by his
several Proclamations to order, that both Parties should abstain from injurious
Words: Such as Zwinglians, Sacramentarians, Ubiquitists, Marcionites, and the
like; That they should not put any Consequences deduced out of their several
Hypotheses upon one another, which either Party did deny; And thirdly, that all
Priests should be obliged to baptize the Children of such Parents, as were
averse to the Exorcism, Formal, Exorcism, Leave this Child, thou unclean
Spirit, and give place to the Holy Ghost!
(which the most Lutherans, together with the Sign of the Cross, use in the
Baptism) without the same. And findding some of the Lutherans in no ways
complying with his Mandates; he ordered certain Formulars to be subscribed by
them, and commanded his confistorial Judges, to see that every thing were duly
performed according to his Mandates. It would be too long to dispute here
concerning the Merit of the Cause upon either Side; it will be sufficient to
show, how the Lutherans behaved themselves in this Case, which I think will
fully clear them as to the Point of blind Obedience. They were then so far from
obeying the Electoral Proclamations, and subscribing the Formulars, that they
on the contrary, together with such of their Auditors as adhered to them, did
by several Petitions under the Name of the true and pure Lutheran Churches, and
their Confessors, tell the Elector, 1674. 2. Supplicat.
That he had quite surrendered himself like a Prisoner to his Privy Counselors,
who pretended to a religious Peace, by suppressing that of Osnabrugge, and
quite abolishing their native Constitutions and Agreements. And whenever they
objected to the Courtiers, that their proceedings were against the Rights of
Patronage, and Contracts; the common Answer was, that these were out of date;
Because the Eighth Commandment was not to be found in the States Catechism, but
in lieu of the same, was introduced, that Principle of Machiavell, Principi
licet, facere, quidquid lubet. Fas non est vel publicum religionis exercitium,
lege^, aut constitutiones Ecclesiasticas hactenus ibi receptas, templa,
scholas, hospitalia aut eo per^inentes reditus, pensione, stipendia prioribus
adimere, suorumque Sacrorum hominibus applicare, vel juris territorialis.
Episcopalis, patronatus, aliove quocunque praetextu subditis ministros alterins
confessionis obtrudere, ullumve aliud impedimentum aut praejudicium directe^
vel indirecte alterius sacris afferre. Pac.Osnabrug. Instrument.. 7.
That at the Peace made at Osnabrugge it was agreed, that no body should be
permitted to alter the free Exercise of Religion, or the Laws and Constitutions
that were established. Neither that under pretext of Rights of Patronage,
Episcopal or Territorialor any other Pretense, Ministers should be forced upon
the Subjects of another Religion, or any thing to be either directly or
indirectly done, which might prove prejudicial to another Religion. They say
further: That these Rules were taken out of the States Catechism, to persuade
Magistrates, that as in Temporal, so in Ecclesiastical Affairs, they have alone
absolute Power to determine and punish, which is an unheard of Doctrine in both
Religions. That some Examples out of the Old Testament and Christian Emperors
ill applied, the Prerogative of Magistrates and Rights of Patronages, were
political Pretenses, from whence it might be evident, that the former
Proclamations were nothing else than the Tokens of (...), or the political
Antichrist; since in setting Magistrates above all what belongs to God, viz.
his Word, Sacraments, Denominations, Church-Ceremonies, and Ministers; the
Design was to invade the Throne of Christ. And in another Petition they object
to the Elector a Coin which was coined 1548, by George Duke of Anhalt, which
had on one Side this Inscription: Plus odi Conciliatores istos, quam apertos
Religionis Hosts. And further say: That the Elector's Proclamations were
against the Peace of the Empire, Constitutions of the Land, and Contracts made
Anno 1653, where it was concluded, that no Proclamations should be issued forth
repugnant to that Contract, or contrary to both Religions. I could have
inserted more of this kind, but I will only add so much, that these Petitions
having been delivered to the Elector, after he had upon the Request of the
Representatives of the Prelates, Earls, Nobility and Cities, abrogated the
Formular proposed to the Clergy before, and explained himself very favorably
as to the point of arguing in their Sermons, may serve as lively Instances,
that the Lutheran Priests, though they represent Obedience as the Queen of all
Virtues, endowed rather with Modesty, than armed with Dagger and Poison, yet
they have neither blinded, neither tongue-tied her. The Disturbances arisen
some time ago, and continuing to this Day in a Hamburgh.
Northern Lutheran Commonwealth, betwixt two Clergymen, who have drawn not only
the rest of the Clergy, but also all the Inhabitants (notwithstanding the
Senates Authority and Endeavors to the contrary) into two Parties, are so
notorious, that those alone sufficiently contradict our Author's Assertion
concerning their blind Obedience. But it is time to leave the Lutherans, and to
see why the Roman Catholic Religion has been the darling of Princes upon the
Account of blind Obedience, according to this Gentleman's Opinion. Truly those
that will a little consider, that pernicious Doctrine of the Roman Catholics,
of deposing, nay even murdering of Princes; the many Instances of this kind,
which have verified their Principles in this point; the Bulls of Bonifacius
VIII, Innocent III, Clement V, and other Popes, who have asserted the same as a
legal Power, will, I believe, easily be convinced that an Arbitrary Prince, who
understands his own Interest, has but little reason to make those his darlings,
who think it not only lawful, but also meritorious to cut his Throat, when not
submitting himself to their Rules. And how can any Prince who affects an
Arbitrary Power, suppose himself absolute Master of his Subjects, as long as
there are in his Dominions those, and that in great Numbers, who being potent
both by their vast Possessions, and the Influence they have over the rest,
acknowledge another Head, besides himself, and profess openly that both in
Spirituals and Temporals they owe more Obedience to the Pope than the Prince?
It would be supervacuous to prove this, it being, besides the Bulls of Gregory
IX, Innocent IV, Gregory VII, and a great many others, so abundantly certified
by Histories, and their practices in all Ages; that no body who has any insight
in History, can be ignorant of it. I know some will object to this, that these
have been the Practices in former Ages among the Roman Catholics, when
Simplicity was more predominant; but that since the Reformation the Jesuits
have known so to mitigate this point, as that nothing is to be feared from
thence, which seems to be also our Author's Opinion; when he says, that the
firm Adherency to Tyranny is manifest in the Jesuits, by their adhering now to
the French interest, as they did formerly to the House of Austria. That the
Jesuits who are the Supporters of the abovementioned Doctrine so destructive
to all Governments, should have in the least receded from the same, is as vain
to imagine, as that the same do now less adhere to the House of Austria, than
formerly. It is not to be denied, some of that Gang have had cunning enough to
insinuate themselves into the most secret Affairs of the French King; but what
is that toward their having shaken off off their old Principles of
Self-Interest, and maintaining the Pope's Prerogative; or their adhering now
more to France. than the House of Austria? Their seeming Compliance, is by all
understanding People in France it self, looked upon as an effect of their Fear,
rather than good Inclination toward that Kingdom: For they having seen, that
the French Kings have maintained their Authority with a high Hand against the
Pope, and the restless Endeavors of their Fraternity, they have of late
according to their wonted Custom, changed their Tune for fear of losing all.
That famous Inscription of Lewis XII, that notable Advice of Cardinal Richlieu,
Perdam Babylonis homen.
of setting up a Patriarch in France, and the vigorous Opposition Innocent XI.
found in the present French King against all his Attempts, has frightened these
Fathers into a Complacency, which nothing but the Consideration of their own
Interest could have extorted from them; to pursue which they will at any time
adhere, either to France, or to the House of Austria, to Monarchy, Aristocracy,
or Democracy. And this may be evident enough to any body who will recollect
their Behavior in our Age as well as the former. Not to speak of the Villainies
of Castle, Clement, and Ravaillack, who are so abominable, that they ought not
to be mentioned among the Race of Mankind, and are lively Instances, how far
the Roman Catholics have laid aside their ancient King-killing Principle. The
Jesuit, Grammon ^ Hist. Ga^, lib. xv.
Santarel, in his Book which was burnt by the Hangman in France, has shown
sufficiently, That they have not changed much their former Opinion as to the
Pope's Prerogative over Magistrates. And it is remarkable what is related of
the Jesuits in France; who being then asked, What their Opinion was of this
Book? whether they would oppose it? or whether they did intend to conform
themselves according to the Approbation of the same by their General at Rome?
after a great many Tergiversations, being put to give a Categorical Answer,
they could not forbear saying, If they were at Rome, they should be of their
General's Opinion. And the threatening Letter from Innocent XI. An. 167^.
to Lewis XIV. as that also to the Clergy, evidences sufficiently, that it is
rather want of Power than good Will, when they seem not to act according to
their former utmost Severity. That the Jesuits follow no other Dictates but
such as agree with their own Interest, (whether in a Free or Arbitrary
Government) so many of the Roman Catholics have testified themselves that I
wonder how any body can fancy them adhering to any. Was it not justly objected
to Father Parsons and Campian in Queen Elizabeth's time, from the other Roman
Catholics, Important Considerations writien by the Secular Priests, p. 4
Vertumnus Romanus. Jesuits Reasons unreasonable. Letters Card. d'^fs^. p. 2.
lib. 7. 8. n. 162.
that the several Disturbances, and especially the Disputes about frequenting
the English Churches were raised on purpose by them only for the Benefit of
their Society; and that the rest had been considerable Losers by it? Were not,
by Father Parson's Means, Seminaries for English Jesuits erected as well in
France as Spain, Portugal, and the Netherlands? Did he not treat with the
Spaniards, French, Queen of Scots, the Pope, Duke of Guise, Prince Farnese, and
the Earl of Derby, about the Crown of England? so indifferent was he in the
Point, that it mattered him not who had it, provided the Jesuits might obtain
their Ends. Letter of Father Peter Walsh of the Order of St. Francis 1674.
Has not a certain moderate Roman Catholic, not many Years ago, attributed the
bloody Wars in Ireland, and a great many other mischievous Devices against this
Government, to the Excommunications of John Baptist Rinuccini, the Pope's
Nuncio, then in Ireland, and to the great Aversion the Jesuit^s and their
Adherents always have showed against the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy? And
have we not in our Memory seen the Jesuits have an equal Interest and
Adherency both to the House of Austria and France, by raising Persecutions in
Hungary and France against the Protestants? And was not the Emperor, by their
Advices, brought to the very Brink of Ruin? and do the most judicious presage
any good to the French King, from having followed their Methods? So that I am
apt to believe, the most sensible Princes, though never so Arbitrary, will not
be so fond of them, as to make them their Darlings upon that score. And if some
Commonwealths have been cautious enough to clip a little their Wings in their
Dominions: yet as the great decay of that once flourishing City and
Commonwealth of Cologne on the Rhine, caused by their Devices, is an instance,
that where ever they get footing, it will be prejudicial to the Government: So
the Switzers can testify, that it is next to an impossibili^y to keep them
even out of Commonwealths. For though Switzerland has showed as little
Inclination to them as any Government whatsoever; yet they having possessed
themselves of one of the best places in Friburgh, they have a most noble
College and Chapel there. And though the Canton of Soloturn would not admit of
them till within these few years, and that not but under hard Conditions; yet
out of 1000 Livres Revenue per Annum for ten of them, they are grown so rich
that they are erecting a most magnificent Church and College, the building
whereof is reckoned, Will amount to 50000 l. Sterling. which may convince all
unbiased Persons, that it is not any form of Government they adhere to, but
that they will flatter either Arbitrary Power or Licentiousness, according as
it turns best to their own Account. But we must go further and hear what our
Author has to say concerning the English Clergy. I do not hereby mean, says he,
to reflect on the Order, which generally has the government of our Youth; we
have had the experience of many among them, who have given proof of a freer
Education and Learning: And without question the chief posts of the Gown of
both kinds were never better filled than at present. I only lament the ill
contrivance of their Constitution; for while Interest draws one way, and
Honesty another, when a Man may make his Fortune by forgetting his Duty to his
Country, but shall always stick at mark while he serves it; it is scarcely to be
hoped Men should hold out against such temptations, unless they be generally
gifted with more Honesty than the generality of Mankind are. And since they
continue still upon the same bottom, it must be expected the same, or other as
mischievous Doctrines will be broached; whereas if they were once set upon the
same foot, the Philosophers of old were, if honesty and the duty to their
Country, were made their private interest, and the way to thrive, we should
soon see them shift hands, and the Spirit of those Philosophers revive in them
again. The Constitution of our Universities as to Learning, seems as
unfortunately regulated, as it is to Politics, etc. It seems as ridiculous to
take patterns for the gentile Learning of this Age, from the old fashioned
Learning of the Times, wherein the University-Statutes were compiled, as it
would be for one, who would appear well dressed at Court, to make his Clothes
after the Mode in Henry the VIII's Days, etc.

Here is an Harangue upon the English Clergy, which if you explain, it is
nothing else to say, but according to their Institution, if they will be honest
they cannot thrive; and that therefore no good is to be expected from them. I
must confess, that among all Books that ever I saw, I never met with one, which
asserted more with an excessive Confidence, and proved less. If this
Gentleman's Resolution was to take upon him the Office of a Church, and
State-Reformer General, it would have been but suitable to so great a
Character, to have been a little more particular, as well in this as other
points, and to have showed us the true Faults of such Constitutions, with their
proper Remedies; that from thence we might have judged, whether by his
Suppositions, those Rules could be introduced into the Government, which the
best Head-pieces hitherto have not been able to find out. But to tell us a
random Story of Interest drawing one, and Honesty another way, without
explaining the point, is nothing else than audacter loqui (not to speak worse)
and can scarce be taken by any sensible Man to have been done with a true
Intention of serving the Public; Since it is certain that by such vain
Rhetoric, neither the true Nature of the Matter will be understood, nor proper
Remedies be found out. Neither can any one conceive what he means by saying, if
Honesty and the Duty to their Country were made their private Interest, since
it is apparent enough to all judicious Persons in that kind, that the
Constitutions of the Clergy, is in all well-constituted Governments, so linked
with that of the Foundation of the whole, and in this Kingdom so inseparately
annexed to our true and fundamental form of Government, that without great
Danger of Ruin, both Interests cannot be separated; We have learned this Truth
by woeful Experience, within some of our Memory, that as to us, it needs no
further Proof. I remember, that in my Travels I did once in a certain
Commonwealth see the following Inscription upon a Door of a great Church, Felix
Respublica, ubi Moses and Aaronmanent Fratres; Hamborrough.
by which as they seemed to admire the Wisdom of the great Legislator, who put
the Spiritual and Temporal Government of the Jews, into the Hands of two
Brothers; so they intimated that from the Union and Concord of both, depended
in a great Measure, the Felicity of the Commonwealth. Surely, our Author, who
is altogether for Antiquity, has forgot, that in the most Ancient, and so
wisely regulated Government of the Egyptians, Dicd. l. 1. sect 2.
the Priests (who also were Philosophers) had the chief Rank of esteem together
with the Soldiers, both by the Prince and People. That besides others, his
beloved Greeks and Romans followed the same Methods. The Athenians admitted
their Priests, whom they called Manteis, to all their public Counsels. The
Lacedaemonians gave to their Kings as a constant Assistant and Counselor, Cic.
l. 1. Divinat.
an Augur; and among their Elders, (who were the Counselors of the State)
they had likewise placed an Augur. In what respect the College of Augurs were
at Rome, and how it was decreed in the Senate, that constantly six of the
principal Citizens Children should be sent into Hetruria; that by learning that
Sort of Divinity it might not be communicated to the common People, is so
notorious, that few who have read Histories, are ignorant of it. I have not
related these latter, with an Intention to put the Heathens religious
Contrivances in an equal Balance with the Jews, and Christians
Church Government; but only to show that even the wiser^ sort of the Ancient
Heathens, Puffendorff. de habit. relig. ad vit. civil
whom our Au^hor prefers much before us, Quam ob causam populus Judaicas salva
sua religione cum alia civitate plene coalescere non potuit, unde sicut religio
Judaica statue fuit coaeva, codem tempore ac volumine sancitis legibus, circa
sacra and civilia. Ita and religio Judaica implicita fuit, ut illa huic
superstes esse non posset. Sicut destruction templi and eversio Reip^
certissimum indicium sit abolitae religionis Judaicae.
did lay the very Founda^ion of their Government upon the Union betwixt
Ecclesiastical and Temporal Governors; and that after God Almighty had
committed the Management of both to two Brothers; he afterward to make this
Tie the more inseparable, instituted but one Temple at Jerusalem, which the
whole Jewish Nation being obliged to visit, they could not alter their
Government, without at the same time renouncing their Religion. What this
Gentleman is pleased to tell us concerning the old Philosophers, and their
Preference, is as vain as the rest, since he proves nothing of their
Foundation, and will (when we by and by treat of that point) be as ridiculous
as most of his former whimsical Assertions: He would have done well, when he
compared the Old Fashioned Learning of the Times, wherein the
University-Statutes were compiled, with the Clothes made after the Mode, which
was in Henry the VII^ Days; to have also remembered, ho^ much that bigoted sort
of Philosop^^ of the Pythagoreans, who gave no other reasons for their
Opinions, than ^^^ dixit, and which our Author has imitted to a Hair, is out of
fashion among the most sensible part of Mankind. ^^ ought to have considered
how little ^^ table it would be both to our Times a^^ Constitutions, Cic. de
Orator. l. 1.
if, according to the ^^^stom of the Ancient Academians, ^^ should be obliged
to hear them prat^^ and contradict every Body without proving, or as much as
asserting circumstantially their Opinions; in which a^^^ this Gentleman takes a
more than ordinary Pride. And I would ask him Diogenes the Cynick should come
in h^ Wine-pipe rolling to Whitehall, whether he would not appear as ridiculo^^
there, as one dressed up after the Fashion which was usual in King Henry the
VIII Days. Magno conatu magnas nugas agere.
And yet these are some of hi^ admired Philosophers, these his inge^^ous
Comparisons: is not that taking pain^ for nothing? It is not to be denied, bu^
that from some foreign Universities, several matters might be taken, which
would much improve ours; as also that a gre^^ deal might be added as to
Universities in general; but as I always have had a natural Aversion against
that Office of Censor, so troublesome to all lovers of Liberty, and that I have
received particular Obligations from one of our two Universities: I will rather
leave that Province to more able Men, than be too busy and forward in
mentioning the same. What also this Gentleman says, That the Lawyers have been
in most places favorers of Liberty, I will not contradict positively; because,
to prove the contrary would exceed the Limits of Animadversions: though, I
believe, if a proportionable Computation were made betwixt the Gown of both
Kinds; it would be found that the Lawyers, even in our latter Times, have in no
ways been behind hand with the Clergy in that point. But since it would be
unreasonable, that the whole Body of either kind should be charged with the
opinions of a few; and a great many of these also, partly have altered, partly
laid aside the same; I reckon it better to bury it in oblivion, than by
exasperating to revive the old Animosities. But we must return to our Author,
who after he has long discoursed concerning the Diseafes in the Body politic,
now begins to come to his Remedies. So have seen your half-learned Youngsters
in Physic, who having got together a few Aphorisms and other sayings out of
Hippocrates and Galen, apply them with a very comely Countenance to all sorts
of Sicknesses, and with no less Confidence promise Cure, speedy and easy, by
help of their Universal never-failing Restaurative of the whole Body: which
though they generally pretend to be as ancient as Hermes Trismegist; yet is
upon due enquiry commonly found to be taken out of some bragging Chemist or
other of our times: But let us look upon our Author's Receipt. The Greeks and
Romans, says he, instituted their Academies to quite another purpose; the whole
Education of their Youth tended to make them as useful to the Society they
lived in, as possible; There they were trained up to Exercise and Labor; to
accustom them to an active Life: No Vice was more infamous than Sloth, nor any
Man more contemptible, than him, that was too lazy to do all the good he could.
The Lectures of their Philosophers served to quicken them up to this. They
recommended above all things the Duty to their Country, the Preservation of
their Laws and the public Liberty; subservient to which, they preached up
Moral Virtues, such as Fortitude, Temperance, Justice, and Contempt of Death,
etc. Sometimes they made use of pious Cheats, as Elysian Fields, and an
Assurance of future Happiness, if they died in the Cause of their Country; And
even deceived their Hearers into Greatness; hence proceeded all those noble
Characters, wherewith their Histories are so stocked, etc. The Managers of our
modern Education, have not been quite so publick-spirited; for it has been for
the most part in the hands of Men, who have a distinct Interest from the
public, etc. Good Learning as well as Travel, is a great Antidote against the
plague of Tyranny. The Books that are left us of the Ancients (from whence, as
from Fountains we draw all that we are now Masters of,) are full of Doctrines,
Sentences, and Examples, exhorting to the Conservation or Recovery of the
public Liberty, which was once valued above Life. The Hero's there celebrated
are, for the most part, such as had destroyed or expelled Tyrants; and though
Brutus be generally declaimed against by modern Schoolboys, He was then
esteemed the true Pattern and Model of exact Virtue. Such was Cato of Utica,
with others of like Stamp, etc. 'Twas not to learn Foreign Languages that the
Greecian and Roman Youths went for so long together to the Academics and
Lectures of their Philosophers; 'twas not then, as now with us, when the
Character of a Scholar is, to be skilled in Words, etc. This manner of
Education produced Men of another Stamp than appears now upon the Theater of
the World, such as we are scarc^ worthy to mention, and must never hope to
imitate, till the like manner of Institution grows again into Reputation; which
in e^slaved Countries it is never likely. to do, as long as the Ecclesiastics,
who have an opposite Interest, keep not only the Education of the Youth, but
the Consciences of old Men in their Hands, etc.

Here is such a Panegyric upon the ancient Greeks and Romans, that I much
question whether Demosthenes and Cicero both have said so much of them. But,
since our Author seems to nauseate so much all that is new, and only to admire
Antiquity, it is a great wonder to me, why he did not go to the most ancient
Fountain it self, from whence the Greeks, and consequently the Romans, had
their best Laws and Constitutions; I mean the Egyptians: What the Historians
have related of them, Diod. lib. 1. ^. 2. Herodot. lib. 2. Plat. in Tim.
as having first of all understood the Rules of governing, and kept their Laws
the longest and best in ure of any other Nation, as having implanted them into
their very Infants by degrees, and taken effectual care to instruct them
afterward in Philosophy and Divinity, deserves credit by all who have had any
insight into those most ancient times. Besides their most admirable
Institutions, the Invention of Astronomy, Arithmetic, Geometry and Physic,
are unquestionably attributed to them; their Magnificent Tombs, stupendous
Obelisks, and Pyramids, their Sculptures, and whole Architecture, their
Labyrinth, and prodigious Channels, derived out of the River Nile, together with
their stupendous Lake of Myris, were much surpassing any thing the Greeks or
Romans ever did afterward. Their bodily Exercises, as Horse and Foot-Races,
besides those with Chariots, were surprising things; and, to say all, the
Greeks had all from them, but they almost all from themselves. And since it is
absolutely certain, that Pythagoras, Plato, Lycurgus, Solon, and the most solid
Grecian Philosophers did fetch their best Knowledge from thence; and it is even
spoken to the praise of Moses himself, that he was instructed in all sorts of
Wisdom of the Egyptians; I cannot well devise what induced our Author not so
much as to mention them; except the Reason is, That their way of having
Hereditary Princes, to whom they did pay (though no Slaves) a most profound
Respect, did not agree with our Author's Romantic Opinion of the transcendent
Virtues of Brutus. And since he pretends to teach us the true Education of our
Youth, the Persians would have furnished him with as good Patterns in their
Princes Sons, as any are to be found among the Romans or Greeks, but that I
suppose these were less for his purpose. We must therefore look a little into
the ancient Monuments, and see whether they are the only People that, being to
be preferred before all others, ought to prescribe Rules for Education and
Policy. I suppose it will not be thought a new Objection to say, That the
Greeks have not been so Religious in describing their own Affairs as the
Romans; wherefore we ought not to wonder, if these latter do not speak in so
high Terms of them as our Author. That the Greeks made no great Account of
their Faith, Cicero, who knew them, I think, at least as well as this
Gentleman, has left as a most notable Remark upon them; Cic. pro L. Flacc.
Tribuo Graecis literas, do multarum artium disciplinam, non adimo sermonis
leporem, ingeniorum acumen, dicendi copiam: denique etiam, si quae alia sibi
sumunt, non repugno: testimoniorum religionem and fidem nunquam ista natio
coluit: to^iusque bujus rei, quae sit vis, quae auctoritas, quod pondus,
ignorant. Ibid
nay he did not stick to say publi^kly, That they did not know truly what
belonged to it; though for Eloquence, Ingenuity, and other Studies, they were
sufficiently to be recommended: Qu^m in the atro imperiti komines rerum ^^nnium
rudes ignarique consederant, tum bella inutilia suscipiebant, tum sediticsos
homines Reip. praeficiebant, tum optime meritos cives e civitate ejiciebant.
Their Democratical and unskilful way of governing, he reflects upon as most
pernicious and destructive: Cic. de Orator. lib. 1. Quantum praestiterint
majores nostri prudentia caeteris gentibus, tumfacillime quisque intelliget, si
cum Graecoruni Lycurgo and Dracone and Solone nostras leges confer voluerit.
Incredibile est enim, quam sit omne jus civil, praeter nostrum, inconditum ac
pene ridiculum.

Cic. Tuscul. quaest. l. 1. Omnia Romani aut invenere per se sapientius, quam
Graeci, aut accepta ab iliis fecere meliora, quae quidem digna statuissent, in
quibus elaborarent. Remp. nostri majores certe melioribus tempera^verunt and
institutis and legibus quam Graect.


Their Laws and Constitutions he thought so much inferior to those of the
Romans, that there was no Comparison to be made betwixt them. As to their
Philosophers, he calls them a Company of Pratlers De orat. l. 2. Seculis multis
ante Gymnasia inven^a sunt, quam in his Philosophi garrire ^^perunt.
who talked much, and applied themselves to nothing. De orat. lib. 3. Graeci
aliqui doctores pervulgata praecepta decantant, quum ipsi nunquam forum,
nunquam ullum judicium aspexerint.
And it is remarkable that the Philosophy of that great man, Plato, immediately
after his death, was divided first into the Academians and Peripateticks; and
not long after, into as many Sects as there were little prattling Schoolmasters
or Teachers. From whence it may easily be conjectured, how useful they were to,
and what Interest they had in the public Good. Cic, de legib. lib. 1. Gellius,
quum proconsul, expraetura in Graeciam venisset, Athenis Philosophos, qui tum
erant, in locum unum convocaevit, ipsisque magnopere author fuit, ut aliquando
controversiarum aliquem facerent modum; quod si essent co-animo ut nollent
aetatem in litibus conter^re, posse rem convenire, and. simul operam suam illis
est pollicitus, si posset, inter eos, aliquid convenire.
Gellius, who was sent as Pro-Consul into Greece, by calling them together at
Athens, would fain have endeavored, by his Authority and Persuasion, to put an
end to their vain Disputes; but could effect nothing; Such great Lovers were
they of the public Good, that they did not think it worth their while to
hearken to his wholesome Counsel^ And if we reflect seriously upon their
Transactions, it will easily be found that^ what our Author tells us, of their
love of Liberty and Country, Fortitude, Temperance and Justice, has abundance
more Pomp than real Truth in it, That ancient Law of their drunken Meetings at
Athens, aut bibe aut abi, does not show so much Temperance; and if the
Lacedaemonians exceeded the Athenians in Sobriety, Avarice was a general Vice
among them. Philip of Macedon's, (who understood the Greeks and their Policies
very well) Saying is famous: That no Fort was strong enough to hold out against
an Attack, if there were but an Opportunity to let an Ass laden with Gold
enter the same. Their continual Strifes are so well known, that it would be
superfluous to pretend to enumerate them; and though they continually did
exclaim against Tyranny, yet their main endeavor was to tyrannize over one
another, and effectually did it by turns, till at last Philip, and
afterterwards Alexander, took away from them the means to devour one another;
and under pretenee of public Liberty, by their cursed Ostracism, to ruin such
of their Countrymen as had deserved best of them. I have not related this to
derogate any thing from the Merits of a great many among them, eminent for
their Doctrine, and brave Achievements. Pythagoras, Democritus, and Plato are
questionless among the Greecians, highly to be recommended for their great
Industry in searching for their Doctrine^ among the Egyptians, and other far
distant Countries; and their Doctrines having from thence been transferred into
Italy, and afterward into these Parts of the World, we ought to pay a due
acknowledgment to those who have shown us the way how to improve our Knowledge.
But my only aim is to demonstrate the Vanity of our Romantic Author, who
pretends to set them so fat above our Age, both in their Doctrine and great
Deeds, that we must not as much as hope to imitate them; and, Cic. de sini^. l.
5.
that, if Pythagoras and Democritus were great Men, yet the Arrogance of the
first, and the latters blinding himself, thereby to divert himself from all
outward Objects, and the better to speculate, savor more of a Fantastical
Conceit, than Usefulness to the Public.

And what has been said of their Philosophers may also be applied to all
others^ who have been eminent among them; If the Athenians, had their
Aristides, Cimon, Thrasibulus, Conon, and others, famous for Justice, Military
Achievements, and love to their fatherly Country; there were also to be found
among them a Miltiades, who affected to domineer over them; a Themistocles, who
made a League with Artaxerxes against them; an Alcibiades, who was as excellent
in Vices, as celebrated in Virtues, by whose Advice the Lacedaemonians straightened
the Athenians. If the Lacedaemonians had their Agesilaus and Leonidas, the
Thebans their Epaminondas, never sufficiently to be praised for their
extraordinary Virtues; had not the Lacedaemonians also a Pausanias, famous for
his Pride, Levity and Treachery? Was not among them also a Lysander so justly
accused of Crudelity, and other enormous Crimes? Callicratidas their General,
if he was celebrated for Military Virtue; Cic. l. offic. 1.
his Ambition was almost the undoing of the Lacedaemonians, Lacedaemonios,
class ill^ a rissa, aliam ptrare posse, se fugere sine de^ocere non posse.
and the Ruin of one of the best Fleets they ever set out. And since our Author
has magnified their Philosophers so much above ours, I cannot but put him in
mind of the greatest of Philosophers, who, being come forth in our Age, has in
so much outdone all the Ancients, both in Metaphysical and Natural Principles,
Des Carts.
and is in no ways behind them in his Ethics; but especially in his
incomparable Method of Reasoning, that I am to believe, if he had perused and
duly considered his Philosophy, he would perhaps have been cured of his vain
Conceits of the old ones. It is not my business here to determine whether he
has taken some light as to his natural Principles, out of Epicurus, as some say
he has^ as to his Metaphysics out of St. Augustine, and other Fathers; this is
most certain, that since his publishing the same, there has been a more solid
Foundation laid toward the true understanding and advancing the most useful
Sciences, than all the Golden Ages of his so much admired Philosophers have
been able to produce. But let us not insist farther upon the Greeks, since we
must also take a short view of the Romans: That the same have much exceeded the
former in true greatness of Mind, Constancy, Love to their Country, and, before
all, in Martial Discipline, Knowledge of the Laws, nay even in Eloquence (that
most beloved Art of the Greeks,) have been equal to them, is what scarce any
body, who has had a right insight into both their Histories, will deny: but
that they should have committed the Education of their Youth, generally
speaking, to the chief management of such Philosophers as were frequent in
Greece, I am to learn yet. As the Foundation of the Roman Government was their
Military Discipline, and excellent Laws and Customs; so the same were implanted
into their Youth, by the Instructions and Examples rather of their Parents,
than any public Philosophers: And though in Process of time Eloquence begun to
bear a great Sway with the Romans; Cic. lib. 1. de Orat. Romae profecto nulla
unquam vehementius, quam eloquentiae studia viguerunt. Nam posteaquam imperio
omnium gentium constituto, diuturnitas pacis otium confirmavi^: nemo fere
laudis cupidus adolescens, non sibi ad dicendum studio omni enitendum putavit.
Ac primo quidem totius rei ignari, qui neque exercitationis ullam viam, neque
aliquod praeceptum artis esse arbitrarentur, tantum, quantum ingenio and
coginatione poterant, consequebantur. Post autem audicis oratoribus Graecis,
cognitisque torum literis adhibitisque doctoribus, incredibili quodam dicendi
studio, ^ostri homines flagraverunt.
yet was it a great while before they took the pains to go and hear the Greecian
Orators, but were contented with such as their Genius and Home-education
furnished them withal. lib. 1. offic. Quorum patres aut majores aliqua gloria
praestiverunt, little plerique in eo genere laudis student excellere; Ut Q.
Decius Publii silius, in jure civili: Pauli filius Africanus in re militari.
And it is observeable that most of the Romans did excel in the same kind,
wherein their Fathers or Ancestors had been remarkable: Pro P. Sext. Imitemur
nostros Brutos, Camillos, Decios, Curios, F^bilcios, Maximos, Scipiones,
Lentulos, AEmilios, innumerabilesq alios, qu: Romanam Remp. Stabiliverunt.
And such as had not the Advantage of such Parentage, commonly used to choose
some great Man or another, from whom they took Directions, and whom they strove
to imitate. From hence came that Custom of taking their Youths into the Senate^
House, that by continual Observations of the Gravity, Constancy and Secrecy of
that great Assembly, they might be instructed, not only in State Affairs, but
also excited to imitate the Examples of their several Parents. To these
Methods, and not the hearing of prattling Philosophers was chiefly owing that
prodigious Offspring of so many Valiant, Wise, and Eloquent Men, who were
educated by the Care of their Wise Parents, and by timely applying themselves
to Business under their Tuition, became the Terror of their Enemies.

And this was doubtless one Reason why by their Annal Laws no body was admitted
to the highest degree of Honor, ^^^^ Philip. p. 5. Legibus ^^^^^^, cum
grandiorem ^^^^^^ ad consulatum Rom^^^^^uebant, adolescentiae ^^^^^^rem
verebantur.
till at a certain age, that also, as by steps, they might ascend to the same,
sufficiently prepared with the Knowledge not only, but also the Practice and
Management of State and Military Affairs. From this Paternal Care, and timely
applying themselves to the Knowledge of their Affairs, and Martial Discipline,
came these so renowned Men among them; and these Philosophers, whom our Author
would fain make us believe to be the principal Men of their Education, were
only employed to teach them the Precepts, of Oratory, and such like; Cic. lib.
1. Offic. Carneades dicebat, eos qui Rhetores nominarentur, and qui dicendi
praecepta traderent, nihil^ plane tenere. Mnesarchus hos, quos nos oratores
votaremas, nihil esse dicebat, nisi quosdam operarios, lingua celeri and
exercitata, oratorem autem, nisi qui sapiens esset, esse neminem.
and as by the most understanding Greeks they were not much valued, so they
proved very mischievous to the Romans, as they had done to the Greeks before,
and will do so to all Governments, where the Art of Rhetoric is preferred
before true Sense. The Roman Commonwealth thus instructed with excellent Laws,
and stocked with Great and Wise Men, yet was so overrun with all sorts of
Vices, and entangled at last in the Snares of its own Citizens, that I cannot
for my Life see why this Gentleman should so much prefer it before our times,
since it is evident enough, that Viceswere as predominant there as they are
among us; and that if they have had Men famous for Military Achievements,
Temperance, Constancy, and other Virtues, our Age is not destitute of them. Was
not Avarice as enormous among the Romans as it is among us? The Saying of
Jugurtha, who had tried them in that kind, sufficiently verifies it. O Urbem
venalen.^^ si modo emptorem invenisset.
And he that doubts, whether all sorts of Vices were as much in vogue at Rome
formerly, as they are in our Age, let him (besides what their Poets and other
Historians have left us) but cast one Eye upon that Catalogue which Cicero
gives us of such as were the Associates of Catiline, Cic. Catilinar. 2.
and belonged to his Army, and he will quickly be of the same Opinion with me.
Cic. pro leg. Manil. Quemenim poss^mus imperatorem aliquo in numero putare,
cujus inexe^rcitu veneant centuriatus, atque venierint? Quid hunc hominem
magnum aut amplum cogitare de rep. qui pecuniam ex aerario deprompt^m ad bellum
administrandum, a^t propter cupiditatem provinciae magistratibus diviserit, a^t
propter avaritiam Romae in quaestu reliquerit? Vestra admurmuratio facit,
Quirites, ut agnoscere videamini qui haec fecerint. Ego autem neminem nomino.
Quare mihi irasci nemo poterit, nisi qui ante de se voluerit confiteri. Itaque
propter hanc avaritiam imperatorum quantas calamitates, quocunque ventum sit,
nostri exercitus ferant, quis ignorant? Itinera quae per hosce annos in Italia
per agros atque oppida civium Romanorum imperatores fecerunt, recordamini: tum
facilius statuetis, quid apud exteras nationes fieri existimetis. Utinam plures
arbitramini per hosces annos militum vestrorum armis hostium urbe, an hibernis,
sociorum civitates esse deletas? Negue enim exercitum potest is continere
imperator, qui seipsum non continet; neque severus esse in judicando, qui alios
in se severos esse judices non vult.
Did not Cicero tell them publicly to their Faces, That through the
Licentiousness and Avarice of the Roman Generals, more Cities were spoiled by
their own Soldiers, than by the Enemies? Had not they among them as well their
Tarquin, Sulla, Catiline, Antony, and others, as their Scipio's, Regulus,
Marcellus, and such like.

Truly even Cicero himself, who could give such good Doctrines to others, who
pretended to be behind-hand with no body for Love to his Country, Greatness of
Mind, and other Virtues, who was certainly as great a Philosopher as ever the
Romans had, and writ as pathetically, as any body in his Philosophical
Treatises, was, without Contradiction, guilty of vain Ambition, Flattery,
Dissimulation, and other Extravagancies. And though he exclaims most
egregiously against the latter, especially Lib. 3. dooffic. Pythius, and omnes
aliud agentes, aliud simulantos, persidiimprobi, molitiosi sunt. Nullum igitur
eorum factum potest esse utile, cu ^ sit tot vitiis inquinatum.
in his Philosophical Works; yet those that will take the pains to compare his
Orations, pro Rege Dejotaro and pro Marcello, with his Philippicks, will easily
be convinced, that he had studied that Art as well, and made himself as great a
Master of it as any body. Now if we look upon the Religious Institutions of the
Romans, How ridiculous were they! And though they served sometimes for a
State's Turn, yet proved they often as mischievous; since for all the outward
Pomp, Cic. lib. 2. Divinat. Vetus illud Catonis admodum scitum est, qui mirari
se aiebat, quod non rideret aruspex, aruspicem cum vi diss. Rex Prusias cum
apud eum Annibali exulanti pugnore placeret, negaba^ se audere, quod exta
prohiberent. An tu, inquit, ^^ unculae vitulinae mavis quam veteri Imperatori
credere?
the most judicious, as well of the Romans, as also others, were sensible of
the Vanity of them, and would ridicule them also upon occasion. How Cato the
Elder represented the Vanity of the Augurs, and Hannibal's witty Reply to
Prusias, who would not fight, because the Entrails of the Beasts did not prove
favorable, is well known to those who are versed in Histories. Their
Constitutions, Laws, and Policy, it is true, were extraordinary; their Counsels
grave, and deeply laid; their Constancy admirable, from whence they seldom
receded; their Military Discipline and Order of their Legions, without
Comparison, much above any thing that was to be found in those times.
Nevertheless the perpetual Contests betwixt the Patricians and Plebeians, and
afterward betwixt the Senate and People, caused a great many Convulsions in
the State, and was at last the cause of its Alteration. After Valerius had once
given an Inch to the Plebeians, in allowing the Appeal to the People, they
would not be contented, till by their shameful Tumultuous Assembly in the Mount
Aventine, they forced the Senate to allow them their Tribunes, who so well knew
how to play their Cards, that in a little time the Plebeians were admitted to
all Dignities, and by continual Strifes against the Patricians, were the
occasion of the abolishing the Power of both. For when Sylla had once tried
what the Romans could bear, Pompey his Scholar was for following his
Footsteps; but being prevented by Caesar, left that Work to be perfected by
him and his Successors. Their Gravity also and Constancy was not a little
shaken, when they were forced to make that shameful Peace with Porscnna, so
little spoken of by the Roman Historians, and to redeem themselves from the
Gauls, called the Senones, with Money. How also their Military Discipline did,
by degrees, decay, and at last degenerate into such a licentiousness, that the
Soldiers and Generals of their setting up became Masters of the Empire, the
Histories of these Times do abundantly testify. It is then in vain for our
Author to seek for his Golden Age among the Greeks and the Romans. If he had
perused the 97 Err^s, mi Lucili, si existima; nostri seculi esse vitium
luxuriam and negligentiam boni moris and alia quae objicit suis quisque
temporibus. Hominum suns ista non tempor^m: Nulla aetas v^cavit a culpa; Et si
aestimare licentiam cujusque seculi incipi^s, pudet dicere, nunquam ^pertius,
quam coram Catione peccatum est.
Epistle of Seneca's, who questionless had an extraordinary insight into those
Times, he would have lost his Appetite of railing against our Age, since it is
evident to all considering Men, that if our Times be overrun with Vices;
nevertheless we are not destitute of Examples of Contempt of Death, Love to
their Country, Constancy, Valor, and other most eminent Virtues.

Contempt of Death is so common to our Age, that even our Miscreants show it
frequently in their Journey to Tiburn. And if this Gentleman's Eyes had not
been quite dazzled with his Ancients vanity, he might at Copenhagen, when he was
there, have seen the Remnants of Valor, Bravery and Constancy, which the
Citizens of that place, when reduced to the utmost, showed under the Conduct of
so brave a King in our Age. Has our Author forgot what one single Person,
whose Name was Hasselaer, did in our memory at Amsterdam; who saved that City
from falling into the hands of the French, who were much stronger and nearer to
that City, than ever Hannibal was to Rome, after the defeat of Cannas? Can our
Author have forgot that successive Offspring of Heroes, of that illustrious
Family, from whence his present Majesty is descended? Has he forgot what his
Ancestors not only, but more particularly he in Person has done for the
Deliverance of his Native Country, first, and again for us, against a more
potent Enemy, than the Carthaginians were in comparison of Rome? If I should
but hint the particulars of these great actions, certainly it would make him
ashamed of his vain Conceits. But since these great and unparalleled Actions
will never be forgot by all good Men, and my Pen is in no ways able to find
words proportionable to so extraordinary Merits, I will only say, that I will
defy our Author to show me out of all his worm-eaten Antiquities, (whether
Greeks or Romans,) a Family by a continual Succession of time so abounding with
Champions for their Country, as his Majesty's, or any one of the Ancient Hero's
surpassing his Majesty in Valor, Prudence and Justice. It is therefore to be
admired, why among so many Romans eminent for their Virtues, he could not pick
out any others to put as Examples, Cic. ad Attic. l. Ep. 1. Cato optimo animo
utens and summa side, nocet incerdum Reip. Dicit enim ^anquam in Platonis
politia, non tanquam in Romuli faece, sententi^^^.
besides Cato and Brutus; Cato was always censured by all understanding
Politicians, for having more surliness in him than was useful to the State. And
Brutus committed the blackest Villainy against his Friend, and murdered him, to
whom he owed more than to his Parents. Neither is the matter much mended, by
excusing his Villainy with the pretense of public Liberty; for not to mention,
that he and Cassius took upon themselves the same Title of Imperator, as Caesar
had done: it is evident enough to all sensible Men, that they intended to play
the same Game, if not a worse, since they were far behind him in every respect.
And if a pretense of Liberty is sufficient to warrant the blackest Crimes, I
see no reason why Ravaillac, and others of that stamp, should not claim the
same Privilege; since questionless the pretense of their Principles of
Religion are as specious as those of Liberty. Methinks our Author shows in this
point especially a little too much inclination to such, as rail with great
violence against the Jesuits; yet have not laid aside their Doctrine of
Sacrificing either King, Friend, Relations or Kindred, when ever they are
possessed with the Frensical humor, that any thing is done in prejudice of
their pretended Rights, which they know how to deduce with as many florid
Speeches, as ever the whimsical Cic, lib. 2. de inven^. Dex Graecorum: Qui
tyranum occiderit, Olympionicorum praemium capito, and quam voldt sibi rem a
mag^stratu deposcito, and magistratus ei concedito.
Greeks and some of the Cic, lib. 2. de inven^. Dex Graecorum: Qui tyranum
occiderit, Olympionicorum praemium capito, and quam voldt sibi rem a mag^stratu
deposcito, and magistratus ei concedito.
Senec. Hercul Fur. Victima haud ulla amplior potest magisque opima mact^ri
Jovi, quam R^n iniquus.
Romans did, when they intended to impose upon the People under the pretext of
public Liberty. And here I should say something concerning our Author's new
broached Rules of Policy, as also the Digression he makes upon the most Ancient
Constitutions of Government in Europe: but because these Remarks are grown
almost as monstrous in bigness as the Preface it self, and we shall be obliged
to treat of these Points hereafter, when he in the Treatise represents the form
of Government in Denmark and other Countries, we will supersede it here, as
also, what he says according to his Romantic way, That in Spain, Italy, and
France, Slavery is not so conspicuous, but in the Northern parts it appears in
its true shape; since something of that will be said in the Conclusion of the
Treatise, where he speaks to the same purpose. But what he says, That it is now
or never seasonable to assert both the Peoples Right and his Majesty's Title,
is like all the rest of his Vanity, since God knows he has not said one word
farther of it; and it would have been but common Wisdom not to have inserted
things of that high moment in a transitory way among his fantastical Conceits,
especially at a time when the People enjoy their legal Liberties under the
Reign of a Wise, Just, and Brave King, whose Title is so generally approved by
the Practice of all, and especially our Age, and more particularly by the
general approbation of all Europe, and all good Men in these Kingdoms, I
conclude with the great Roman Politician and Philosopher.

Nihil est temeritate turpius, nec quidquam tam indignum sapientis gravitate
and constantia, quam aut falsum sentire, aut quod non satis explorate perceptum
aut cognitum sit, sine ulla dubitatione defendere. ( ic. lib. 1. de nature. Deor.

REMARKS UPON THE TREATISE, CALLED An ACCOUNT OF DENMARK.
THE first Chapter of the Treatise it self, having nothing material in it,
besides a general Geographical Description of the Territories belonging to the
King of Denmark, does not require any further Observations; and if the Author
in some other matters had, (as he has done in this) rather followed the
footsteps of Authentic Writers, than his Sensible and Grave Men (as he calls
them in this Chapter) who have misled him for the most part, into a Conceit of
his own Knowledge and an ill-grounded Experience, instead of Truth, we might
have superseded to extend these Remarks so far as we are obliged now to do. We
will therefore go on to the Second Chapter, where he speaks thus, concerning
the Island of Zealand: It is almost of a circular Figure, and contains about
180 English Miles in circumference: I cannot commend its Fertility, there being
no Bread Corn growing in any part of it, except Rye, which indeed is in good
quantity, and whereof most of their Bread is made, etc. It has no Rivers, nor
above half a score Brooks that are able to turn a Mill, etc. About one fourth
part of it is Forest lying open for the King's Hunting, and his Game, such as
Stags, Wild Boars, Roe Buck, etc. These are such Sacred things, that no body
dares touch them, though they find them in whole Herds destroying their Corn, to
the infinite yearly damage of the poor Peasants, etc. For Seaports, that most
excellent one belonging to Copenhagen, must make amends for the want of them,
not only in this, but many other of the Islands; there being few others, that I
know of, capable of harboring a Vessel of 200 Tuns, etc. Neither is this a
sensible want, because there are no Commodities in this Island, for
Exportation. I have been told, that forty years ago, ten or twelve Dutch
Fly-Boats found yearly their Lading at Kiog, a pretty flourishing Town at that
time, within twenty English Miles of Copenhagen, but of late they seem to be
well satisfied, if the Product of the Isle maintains in this sort of Grain the
Inhabitants of it: Not that the Numbers of these are increased, but Husbandry
is not so much encouraged now, as when the Taxes of the poor Country People
were less frequent and grievous, etc. The feeding of the Commonalty generally
throughout all Denmark, is very mean, the Burgers or Citizens sustaining
themselves with Rye Bread, Sale Flesh, Stock Fish, Bacon, and very bad Cheese;
insomuch that the Inspecters of our Markets in England, who use to destory or
send to the Prisons all such Victuals as are not judged wholesome, would (if
they found them no better provided than at Copenhagen) go near to empty the
Markets, and leave little so either Buyer or Seller; the Peasants live on
Roots, white Meats, and Rye Bread, feldom tasting fresh Fish, and scarce ever
Flesh, unless on some extraordinary Festivals as on St. Martin's Eve, when each
Family in Denmark, without fail, makes merry with a roasted Goose at Supper,
Here and in all Denmark, are but two Seasons of the year, Winter and Summer;
those two other more agreeable ones of Spring and Autumn not being commonly
known; the Spring never, and the Autumn seldom, etc. The principal things of
this Island, and indeed of all Denmark, are the City of Copenhagen, and the
Passage of the Sound. I will begin with the City, the rather, because when I
have done with that, I have little more to say of any other in the King of
Denmark's Dominions, there being no other belonging to him, much better than
our Town of St. Albans. Thus far our Author.

This Island of Zealand containing the chief City of all Denmark, and being the
place of Residence of its Kings, and consequently more frequented by Strangers,
than most of the other parts of this Kingdom, we might have justly expected a
more exact Account thereof, than of the rest; which, how it has been performed,
will be worth our taking notice of. The circumference of Zealand he makes to be
^80 English Miles, when I am surre I could never meet with any body whether
Da^e or other Foreigner, that knew this Island, but all confirmed what I had
observed as near as I could, before, that the length of this Island were about
20 Danish Leagues, and if you do reckon but a Danish League to consist of four
English Miles (as certainly they do at least) the circumference which this
Gentleman himself is pleased to make almost circular, must by computation,
amount to 240 English Miles, which is 60 more than is mentioned in the Author's
Description. And according to this Calculation, you must give grains of
allowance for all the rest; he cannot (says he) recommend its Fertility, there
being no Bread Corn growing there in any part, except Rye: but he had forgot
that there also grows Wheat in some parts, and Barley almost every where in
abundance, as also a great quantity of Oats. He says, That there are few Ports
in this and many other of these Islands capable of harboring a Vessel of 200
Tuns; neither that this is a sensible want, because there are no Commodities in
this Island for Exportation. I must confess he has been a little more modest in
this Assertion than in any other before, having added the words ( that I know
of) yet it is a wonder that his Grave and Sensible Men could not instruct him
better. They must for all their Gravity have been either very ignorant, or else
very negligent in not telling him, that in this very Island of Zealand, were
other Cities and Ports (not to speak in this place of those in the other
Islands, which shall he mentioned in their proper places) which could, and did
harbor Ships of above 200 Tuns, and that it would be a considerable want, if
these places were not in that Island; since from Corsoer, a place well
Fortified with a Castle, and lying on the West side of this Island on the great
Belt over against Nyburgh in Funen, a considerable quantity of Barley is yearly
Exported to Holland; as is done likewise from Holbeck, but more especially from
Calenburgh; which being a well built place, exceeding St. Albans in every
respect, and having a very good Port capable of harboring Ships of a much
greater burden than 200 Tuns, stands about fifteen or sixteen English Miles
North of Corsoer. In the South part of this Island, is also a place called
Nestwed, situated on a Navigable River, which extends it self much higher into
the Country, (though our Author has been pleased to allow none at all here) from
whence there is a considerable Trade to Lubeck. And if from Kiog, an
inconsiderable place in comparison of these places we have now mentioned, but
particularly remembered by this Gentleman, when he forgot the rest, there used
formerly to go a few Fly-Boats to Holland, there go more now from thence to
Norwegen with Malt. I will not insist now upon some of less Note, as Schelsoer
and Warburg, though the last of these has been famous in our Age, because Charles
King of Sweden in his first Expedition against Denmark, Anno 1657. did set
first footing there, as he did afterward in his second, Anno 1658. at Cursoer.
When I consider with my self, that this Gentleman has not as much as made the
least mention of these beforementioned places, and how much this contradicts
his Norions he has set down of this Island of Zealand, as also that not so much
as any places have been named by him, lying beyond Elsinore, Cronenburgh and
King, the most remote of which is within 20 English Miles of Copenhagen, it
seems to be very obvious, that both his own Knowledge and that of his Grave and
Sensible Teachers, did not reach much farther. And what may confirm any body in
this opinion is, that he tells us a most dismal Story, of whole Herds of Stags,
Wild Boars and Ro^ Bucks, (whom he calls Sacred things) destroying the poor
Peasants Corn: when it is sufficiently known, that there is scarce any Kingdom
to be found, where there is not Provision made for preserving the Royal Game
against the rapaciousness of the Peasants and other Vagabonds. And though there
is a considerable quantity of Forests Royal, and Wild Beasts in this Island,
yet is an effectual care taken, that they may not be destructive to the
Country; since not only every Nobleman, (who possess almost all the Lands not
belonging to the King here) have the Privilege of Hunting and Shooting in
their own Lordships, or Territories, but also the Court by frequent Hunting,
kill a great number of them, and the King keeps in every part a certain number
of Huntsmen, whose Duty it is to preserve the Country from receiving damage by
these wild Beasts.

But leaving the wild Beasts, we must also see what he says concerning the
Inhabitants of Denmark, whose feeding (if this Gentleman is to be believed) is
very mean, and the Burgers and Citizens sustain themselves with Rye Bread, Salt
Flesh, Stock Fish, Bacon, and very bad Cheese. Here you see the Fare of the
Danes, and that of those who live in the Cities, for the poor Peasants fare
worse. I am apt to think that this Gentleman happened to light into some
Black-Smiths or other their like Mechanics House in Copenhagen, who (according
to the Custom of these Northern Countries) being obliged to find their
Journey-Men with Victuals at their Houses, where they work, make use of such
Dishes as our Author has been pleased to mention here. But if he had been
acquainted in Burgers or Citizens Houses of an higher Degree, he would have met
also with another sort of Victuals. It is so generally objected as a fault to
the Northern Nations, that they are too Liberal and Hospitable in their Houses,
and that they mind Eating and Drinking more than any thing else, that I wonder
how this Gentleman could think upon it, except he takes a particular Pride to
be singular, and to t^ll us Miracles, which were never seen or heard of before
his Arrival in Denmark. I may say it without Vanity, that the Northern parts
are very well known to me, and perhaps as well as to this Gentleman, and this I
can affirm for a truh, which may easily be confirmed by hundreds in this Town,
that the abovesaid Objection of the Author, is utterly contrary to the
Experience of all understanding People; since it has been always confessed by
them, that they rather exceed the true bounds in this point. For nothing is
more common in those parts, than to see the Table-Cloath laid thrice a day, and
at every Meal to have hot Victuals, at Dinner especially you shall seldom find
them without two Dishes; among Mechanics the most solid sort of Victuals^ such
as are suitable to their Constitutions and Labor are used, but the better sort
of Citizens generally deny themselves not any thing that the Season affords,
and are extremely addicted to Varieties in their Diet. It is true, you may
seldom meet there with such large Dishes of Meat at the Tables of the better
sort, as are customary here, but they make that up in the Number; since even in
private Burgers Houses, they seldom sit down at Dinner or Snpper without two
Dishes, and a Glass of Wine, which generally they are furnished withal in
their own Houses, Taverns being not to be found in so excessive anumber there,
as they are with us. When they invite their Friends, their Tables are always
thrice filled up with variety of Victuals, and Wine is so plentiful among them,
that if a Man does not feel the effects of the Feast the next day, he does not
think himself well Entertained the day before. I will not undertake here to
make an exact Comparison betwixt our and their Markets, since perhaps this
Gentleman and his Friends have taken more pains in searching them, than ever I
did; but this is notorious enough, that in Denmark the Beef is exceeding well
tasted and very fat, that Veal is proportionably good, (though not so large as
here) and their Hogs-flesh to be compared to any in the World, as also
Lambs-flesh and Mutton not to be despised, though the latter be not so common
among them. Concerning their Poultry we will say nothing in this place, because
we shall have occasion to speak something of this hereafter, when we come to
our Author's Remarkable History of the Green-Geese and other wild and tame
Fowl. What he says concerning that there are but two Seasons in Denmark, may
best be explained by comparing the North Latitude of these Countries with some
of ours. The North Latitude then of Denmark being betwixt the Degrees of 54 and
58 lies parallel to all that Tract in our Island, laying betwixt the City of
York and the further end of Scotland; and the City of Copenhagen being situated
under the 56 Degrees of Northern Latitude, which is correspondent to that of
Edinburgh in Scotland, we may from thence conjecture, That the leaping from
extremity of heat to extremity of cold, is not near so fearful as this
Gentleman would make us believe, or at least it is not so in all parts of
Denmark. The rest of this Chapter is taken up with the Description of
Copenhagen, which being the only place this Gentleman has thought worthy of
taking particular notice of, yet is described by him so superficially, that
besides what he says of the Port and its situation, scarce any thing else has
been mentioned of the same. This Author having already showed himself no great
admirer of Universities, I do not much admire at his not so much as naming that
of Copenhagen; but since he seemed so fond in his Preface, of the Bodily
Exercises practiced in the Ancient Academies, one might justly wonder why he
has not mentioned that set up a few years ago at Copenhagen, which as it is
greatly encouraged by his present Danish Majesty, in allowing considerable
Sallaries and Privileges to the same; so all sorts of Exercises, (besides
Foreign Languages and Mathematics) are taught in great Perfection. The Change
and Arsenal he has just vouchsafed to name, when it is confessed by all that
have taken a right view of the last of these two, that it is one of the finest
to be met withal, and is especially much celebrated for that most wonderful
Celestial Globe, which having six foot of Diameter, was once the work of that
so much renowned Danish Astronomer, Tycho Brahe; I will only say thus much
concerning Copenhagen, That as its Situation is one of the most Commodious in
Europe, as to the Seaside; so on the Land-side, it standing upon a Flat, and
containing near 9000 Houses, it is encompassed with a pleasant and delightful
Country. The Streets are broad, clean and neat, wherein are Lights kept in the
Nightime, and what our Author says, That their Buildings being Cage-work, the
intervals of the Timber being filled up with Brick, and therefore very mean, is
frivolous; it being obvious enough to any considering Person, that in a Country
where Timber is very cheap, and consequently not so sparingly used as here, the
Houses so built, are much exceeding for Beauty, our ancient way of
Plaister-work betwixt Timber, and even surpassing our modern common way of
Brick-Buildings, which are so much inferior to those in the Northern parts for
strength, that they generally do not stand half so long, though it cannot be
denied, that ours for Uniformity and Contrivance, excel theirs. And before we
leave this Island of Zealand, I cannot but mention also a place called Roshild,
some Leagues distant from Copenhagen, formerly an Episcopal See, the Bishops
whereof had the Honor of Crowning the Kings of Denmark, and the Cathedral here
is famous for the Tombs of a great many Danish Kings, some whereof are very
Sumptuous and Magnificent. And though it has been Celebrated again in our Age,
for the Peace concluded there Anno 1658^ betwixt the Two Northern Crowns; and
it also excels our Town of St. Albans: yet the Author has not thought fit to
name it to us. And so I will have done with this Island, when I have added
this, That besides a great many other Towns not mentioned, it is computed to
contain near 350 Villages. The following Chapter treating of the Sound, but
more especially of the Toll there at Cronenburgh, whereof the Author has given
us a large History, we will pass by, as having nothing much remarkable in it,
besides what is mentioned there: and come to the Fourth Chapter, where he
treats of the other Islands, and Jutland. Not to insist here upon some Islands,
which are left out by our Author, though they are more considerable than some
that he has mentioned, we will take them in the same Order as he has set them
down in the Treatise; and thus he speaks concerning Funen: Funen is Second to
Zealand, whether its bigness, or the goodness of its Soil be considered: It has
plenty of Corn, Hogs, Lakes, and Woods. The chief Town of it is Odensee, a
well-seated, and formerly a flourishing little City; but at present much fallen
to decay. This Island produces nothing for the Merchant to export, except some
few Horses, the Inhabitants generally consuming their own Commodities, etc.
This is the whole Description he has given us concerning this Island; which
being about 190 English Miles in Circumference, and containing above 250
Villages, is situated between Zealand and Jutland; parted from the first by the
great Belt, and from the latter by the little Belt: The chief Town of it was
formerly Odensee, a flourishing little City, as this Gentleman says; but yet
much better than St. Albans; though Nyburgh seems now to be the principal City
in this Island: which lying opposite to Corsoer in Zealand, has a capacious and
commodious Port, able to harbor a great many stout Ships, beyond the Burden of
200 Tuns; as have also likewife Swenburgh, Kartemunde, Voburgh, Middelfare, and
other considerable Ports here; from whence good store of Barley is transported
into Holland, and a great quantity of Oxen into other Parts: from whence may
appear the Vanity of this Author's Assertion in the Second Chapter concerning
the Danish Ports, and what he has been willing to persuade us here, That this
Island produces nothing for the Merchant to export.

The rest of the Islands mentioned by our Author, being of less Consequence
^han the rest, seem not to require any Remarks, unless what may be said as to
their Situation, Laland, Falster, and Mo^^en, lying close together, South of
Zealand, and only are parted from that Island ^y a very narrow Straight, called
Grone^ound: Laland being the biggest of the Three, is also the most fruitful;
the ^hief Town whereof is Naskaw, pretty ^ell fortified, and famous for the
long ^esistance it made against the Swedes, ^nno 1659. Monen being but about
Thirty English Miles in Circumference, ^id also defend it self better in the
same ^ear against the Swedes, than any of the ^igger Islands. Falster lying
South West ^om Monen, is celebrated for its Plenty, ^^t more especially for the
chief place of ^^e Island, called Nicoping, the great^t, and best built of any
place in Den^ark. In Langland the principal Town Rudcoping: Alsen is famous for
the ^wo Castles of Norburgh and Sunder^rgh, which have given Titles to Two
^ukes of the same Name; and the lat^r for holding out against the Attacks of
Wrangel, the Swedish General; so that he was thereby obliged to quit the whole
Island. But Amack, says the Author, deserves particularly to be ^^ membred:
This Island joins closely ^^ the City of Copenhagen, from which it^^ only
separated by a small Arm of the S^ which is passed over by a Drawbridge and
exceeds in fruitfulness any spot of Ground in Denmark. This Land we^^ given
many Years ago to several Families of North Hollanders, who were plant^^ there
to make Butter and Cheese for ^^ Court, etc. This Island being the lea^^ of all
that lie scattered in the Sea, ne^^ Zealand, as having but Fifteen or S^teen
English Miles in Compass, may w^ be called the Storehouse of Copenhage^ since
it furnishes its Markets abundant^^ not only with all sorts of good Meat, b^
also with Butter, Cheese, Hares, D^ mestick Fowls, and all sorts of Kitche^
Herbs, and Salleting. There are in^ several Villages, and Three or Four P^ rish
Churches; One of which is only ^^ the Possession of the North Holland^^ granted
to them above 150 Years ag^ by Christiern II. King of Denmark: T^^^ other part
of the Island being inhabit^^ by the Danes, I wonder how our A^thor could fall
into this mistake, That this Land was given to the North Hollanders, without so
much as mentioning the Danes, who possessed the greatest part of it, and that
in the very sight of Copenhagen. And so taking our leave of these Islands, we
must also take into consideration what our Author has told us concerning
Jutland; which though it be a Peninsula, yet he has began to treat of it here
in the same Chapter with the Islands. But let us hear his Words: Jutland, part
of the ancient Cimbrica Chersonesus, is the biggest part of the Kingdom of
Denmark, and may amount to about Two Thirds of the whole. It is divided into
Four Stiffts-Ampts, or principal Governments. This is a plentiful Country,
abounding more especially in Cat^le: It wants good Seaports toward the Ocean;
notwithstanding which, the Hollanders transport yearly great quantities of
^^ean Cows and Oxen from hence, to their more fertile Soil, etc. The Horse and
Swine of this Country are excellen^, and in great quantities. It affords Corn
in sufficient quantity for the use of its own People, etc. In short, it is the
best Country the King of Denmark is Master of, ^^nd appears to be least
declining, because most remote from Copenhagen. Procul ^^ Jove, procul a
fulmine.

Jutland being at this time divided into to North and South Jutland, the Author
has given us his Description of the North part of it in this Chapter, reserving
the South Part for the next following. North Jutland then is divided into Four
Principal Dioceses, or Governments, viz. Alburg, Wiburg, Arhusen, and Ripen, so
denominated from the Capital Cities of each Government. And here one might, not
without good Reason enquire, why this Gentleman has not vouchsafed to add
something more concerning these Part^ which he himself calls the biggest of t^^
Kingdom of Denmark, and are indeed the most considerable; since under the
Diocese of Ripen alone, there is reck^^ed to be near 300 Parishes, Seven walled
Towns, and Ten Royal Cities: But I am apt to believe, he was unwilling to
contradict himself in what he had said in the Second Chapter, That there were
no places in Denmark much better than our Town of St. Albans; neither ^^
Seaports capable of harboring Ships ^^ above 200 Tun, except Copenhagen.

It will not therefore be amiss to say ^^ little of each of these places; from
whence may appear how miserably this Gentleman has been misled by his grave
and sensible Men. And to begin first with Aalburg, which lying most North, is
the chief and largest place of this Government, (unto which it has given the
same Name) approaching in bigness to Copenhagen it self.

It has a good Port capable of containing Ships of a much greater Burden than
200 Tuns, seated on the South Side of a very large Bay, called Limfort. This
Bay extends it self all along a great part of the Peninsule, and comprehends
within its compass a good large Island, called Mors. The second District or
Government lying next to this, Southward, is called Wiburg. The Capital place
whereof is of the same Name, situated on a small River, which runs Northward
into the above named Bay of Limfort. It is an Episcopal See, and though but an
Inland place, the River being scarce navigable; yet near as big as Aalburg:
South of this lies the Government of Aalhuis, likewise so named from its
principal City. This place is situated to the South-East of Wiburg, a few Miles
above the lesser Belt on the Seaside, having as commodious a Port as Aalburg,
and coming very near to it in bigness. Opposite to this, viz. on the West Side
of the Peninsule near 60 English Miles distant is Rinkoping, a most famous
Seaport on the German Ocean. This with some other convenient Ports lying on
the West Side of this Peninsule, do contradict manifestly what this Gentleman
has been pleased to tell us in this Chapter, that it wants good Seaports
toward the Ocean, as the abovementioned Cities do show the Vanity of what he
pretended to persuade us in the second Chapter, concerning the want of
Seaports in Denmark, and that no place here were better than our Town of St.
Albans. The fourth and last of these Northern Dioceses, is called Ripen, it is
the largest of these four; its Capital City is called likewise Ripen, being an
Episcopal See, situated on the West Side of the Peninsule, near the German
Ocean, being defended by a well fortified Castle. Among other Towns here is a
place called Fredericks Ode, deserves to be taken particular notice of. This
though well fortified to the Land side, and provided with Pallisado's near the
Seaside; yet was surprised Anno 1657. by the Swe^sh General Wrangel, who, with
his Men in the Nightime, beating down the Pallisado's, and passing through
the Waters, took it by storm; where above 2000 were slain, and 2000 taken
Prisoners, besides Officers, and a great store of Ammunition and Plunder. A few
Miles from this place is also a good Seaport called Colding, with a strongly
fortified Castle called Arnsburg, where is paid the Toll for the Horses and
Oxen, which pass this way for Germany in great Quantities; so that it is a
manifest Error in our Author, when he says, that only lean Cows and Oxen are
transported from this Peninsule to Holland; since besides these a prodigious
Number of fat Oxen, very good Horses, and the best Hogs are sent from hence by
Land into Germany, and a considerable Quantity of Corn and Fish, is from the
abovementioned Ports transported into Holland, and other adjacent Countries.

The reason this Gentleman has been pleased to give, why Jutland appears least
declining, because most remote from Copenhagen, as it favors a little of
Malice, so it may perhaps take with some inconsidering Persons. But to the more
judicious it will be evident enough; that, if this point of its appearing least
declining should be granted; which however it is not, since near Copenhagen,
the Country appears in as good a Condition as here; yet the difference arises
chiefly from thence, what our Author had said a little before, That this is a
plentiful Country, abounding more especially with Cattle; to which I will add,
that it has also convenient Ports, and abounds with more Commodities for
Exportation. And that this is the true Cause of its appearing least declining,
may be gathered out of the Authors own Words in this very Chapter; where he
says, The Land is more fertile near the Seac^oasts, the Inland being full of
Heaths, Lakes and Woods: and truly in these places, Jutland makes no better
appearance than Zealand. I could also assign this for one reason among others,
that the Peasants in general here, being not Vassals to the Nobility as they
are in Zealand, might contribute much to this Appearance; but as the first is
most evident, so I think it may convince all unbiased and judicious Persons,
how impartial this Gentleman has been in his pretended Account of Denmark. In
the V. Chapter, which he entitles, Of the rest of the King of Denmark's
Territories; he begins with the Duchy of Sleswick thus: The Duchy of Sleswick
is in general a very good Country; Its convenient Situations between two Seas,
the Ocean and the Baltic, rendering it considerable for Trade; although the
natural Commodities fit for Exportation, are in no great Quantity. Some Cor^,
Cattle, Horses and Wood for firing, it affords to its Neighbors, over and
above a sufficient store of each for its own Inhabitants. It is divided between
the King and the Duke of Holstein. The principal Town, which gives name to the
Duchy, belongs to the Duke of Holstein, who resides near it in his Palace of
Gottorp, etc. This is all that this Gentleman has thought fit to afford us
concerning the Duchy of Sleswick; which being the South-part of Jutland,
comprehends a large and fruitful Tract of ground, adorned with a great many
fair Cities, and commodious Sea ports; whereas he has taken up more with the
Description of the Resident place of the Duke of Holstein Gottorp; which as it
does not belong to the King of Denmark's Dominions; so it is much inferior
(though else a very fine Seat) to some of the King of Denmark's, which either
are not mentioned at all by the Author, or else represented much less
advantageous. It must needs be a great Wonder to any Body that knows these
Countries, how he should make a Digression to describe the Residence of the
Duke of Holstein Gottorp, and neglect to remember here a goodly Town, called
Hadersleben, situated in the same Dukedom near the Baltic, and beautified with
the fair Castle of Hansburg, begun to be built by John the Eldest Son of
Christiern I, and finished by Frederick II. this present King^ of Denmark's
great Grandfather. Not to mention here Apenrade and Tondern; the first whereof
lies on the Baltic, as the Second is situated near the German Ocean; certainly
the Town of Flensbourgh with its Castle, might have deserved to be remembered as
well as Gottorp, except he was afraid of contradicting what he said before
concerning the want of Harbors in Denmark, which were capable of harboring a
Ship of 200 Tuns; it being notorious that this place situated on a Bay of the
Baltic Sea, called Hever Bay, has so deep and commodious a Port, that it not
only receives Ships of a far greater Burden; but also the same lie up close to
the Houses almost every where, as they do at Wapping, and other adjacent parts
of the Thames. It would, I think, not have been amiss to have described here,
that Tract of Ground, which lying betwixt Sleswick and Flensburgh, goes to this
Day by the Name of Anglen; and the Inhabitants of it are called Engel Saxen;
who being esteemed the Remnants of one of those three Nations, that settled
here, this Kingdom has particularly derived its Name from them. The River Eyder
also, which divides the Dukedoms of Sleswick, and Holstein, ought not to have
been forgot, since it was the ancient Boundary betwixt the Saxons and Danes.
And since this Gentleman is so strangely taken in the next Chapter with the
ancient Goths, I cannot devise why he should not have remembered a piece of Work
of their Posterity extant in this Country, somewhat resembling that ancient
Roman Work in our Island, called Picts-wall.

This is a long Trench and Wall which was built about the Year 809, in the
Times of the Emperor Charles the Great, by Gotricus, then King of Denmark, to
hinder the Incursions of the Saxons. The Tract of this Work is easily to be
seen yet in a great many places within a few Miles South of Sleswick, and is by
the Inhabitants called Danewark to this Day, and reported, that it did reach
from the one Sea to the other. These matters, as also a great many others,
having a near relation to our ancient times, the Author did either think not
worth mentioning; or else those grave Men who instructed him, were not so
sensible as he describes them in his first Chapter. But it is time also to see
what he says concerning Holstein, these are among others his Words. The
Country, (meaning Holstein) is very fruitful and pleasant, excellently well
seated for Trade, lying between the two Seas, and having the advantage of the
Neighborhood of the River Elbe, and of Hamburgh, etc. Stormar and Ditmarsh, he
says, lie the nearest to the River Elbe, and are for the most part low and rich
Countries; the soil being fat, and in many places resembling Holland, as well
in its fertility, as manner of improvement, etc.

This is all the Account the Author gives us of Holstein, (besides what he says
of its being divided into several Branches) which Country, considering the
ancientness and number of its Nobility, the variety and fertility of Ground,
number and consequence of its Cities and Towns, would have deserved also a more
particular Description: But since he has told us in the First Chapter, That he
did include in this Account the Duchy of Sleswick, as part of Denmark, but not
the Duchy of Holstein; because the former was a F^ef of that Crown, the latter
of the Empire; and our Remarks being limited by the Account he has given of
Denmark, we will only add, That Holstein being divided into Four Principal
Parts, viz. Ditmarsen, Holstein, properly so called, Stormar, and Wageren, the
Author has not mentioned the last of all, though that famous City of Lubeck
lies in the same, as that of Hamburg is situated in Stormaren; each of which
would deserve a particular Description, if the Nature and Bounds of these
Remarks would permit us to undertake it.

What he has said concerning the Country of Oldenburgh, is not much to be said
to, only to remember, that it is not only that sort of Cream-coloured.
Coach-Horses he speaks of, that abound there; but that there is also in that
Country so excellent a breed of all sorts of Horses, introduced some Years ago
by Anthony Gunter, the last Count of Oldenburgh, that I much question, whether
the like, both in number and quality^ can be found in Europe in so small a spot
of Ground.

Concerning Norway, the Author having given a pretty regular account, we will
say no more of it, but that it is not destitute of Corn; since Tellemarch,
Hemarch, and Gouldbrands Daal, afford considerable Quantities of Corn. The like
is also to be found about Druntheim; and when I have once more put him in mind
that the City of Bergen in Norway is one of those which are much better than
our Town of St. Albans, and is capable of harboring Ships of a much greater
Burden than 200 Tuns: I will take my leave of him as far as he describes the
Territories of Denmark; and go on to the following Chapters, where he treats of
the Form of Government, and other Matters. Yet, before I conclude, I cannot but
mention here, that as, out of what has been said in these Remarks upon the
foregoing Chapters, it is evident^ that Denmark is generally a fertile Country,
abounding in Corn, and pasture grounds for the feeding of Oxen, and Horses, of
both which kind prodigious quantities are sent yearly into Germany and other
parts; that their Forests and Woods feed innumerable Herds of Swine of the
best kind, so I cannot sufficiently admire with what confidence this Gentleman
can conclude this Chapter with these words; producing (meaning D^nmark in
general) but few Commodities for the Merchant. But it is time to supersede to
say any thing farther of this point, and to see what he says in the VI.
Chapter, concerning their Form of Government, his words are these, The Ancient
Form of Government ^ere, was the same which the Goths and Vandals Established
in most, if not all parts of Europe, whither they carried their Conquests, and
which in England is retained to this day for the most part. It Is said of the
Romans, that those Provinces which they Conquered, were amply recompensed for
the loss of their Liberty, by being duced from their Barbarity to Civility; by
the introduction of Arts, Learning, Commerce and Politness. I know not whether
this way of arguing have not more of Pomp than Truth in it; but with much
greater reason may it be said, that all Europe was beholding to these People
for introducing or restoring a Constitution of Government far excelling all
others, that we know of in the World. It Is to the Ancient Inhabitants of these
Countries, with other Neighboring Provinces, that we owe the original of
Parliaments, formerly so common, but lost within this last Age, in all
Kingdoms, but those of Poland, Great Britain, and Ireland. And in the Preface
he speaks to the same purpose; which we will consider in this place, because it
explains what he has said just now. These are his words, All Europe was in a
manner a free Country till very lately, in so much that the Europeans were, and
still are distinguished in the Eastern parts of the World, by the name of
Franks In the beginning small Territories or Congregations of People, chose
Valiant and Wise Men to be their Captains or Judges, and as often depased them
upon mismanagement These ^^ Captains doing their Duty well and faithfully) were
the Originals of all our Kings and Princes, which at first, and for a long
time, were every where Elective. According to their own Warlike temper, or that
of the People which they Governed, they (upon the score of Revenge, Ambition,
or being overthrowing with multitudes at home) encroached upon their
Neighbors, till from petty Principalities, their Countries waxed to mighty
Kingdoms. Spain alone consisting of twelve or thirteen till 'tother day, and
one part of our Island of no less than seven: Each of these was at first, made
through an Union of many petty Lordships. Italy from several small
Commonwealths was at length swallowed up by the Emperors, Popes, Kings of
Spain, Dukes of Florence, and other lesser Tyrants. Yet it is to be remarked,
that the Ancient States of Europe is best preserved in Italy, even to this day,
notwithstanding the Encroachments which have been there made on the Peoples
Liberties; of which one reason may be, that the Republics which are more in
Number and Quality in that spot of ground, than in all Europe besides, keep
their Ecclesiastics within their due bounds, and make use of that Natural Wit
which Providence and a happy Climate has given them, to curb those, who if they
had Power, would curb all the World. Every one ought to know how great the
Rights of the People were very lately in the Elective Kingdoms of Sweeden and
Denmark; how Germany was freer than any other part of Europe, till at length
'twas Lorded by Captains which in process of time grew Princes and Electors,
and by Bishops with Temporal Authority, who may thank Charles the Great, (a
bigoted Prince) for the double Sword of Flesh and Spirit.

In this Passage, the Author pretends to give us an Account of the Origin,
Growth, and Alterations of Government, he pretends give us a short History of
the Goths, Vandals, Germans, Spaniards, Italians; nay, even English, Sweeds,
Danes and Poles, and all this in a few Pages, which great Authors before in
whole Volumes, have scarce been able to effect to the purpose: But that which
is most pleasant, is, that he having entangled himself among his Ancient Goths
and Vandals, and their most admirable Constitutions, has not given himself
leisure to look rightly into our latter times, else he could scarce have fallen
into such a Paradox as to affirm, That in Italy the Republics are more in
Number and Quality, than in all Europe besides. When I did read these words to
some Gentlemen, who had Traveled in those as well as other parts of Europe,
and were come to pass a little time in the Country, they did cry out aloud,
risum teneatis amici; and I remember that a certain Mine Here, who seemed to be
well versed in those Countries, could not forbear saying, according to his
Native blunt way, That surely this Gentleman must not have seen much of Europe,
or else have slept by day, and never Traveled but by night; since if he had
but walked through the streets of Amsterdam in the day time, and considered
with what vast Charges that City had been built, the stupendiousness and
vastness of its Fortifications, which together with a large Mote all Brick'd
round, comprehended above 1000 Acres of Ground, the Magnificence and Regularity
of the Houses and Garden; in and about that City; as also that prodigious
number of Shipping of all sorts, which was obvious enough to every Body's Eye,
he might from thence have taken an occasion to inquire better into the Power
and Wealth of this Commonwealth, before he had made this Assertion concerning
his Italian Republics. He ought, said the Amsterdamer (for so I understood
afterward he was) have cast his Eyes upon the two Jews Synagogues at
Amsterdam, whereof one is far exceeding, not only those at Rome and Venice, but
also all the rest in Europe; he ought to have looked upon that famous
Stadthuyse there, with the large Magazin of Arms by it; upon those most
excellent Statues a top of it, especially that of Atlas bearing upon his
Shoulders the Globe which holds 30 Barrels of Water: He ought to have viewed
the extraordinariness of the Globes Celestial and Terrestial, laid in the
Floor of the Great Hall, together with the rest of the Rarities of Pictures,
Carved Works and Marble Statues there: He ought to have made an exact
Observation concerning the great Number and Splendour of their Alms Houses in
this City, which being like Princes Palaces, maintain 20000 Poor per diem; as
also the Multitude, Largeness, and Magnificense of their Bridges and Channels,
which are to be found in every street, and faced every where with Brick and
Square Stonework, and other innumerable advantages which this City enjoys, and
are all acquired with vast Charges and great Industry; and then he would easily
have been able to find out, that if Venice boasts of its Channels which divide,
and Bridges which unite their City; if Genova is proud of her Magnificent
Buildings, Amsterdam surpasses the first, and is not behind hand with the
latter in either kind; But, said he, if this Author have made a due enquiry and
have been instructed, that Amsterdam is the Magazeen of Europe for Corn and
Spices, the latter of which the Venetians formerly brought by Land through
Egypt, that it has a inconceivable store of all manner of Provisions for War,
and more store of sawed and prepared Timber for Shipping, than can be found in
any one Nation besides in the World; how it has the vastest Magazeens of
Marbles whereof Versails it self has been built; how it is the Emperor's Staple
of Quicksilver, and that from hence, not only Spain, but also almost whole
Europe and the Indias are furnished; if he had been duly informed, what vast
quantities of Wines, Brandies, Hemp, Pitch and Tar are to be found here,
besides the prodigious Stores for Shipping which are laid up in the Admiralty
and East India Houses, and are almost incredible to be related; how great a
share Amsterdam bears in the Charges of such a War as the United Provinces now
wage with the rest of the Confedrates against France; and how at last the Bank
of Amsterdam is the most considerable in Europe, and the World, and so much
surpassing both these of Venice and Genoua (the only two Commonwealths now in
Italy, worth mentioning) that these of Amsterdam writes more in one day, than
these of Venice and Genoua together do in two: He might from thence have easily
been convinced concerning the Vanity of his Supposition. The whole Company
could not forbear smiling at the eagerness, wherein this Gentleman had
represented the advantages of his Native place, when it was objected to him by
one, who particularly well seemed to understand the Italian Commonwealths: That
it was scarce to be denied, but that Amsterdam alone, for Wealth and Trade, did
surpass all the Commonwealths in Italy, yet that he had not considered what
large Possessions the Venetians had on the Terra firma, and in the Morea,
besides what belongs to them in Candia and Dalmatia, and what a considerable
Tract of Ground were in the Possession of the Genueses, all along the Sea side
about that City, to all which Amsterdam could not pretend to, as having very
small Territories belonging to it. The Amsterdammer was a little startled at
this unexpected Objection, but quickly recollecting himself, he answered, That
the Wealth of Amsterdam was such as to be able to purchase the Territories of
all the Italian Commonwealths whatsoever. And said he, since this may seem a
hard saying in the Opinion of some, who have not been so inquisitive in this
matter, I will show you another Commonwealth within the Commonwealth of the
United Provinces, and whose chief strength is lodged within the City of
Amsterdam, which easily may be proved to exceed all the Commonwealths of Italy
together, in Trade, Strength, and extent of its Territories, and this is the
East India Company in Holland. This is easy to be believed by these who will
consider, said he, what vast and rich Possessions this Company has in the
Island of Java, where in the Capital City called Batava, Built and Fortified
after the manner of Amsterdam, the General of the Indies lives like a Prince
attended with his Horse and Foot-Guards, and assisted by his Counselors; what
a vast Trade it has in Japan, China, the Isles of Sumatra and Bengala, in the
two latter of which the Company has also here Lodges and vast Storehouses, as
he has likewise on the Coast of Malabar, and Cormandel, and in the Countries of
the Great Mogul and King of Galcanda. How in the Molucca and Banda Islands she
is almost become Master of all, as in the rich Island of Zealon, she has all
the plain Country under her Jurisdiction, having obliged the Emperor to live in
the Mountains, while she is possessed of Colomba and other Garrisons there.
These places being maintained by 30000 Men and 200 great Ships, whereof 50 are
Capital ones, which are in constant Pay of the Commonwealths, of the East
Indias and Transport yearly such prodigious Riches from those parts into the
six Chambers of Amsterdam, Zealand, Delph, Roterdam, Horn, and Enckhuysen,
from whence they are dispersed again through whole Europe; I will, said the
Gentleman, leave it to the Judgment of Understanding Men in this matter,
whether all the Commonwealths of Italy put together, can produce any thing like
it. All the Company was much delighted to hear with what dexterity this
Gentleman pleaded the Cause of his Native Country, unto whom I replied, That
since it was obvious enough that the Strength and Power of all the Republics
that are now adays in Italy, was in no ways to be compared with Holland; I
could not but be of Opinion, that what our Author had said concerning the
Quality of these Republics, was meant concerning their Policy, and, when the
Amsterdammer, interrupting me, answered, That, though he saw me willing to help,
as the saying was, A lame Dog over the Style, yet if I would but look upon the
Author's passage where the words, more in Number and Quality were joined
together, I might easily find what his meaning were, and that one was as
extravagant as the other. For, said he, what is more evident to any judicious
Traveller, than the great difference there is betwixt the number of Republics
in Italy and betwixt the rest of Europe. Not to speak of the seven United
Provinces, which are each of them a separate Commonwealth, but joined by a
mutual Confederacy; are not the Switz Cantons and other Commonwealths
sufficiently known to out-number all the Republics in Italy, and to possess
great Territories? What Traveller can be so ignorant as not to have heard or
seen, that considerable number of Commonwealths, which are remaining to this
day in Germany only, is Venice, Genoua, Lucca, and one or two more not worth
mentioning, equal in number to all these. And if we should add that Bologna
which retains somlething of its Ancient Freedom under the Jurisdiction of the
Pope; and that of Vinzenza under the Government of the Venetians; nay, even the
three small Leagues of the Grisons, laying on the utmost Borders of Italy, all
these will not amount to the number alone of the Commonwealths now in being in
Germany. This may be easily computed if we remember but the chiefest of them;
as Hamborough, Bremen, Lubeck, Embden, Frankford, on the Mayn, Cologne, Worms,
Ratisbon, Augsburgh, Eger, Nurenburg, Ulm, Oppenheimb, Nordlinger, and the
greatest part of the two Circles of Suabia, and Franconia, besides others; and
considering that Hamborough Nurenburg, Collen, Frankford and Bremen, come very
near in bigness even to the best Commonwealth in Italy; that the Bank of
Hamborough comes next to those of Venice and Genoua, and surpasses either of
them in Trade and Shipping; that Bremen and others come very to them in Trade
now; and what great Territory some of them possess; it is evident enough that
if our Author, instead of Europe, had but said Germany, yet it would have been
taken for a Rodomontado by all Travelers, especially those who have made a due
comparison betwixt the Frontier Places and Garrisons of the Venetians, and the
vast Fortifications and considerable Forces. which are maintained by these
abovementioned Commonwealths in Germany.

But at last, said the Dutchmen, supposing I should be willing, according to
your opinion, to apply the Author's word Quality to the Policy of the
Commonwealths of Italy, in comparison of all the rest in Europe, who is so
ignorant, as not to know that a great many of them enjoy a much greater share
of Liberty (as being democratical) than any of his Italian Republics; and though
some of the Swiz Cantons have modeled their Government some what according to
the Venetians; yet some in Germany, and especially the Seven United Provinces,
though Aristocratical do enjoy a so much higher Degree of Liberty before the
Venetian Subjects, generally speaking, that if in those parts the Countryman
should be a Vassal to his Baron or Lord, the Gentlemen should be squeezed
continually, and oppressed by one Podesta or another; and in general, the
Nobility again in constant fear of an Inquisition, they would not like to
change theirs with the Venetians; and I believe that all our Author's Rhetoric
would not be sufficient to persuade them; but that their new way of living free
were much to be preferred before his ancient Gothic way of Governing. But it
is time to break off this Dialogue, and to consider what our Author further
says concerning the ancient Goths and Vandals, whom he makes the Fundators of
that sort of Government in Europe, as is now, for the most part retained in
England, and says, That we owe the Originals of Parliaments to them. I know not
whether this Assertion have not more pomp than truth in it, (to make use of his
own words, which he has given us concerning the Romans) since, if we look
rightly into the Matter, the Government of these Nations when they at first
extended their Conquests over Spain, Africa and Italy, as the Franks did over
France, and the Saxons over England, being wholly adapted to Military
Enterprises; there was, it is true, commonly a General chosen by the Army, and
the Heads of the same were admitted to all Debates; yet was it in no ways to be
compared with what of latter years has been called a Parliament, If we peruse
what the ancient Authors have left us concerning their way of Government at
home we may conjecture what it was abroad. Considering then the most ancient
way or custom of these People (which were Germans) It is manifest enough, That
they were divided in a great number of Commonwealths, whereof each had one whom
they called sometimes a King, sometimes a Duke; These being again subdivided in
Petty Governments Caesar. lib. 4. De Bello Galico Sueviorum Gens bellico
sissima Germano^^ omnium; Iri centum pagos baber dicuntur: Ex quibus quotannis
singuli miliae armatorum bellandi causae, suis ex finibus educunt. eliqui domi
manent. Pro se atque illis Colunt. sed privati and separati agri apud eos nihil
est: Neque longius an^o remanere uno in loco incole^dicausa, licet. Neque
multum frumento, sed maxim^^ partem lacte atque pecore vivunt multumque sunt in
v^nationnibus. Que res and cibi genere and quotidiana exercitatione and
liberate visa^ (quod a pueris nullo officio ^^^ disciplina assue facti nihil
o^^ nino contra voluntatem faciant) and vires alit and immani corporum
magnitudine efficit.
had their Heads, to whom they paid some sort of Respect at pleasure. At home
Matters of no great Concerns were debated, and adjusted by the Chief or Heads
Corn Tacit. de morib. Germ. De minoribusrebus principes consultant, de
majoribus omnes, ita tamen ut ea quoque, quorum penes plebem arbitrium est,
apud principes pertractentur. Illud ex liberate vitium, quod non semel nec
just convenient, sed and alter and tertius dies cunctatione coeuntium
absumitur. Ut turba placuit, considunt armati. Mox Rex vel Princeps, prout
aetas cuique, prout nobilitas, ^prout decus bettorum, prout facundia est,
audiuntur austoritate seadenda magis, quamjubendi potestate. Si displicuit
sententia, fremit^ aspernatur, sin placuit frame as asconcutiunt. Licet apud
concilium accusare quoque and discrimen capitis intendere.
but those of moment the whole Body of the People consulted about, and
determined even as far as Capital Matters went. As one of these Commonwealths
was rarely in a Condition to undertake any foreign War; so the same was always
begun with the joint Consent of such as intended to engage themselves in the
same; when a General (without regard to his Nobility sometimes) Ibid. (c.)
Reges ex nobilitate, duces ex virtute sumunt. Et duces exemplo quotius, quam
imperio, si prompti sint, si comspicui, si ant^aciem agant, admiratione
praesunt. Caeterum neque animadvertere, neque vincire, neque verberare quidem,
nisi Sacerdotibus, permissum.
was chosen, who with the Advice of the Heads of those several Commonwealths,
that were partakers of the Troubles and Dangers of the War was fain to act
rather precariously than with Authority. And considering that Cities, nay, even
Villages were unknown to them ibid. Nullus Germanorum populis urbes habitari,
satis notum est, ne pati quidem inter se junctas seeds. Colunt discreti ac
divers^ ut fons, nt campus, ut nemus, placuit. Vicos locant non in nostrum
morem, connexis and cobaerentibus aedificiis. Suam qnifque domum
spatiocirsumdat.
that they changed their Habitations as often as they found an opportunity, or
disliked the former; that their Fences were hor, rible Forests, and impassable
Mountains and inaccessible Moors; what wonder if their Custom of Governing
(for Laws they had none) were according their wild Inclinations, and Savage
Habitations. But to deduce the Orginals of Parliaments, used in the best
regulated, Governments of Europe from the Barbarous and Irregular Conventions
of a Savage People; when we may have them from better Hands, I must confess, is
a way that savours a little to much of a conceit of unknown Antiquity. I see no
reason why wemight not with the same Right, or perhaps more affirm that the
Cosarcks upon the Frontiers of Poland; the Rascians in Bosnia, and Morlacks in
Dalmatia have their Parliaments, since it is certain they are as free as ever
the Germans were, and have their way of consulting together under their Heads
as well, and that more orderly than those had in ancient times.

Nevertheless it can scarce be denied, but that Spain and France, which were
the first places whither those barbarous Nations extended their Conquests, have
been very Instrumental in first showing to the other Nations in Europe the
Parliamentary way. These two Nations being a great deal sooner and more known
to the Romans than the Germans, we have received a more perfect and authentic
Account concerning them; And as they were sooner and better Civilized than the
Germans in those Times, so their Government was more regular, and coming a
great deal nearer to these most excellent Conventions, afterward called
Parliaments. The Spaniards were, it is true, divided into a great many
Commonwealths, or separate Governments; but these were more Aristocratical than
Democratical, having sometimes their petty Kings, Princes or Senate; Live. Hists
Romans lib. 21. 24, 28. Caes. lib. do bell. Hisp.
and as they had a great many well fortified Cities, Towns and Seaports; so
had the most Civilized Provinces their Capital Cities, where the Prince that
governed the rest, together with their Principals did reside, and had a great,
though limited Power over them. Of this is a very remarkable Instance related
by Livy: from whence may be conjectured in how great a Veneration the Name and
Authority of Kings was among these People, Live. Hist. Romans Lib. 27. C. 19.
when they would have proclaimed Scipio a King; which he refusing, says the
Historian, they were surprised how he could refuse the highest Degree of
Dignity, Cricumfusa inde multitudo Hispanorum and ante deditorum and pridie
captorum Regem eum ingenti consensu appellavi^ Tum Scipo, silent to per
praeconem facto, sibi maximum nomen Imperatoris esse, dixit, quo se milites sui
appellassent. Regium nomen alibi magnum, Ramae intolerabile ad esse. Regalem
animum in seesse; si id in hominis ingenio amplissimum ducerent, tacit
judicarent; Vocisusurpatione abstinerent. Sensere etiam barbari magnitudinem
animi: Cujus miraculo nominis alii mortaleos stuperent, tam alto fast igio
aspernantis. Dona inde Regulis principibusque Hispanor^^ divisa, and ex magna
copia captorum equorum trecentos. equos el^gere judibilem jussit.
which all the rest of Mortals were so covetous of. The ancient Gauls,
adjoining on one side to Spain, as they were not unacquainted with the
Spaniards, serving sometimes there under the Carthaginians, sometimes under the
Romans, and having even extended their Conquest thither, Caes. de bell. Gall.
Lib. 1. 2. 3.
as may be seen by the Celtiberians, who came out of France into Spain; so they
had questionless a great part of their Policy from thence, it being evident
that they had their Kings, Princes, Senate and Nobility, who did Command over
such several distinct. Commonwealths, as they were divided into: And as they,
according to the Method of the Spaniards, had their well regulated Councils,
Caes. bell, Gall. lib. 1. 2.
consisting of their principal Men, so they had their fortified Towns, where
their Kings, Princes and Magistrates generally resided, who had a Power much
beyond what was usual then in Germany, nay, even of Life and Death, and were
not depending on the Popularicy, but some of them according to their Laws and
Constitutions, were Hereditary: How much more polished these People were than
the Germans, and how much more regular their Councils; Caesar has Caes. bell.
Gall. lib. 1. In castris Helvetiorum tabule repertae sunt liter is Graeeis
confectae and ad Caesarem perlatae, quibus in tabulis nominatim ratio confecta
erat, qui numerus domo exisset eorum, qui arma far possent, and item
separatim pueri, senes, mulieresque, etc.
left us a notable Instance concerning the Helvetians in his Commentaries;
Where he tells us, That after the Defeat of the Helvetians, there was a
Register found written in the Grecian Tongue in their Camp, wherein was
contained a most exact Account of the Names and Number of such, as according to
the Agreement of the Grand Council of the several Helvetian Commonwealths, were
come to settle themselves in those parts of France, where they were defeated by
Caesar. Caes. lib. 2. bell. Gall.
And much to the same purpose he speaks afterward concerning those People in
France, which were then called Belgae, and inhabited those parts of the
Netherlands, Normandy and Picardy, which are opposite to our shore, though at
the same time he reckons them the least civilized of all the French. De numero
little omniase habere explorata Rhemi dicebant, propter^a quod propinquitatibus
affinitatibusque conjuncti, quantam, quisque multitudinem in Belgarum communi
concilio ad id bellum, pollicitus sit, cognoverint. Suessones suos esse
finitimos latissimos; feracissimosque agros possidere. Apud eos fuisse regem
nostra etiam memoria Divitiacum totius Galli^e Potentissimum, qui qu^^ magnae
parti^ harum Region^m, tum etiam Britanniae Imperium obtinuer^t^ nune esse
Regem Galbam: Ad hunc proter justitiam prudentiam que summani totius ^e^i^ ^
voluntate doferri.
Any body that will take the pains duly to compare what Caesar, Livy and
Tacitus have left behind them concerning the ancient Spaniards, French and
Germans, will soon be convinced, how far the well regulated Policy of the two
former in their Cities and Councils exceeded those confused Meetings of the
Germans, without Order or Command; and which of these may justly claim that
Prerogative of having been the Original of these Conventions of the States
since called Parliaments. What some object, that these Nations being subdued by
the Romans, had before the Germans came thither, lost together with their
Liberty, their ancient Constitutions of Government, is very insignificant;
Since it may easily be proved, that, as all of them did not lose their Liberty,
so they retained their Constitutions. Who can be ignorant that a great many
Commonwealths, both in Spain and France, were not Conquered by the Romans; but
were received as Allies, and proved very instrumental in subduing the rest?
Caesar. lib. 1. bell^ Gall. Orat. ad Ariovist^ Multa a Caesare in came
sententiam dicta sunt, quare negotio desistere non posset, and neque suam neque
Populi Romans consuetudinem pati, ut optime meritos socios desereret; neque se
putare Galliam esse potius Ariouisti quam Populi Romans bello superatos esse
Arvernos and Rutenos a Q^ Fabio Maximo, quibus Populus Romans ignovisset, neque
in provinciam redegisset, neque stipendium imposuisset. Quod si antiquissimum
quodque tempus spectare oporteret, Populi Romans justissimum esse in Gallia
Imperium; si judicium Senatus ser^ari aporteret, liberam esse debere Galliam,
quam bello victam suis legibus uti vol^isset.
And yet among these also that were subdued, it was a common Custom among the
Romans to let them enjoy their Laws, and even to confirm their Kings and
Princes. Caesar called the French that inhabited the Neighboring Provinces of
the Rhine, the Allies of the Romans; and said that France, according to the
Decree of the Senate, ought to enjoy its Liberty and Laws Caes. lib. 5. bell,
Gall. Concilio Gallorum Sambrigiae peracto quod eo anno frumentum in Gallia,
propter sic^itates angustius provenerat, coactus est aliter acsuperioribus
annis, excrcitum in hybernis collocare, legionesque in plures Civitates
distribuere, etc. Unam legionem, quam proxime trans Padum conscripserat, and
Cohortes V. in Eburones, quorum pars maxima est inter Mosam and Rhenum, qui suo
Imperio. Ambiorigis and Catavulci erant, misit.
. And when he afterward returned the second time out of Britanny: and had
occasion to lay his Army into Winter quarters among the Belgas or Armoricans,
subdued by him before, he called a general Council together of these several
Commonwealths, where he intended to divide his Forces into Winter quarters:
Tacitus de moribus Germanor.(e) Ubii transgressi olim and experimento fidei
super ipsam Rheni ripam collocati, ut arcerent, non ut custodir^ntur. Omnium
harum gentium praecipue Bata^^ non multum ex ripa, sed insulam Rheni amnis
colunt. Manet honos and antiquae societatis insigne; Nam nec tributis
contemnuntur, nec publicanus atterit, etc.
And that some of these Commonwealths retained their Liberty and Constitutions
about 150 Years after Caesar's time; Tacitus has left as a particular
Observation concerning some of them, that lived near the Rhine. It would be too
tedious to relate all that the Ancients have left behind them in their
Monuments concerning this Point; out of what has been said, I think, it may
easily be seen, that, as the Constitution of Government among the ancient
Spaniards and French, (being composed out of their Kings, the Nobility and
principal Men of the Cities,) did come a great deal nearer to the Parliamentary
way of consulting in latter Times, than the irregular Proceedings of the
Germans in those times; So those that will thoroughly peruse the ancient
Histories, will be sufficiently convinced, that the same Form of Government was
never extinguished in all parts of those Kingdoms, but preserved even till the
time, when the Goths, Vandals, Suevians, Franks, and others, settled themselves
in those parts; So that it may be said, that we owe the first Rudiments of
Governing by consent of the Estates to those Countries, which were Conquered
afterward by the Germans, but that the same should have been established by
them, when they were so many hundred Years before in use there, is, what scarce
any body, who is not prepossessed with the conceit of a Gothic and tumultuous
sort of Government, will assert. And here, if we should enquire into the
Originals of Princes and Kings, (which our Author pretends to have done in a
few Lines) at several Times and Places, we should be obliged to go much beyond
the design of these Remarks, since to understanding Men it is apparent enough,
that if the Author's whole Book, had been employed upon that Point only, it
would not have been sufficient so much as to touch the chief Heads of so ample
a Subject. I will only say, that I cannot sufficiently admire, why this
Gentleman is so mightily taken with these Times, when Spain and England were
divided, the first into thirteen, and the latter into seven or more peculiar
Governments, considering that they were perhaps the worst of Times ever these
Countries saw; neither could any lasting Peace be settled, till instead of the
same, one Head had the Management of the whole Body. But before we leave this
Subject, we must say something concerning Germany and Sweden: For every one
ought to know, says he, how great the Rights of the People were very lately in
the Elective Kingdoms of Sweden and Denmark: If every one ought to know, he
might have said a little more of it, since else few will know it for him. What
clear a Notion this Gentleman has concerning Elective Kingdoms, will better
appear hereafter, when we shall have occasion to treat upon the Question,
Whither the Kingdom of Denmark has been Hereditary or Elective; But as for the
Rights of the People in Sweden, why they should so much vary from the same,
that they were lately, he would have done well to have explained a little. I am
not ignorant, that the Wings of the Nobility, that composed formerly the Senate
there, have been considerably clipped, and that about fifteen or sixteen Years
ago, when that Kingdom during the Minority of this present King, was partly
through Mismanagement, partly through the War with the Empire and Denmark,
miserably exhausted; the Estates then, finding themselves not in a Capacity to
restore matters without extraordinary Subsidies, which could not easily be
levied upon the Subjects, did then advise the King, to oblige such of his
Subjects as had by the Profuseness of some of his Predecessors, or other means,
acquired to themselves vast Estates and other Advantages belonging to the
Crown, to restore the same, which was executed accordingly; some of the
chiefest profering the same voluntarily, the rest being obliged to follow their
Example. As by these means the King was enabled to restore the decayed State of
the Militia and Army; so it is not to be denied, but that his Revenues were
greatly increased, as well as his Power; yet is from hence not necessarily to
be concluded, that the Rights of the People are lost, since the four Estates of
the Nobility, Clergy, Citizens and Peasants, have thereby not surrendered any
thing of their Native Rights, tho perhaps some particular Persons have felt the
smart of it. Germany was freer than any other part of Europe, says our Author,
but he ought to have remembered that this was in those days when every body
being his own Master, there, they lived more like the Tartars do now, than like
any of the rest of the Europeans; And if they had continued in that so much
admired State of Liberty, I am apt to believe Germany would not have come into
that flourishing Condition it has been in since. If it was for my purpose here
to enlarge me self upon this matter, I could show easy enough, that these,
whom our Author calls Captains, Princes, Electors, Bishops, etc. were the first
Restorers of the Liberty of Germany; that they were the Founders of its
Greatness, and Upholders of the same after this Country was Conquered by
Charles the Great. I could show him, that there were the Bishops in Germany
before the times of Charles the Great, and that those instituted by him, for
all their double Sword of Flesh and Spirit, have not been armed sufficiently so
to subdue the Germans, but that in the most parts the ancient Liberty has been
preserved under their Jurisdiction, and some have been able to find ways to
free themselves quite from it. And thus much I will only say in the Vindication
of Charles the Great; As he has laid the Foundation of what Germany is now
(whom our Author makes bold to call bigoted) that as able Headpieces as this
Gentleman, and these some what better versed in the German Constitutions than
he can pretend to, have so greatly approved of the Methods that that Great
Emperor took in uniting so vast a Country both in Laws and Religion, that his
vain and confident Assertions will prove ridiculous to all, who have had any
true insight into the Affairs of Germany. I must add something more concerning
Poland, which he says, is the only Kingdom besides this Island and Ireland,
where Parliaments are not lost, to show what sort of Parliament is to be found
there, that so every body may be able to judge how far the Polish Parliaments
do differ from the English, both in their Proceedings and fundamental
Constitutions. It is therefore to be known, that there are but two sorts of
People (besides the King) in Poland, that can justly be said to have a Share in
the Government, viz. the Clergy and Nobility; The Citizens and Peasants being
totally excluded from the same, and being for the most part subjected either to
the Clergy or the Nobility, the fewest to the King. And though the Cities in
the Regal Prussia enjoy a greater share of Freedom, as having their own
Constitutions, and sending their Deputies to the Diet; yet is their Number so
inconsiderable, in comparison of the rest, that it scarce comes into
Consideration. The King's chief Advantage is, That he has a considerable
Revenue allowed him, and has the choosing of all the Officers, both Civil and
Military; but the Great Officers, especially those who by their Places are
Members of the Senate of the Kingdom, as also all the Senators, have their
Offices granted them ad Vitam; so that when once put in Possession of the same,
they have not any Dependence further from the King. The two Archbishops, and
other Bishops, as they owe their Promotion chiefly to the Pope, (though they
are nominated by the King) and are exempted from the King's Jurisdiction; so
they having vast Possessions, which depend only from them, have therefore a
great, if not the greatest Sway in the Senate of the Kingdom. But both the
Spiritual Lords, as also the rest of the Nobles who compose the Senate, having
the Places of the best Profit in their Possession, and maintaining in their
Palaces a great many of the poorer sort of Nobility, become thereby so
powerful, that it may justly be said, that these are the chief Governors of
the Realm, since the King cannot do any Public Matter of Moment without them,
as being by their Constitution his constant Advisers and Directors; the
Deputies of the Provinces (who are chosen by the Nobility) being only called
together when Matters of the highest Moment are to be consulted, or concluded.
These were, in former Times, never to meet, but in case of agreeing to a new
Tax, resolved beforehand in the Senate; but within these Hundred Years, or
thereabouts, their Power is so much increased, that they claim a Right to be
consulted with in all Public Matters of great Moment.

The Senate of the Kingdom, which is the constant Council of the King, the
Members whereof, as I have said, are constituted by the King ad Vitam, consists
first of the two Archbishops of the Kingdom, of whom the Archbishop of Guiesen
is Primate of Poland, having the Power of Administering the Kingdom in Absence
or in case of the Death of the King: After these are the Bishops, and some
Abbots, Thirty Four Governors of Provinces called Palatines, Eighty Three
Governors of Castles, or Deputy Lieutenants of the Palatines called
Castellans, and Ten of the Great Officers of State, who are in all computed to
amount to near an Hundred and Fifty in Number. And are always chosen out of the
Nobility; The Clergy among these, though the least in Number, yet having more
Possessions than both the King and Nobility, and in no ways depending on them,
has the greatest Sway; and the two Chancellors and Vicechancellors also a great
Power of Signing and Dispatching Things without the King's consent, and
refusing also his Orders, if they do not think convenient to obey them, Three
of these Four being generally Ecclesiastics. When with their Advice, the King
has resolved to call together the Diet, he orders a Convention of all the
Nobility to be had in every particular Diocese or Government, at a certain Time
and customary Place; where being convened, the Palatine, Castellans, and other
Senators, having explained to them the Reasons why the King intended to call a
Diet, and what Time the same was to be held, the Nobility of each Diocese,
after Prayers finished, choose their Deputies; to whom they give Instructions
concerning the Propositions made to them by the Senators, though sometimes they
also allow them a larger Authority, which however expires with one and the same
Diet, which is not to last above Six Weeks, and seldom continued much longer.
These particular Conventions being over, there are two more Conventions to be
held, which they call General Conventions, one whereof is always in Great
Poland, the other in Little Poland; in which two Places, all the Deputies, and
such of the Nobility as are pleased to come, being again Convened at a certain
Time, they there confer together concerning the Propositions made by the King,
and what Instructions they have received thereupon from their several
Provinces. Thus prepared they come to the Diet, where the Senate being seated
in a Theater, the Deputies and Clerks standing by, the Chancellor or
Vice Chancellor proposes in the Name of the King such Matters as they are to
consult upon. This done, the Archbishops and Bishops, and so all the rest of
the Senate, having given their Votes, the Deputies ask Leave from the King to
withdraw, and to consult concerning the Propositions made to them. Their
Consultation being over, they repair again to the Senate; and having given
their Opinion concerning the Business in Agitation, they also propose such
Matters as they think fit to be consulted about: Which Matters being agreed
unto by common Consent of the Senate and Deputies, the King gives his Consent
last of all; which done, it has the Force of a Decree of the Diet. But if one
of the Deputies makes his Protestation against any Thing, as done in Prejudice
of the Liberties and Prerogatives of the Nobility, or the Constitutions of the
Kingdom, the whole Proceeding becomes thereby void, and of no Force.

From hence may be collected, what Difference there is betwixt the Dyets in
Poland and our Meeting of Parliaments, as well in their Fundamental
Constitutions, as Manner of Proceedings. And if we consider how all the Cities
and Commons in Poland (except the City of Cracaw, and a few more in Prussia)
are excluded not only from the Diet, but also all Places of Note, nay that even
in the most of them the Magistracy and whole Corporations are depending on
either the Clergy or Nobility; and what prodigious Prerogatives^ they have
acquired to themselves; as by Example, That a Nobleman Killing a Commoner,
shall pay but a small Fine; but if a Commoner Kills a Nobleman, it shall be
Capital: That a Malefactor being a Nobleman, and taken in the Fact, shall not
be judged by the Magistrates of that City or Corporation where he is taken:
That the Bishops, as well as other Noblemen, have their Strong Castles,
Garrisoned by themselves; and a great many the like, of dangerous Consequence:
These, I say, duly considered by an Englishman, will, I am apt to believe,
put him very much out of Conceit of Polish Parliaments; and both the King, as
also the Cities, Corporations, and Commons of England, will have but little
Reason to thank this Gentleman for his comparing the same with ours; especially
since he might have found out other Countries, and that nearer at hand, where
the Meeting of the Estates come a great deal nearer to our Parliaments.

But leaving to our Author the Advantages of his Ancient Gothic and New Polish
Parliaments, we must go on, to see what he says in this same Chapter concerning
the Form of Government in Denmark in particular. These are his Words: Denmark
therefore was, till within these Thirty Two Years, governed by a King chosen by
the People of all sorts, (even the Boors had their Voices;) which King Waldemar
the Third acknowledged in that memorable Answer of his to the Pope's Nuncio,
who pretended to a great Power over him: Naturam habemus a Deo, regnum a
subditis, Divitias a parentibus, Religionem a Romana Ecclesia; quam si nobis
invides, renuntiamus per praesentes. The Estates of the Realm being convened to
that Intent, were to Elect for their Prince such a Person as to them appeared
Personable, Valiant, Just, Merciful, Affable, a Maintainer of the Laws, a Lover
of the People, Prudent, and adorned with all other Virtues fit for Government,
and requisite for the great Trust reposed in him; yet with due Regard had to
the Family of the preceding Kings. If within that Line they found a Person thus
qualified, or esteemed to be so, they thought it but a piece of just Gratitude
to prefer him before any other to this high Dignity, and were pleased, when
they had reason to choose the Eldest Son of their former King, rather than any
of the Younger; as well, because they had regard to Priority of Birth, when all
other Virtues were equal, as because the Greatness of his Paternal Estate might
put him above the Reach of Temptations to be Covetous or Dishonest, and enable
him, in some degree, to support the Dignity of his Office. But, after such a
Choice, if they found themselves mistaken, and that they had advanced a Cruel,
Vicious, Tyrannical, Covetous, or Wasteful Person, they frequently Deposed him,
oftentimes Banished, sometimes Destroyed him, and this either Formally, by
making him Answer before the Representative Body of the People; Or if by ill
Practices, such as making of Parties, Levying of Soldiers, contracting of
Alliances to support himself in Opposition to the Peoples Rights, he was grown
too Powerful to be legally Contended with, they dispatched him without any more
Ceremony the best way they could, and Elected presently a better Man in his
Room; sometimes the next of Kin to him, sometimes the Valiant Man that had
exposed himself so far as to undertake the Expulsion, or the Killing of the
Tyrant; at other times a Private Person of Good Reputation, who possibly least
dreamed of such an Advancement. Frequent meetings of the Estates, was a part of
the very Fundamental Constitution: In those meetings all matters relating to
Good Government were Transacted: Good Laws were Enacted, all Affairs belonging
to Peace or War, Alliances, disposal of great Offices, Contracts of Marriages
for the Royal Family, etc. were debated, etc. This was the Ancient Form of
Government in this Kingdom, which continued with very little variation
(excepting that the Power of the Nobles increased too much) till about 32 years
ago, when at one instant the whole Face of Affairs was changed, etc. It is
easy for any considering Person to guess the Consequences of this, which are
Frequent and Arbitrary Taxes, and commonly very Excessive ones, even in times
of Peace; little regard being had to the occasion of them: So that the value of
Estates in most parts of the Kingdom is fallen three fourths. And it is worse
near the Capital City, under the Eye and Hand of the Government, than in
Remoter Provinces; Poverty in the Gentry, which ^ecessarily causes extremities
of misery in the Peasants, Partiality in the distribution of Justice, when
Favorites are concerned, with many other mischiefs, which shall be hereafter
more particularly mentioned; being the constant Effects of Arbitrary Rule in
this and all other Countries wherein it has prevailed.

This Description or Form of Government it is likely the Author has given us in
imitation of some old Fashion Romance or other, for I am sure out of History he
can bring none that were ever like it; I must confess that I could scarce Read
without some Indignation, how he had abused in a most unanswerable manner, the
Laudable Ancient Constitutions of the Danes, not only, but also by so doing had
taken an Opportunity to put his Fictitious Suppositions; the conceits of his
own Brains or some States Mountebanks Chimerical Notions for Truth upon the
English Nation. What he says concerning the Election of their Princes, How the
Eldest were preferred before the Younger out of Courtesy, if they were equal
in Virtues, as also their Adhering to a Line being at pleasure, might be taken
for a vulgar mistake, such as does arise from the neglect of true History: The
Qualifications, which he says, were required in their Princes, might be looked
upon, as an Effect of a Poetical fancy; But what he tells of frequently
Deposing and Banishing, nay even Destroying their Kings, either Formally or
without Ceremony, by some Valiant Hand, who for his Meritorious Act of Killing
or Expelling the Tyrant, used to Succeed in the Kingdom: Is so much against the
Practice of the Ancient Danes described in True History, that these
Extravagancies cannot be looked upon by Judicious Persons, otherwise than
selfinvented Notions, fitted to the Humor of some self-conceited Politicians;
but always esteemed by the more Understanding sort, as most pernicious to Human
Society. To make this appear the better, what if we should endeavor to show
that the Ancient Government of the Danes was so far from Adhering to such
Barbarous Practices, or choosing their Kings by Courtesy, that the Laws of
Succession were so Sacred with them, that that Kingdom ought rather to be
called Hereditary (if any one ever was, in this Gentleman's Opinion, to be
esteemed as such in Europe) than Elective. Not to mention here the times before
Charles the Great, the History of those Countries before that time being
infected with many Fabulous Relations, we will begin with the Year 804 P. C. N.
When Gotricus Brother to his Predecessor, Sigifrid being declared King of
Denmark, left that Crown to his Son Olaus, from whom it always descended in the
same Line to the next Heir, till after the Death of Margaret Queen of Denmark,
Sweden and Norway, which was about the Year 1414. Thus the Crown of Denmark
having been in a perpetual Lineal Succession of one Family for above 600 Years,
and the said Margaret having no Issue, she had in her Life time Crowned Eric
VIII. her Sisters Son, who having left Denmark, and resigned the Crown, after
an Anarchy of Six Years, in his Place, was Constituted Christopher III. Eric's
Sister's Son, who is Mother was also Niece to the above named Queen Margaret.
This Christopher dying without Heirs, as did also his Sister before him; the
most Ancient Race of the Danish Kings was then extinguished about the Year
1448. Only that there was left Adolph VIII. Duke of Sleswick, and Count of
Holstein, being Son to a Nephew of Woldemar IV. to whom the Crown of Denmark
being offered by the States, he refused the same as having no Children. The
Crown being thus fallen into the Hands of the States, yet were they so
Religious in observing their Ancient Right of Succession, that they chose
Christian Count of Oldenburg for their King, as being Son of Hedwig Sister of
Adolph, Duke of Sleswick, and consequently being Related to the Family of the
Ancient Danish Kings; his Son John Succeeding him, Constituted with consent of
the States, his Son Christian II. King of Denmark, who was afterward Declared
by the States, (who had now acquired a greater power) incapable of the Crown,
as having Reigned very Tyrannically over them; and in his stead Frederick I.
Brother of John King of Denmark, and Uncle to Christiern, was made their King.
And I think it is a remarkable Instance, that even at that time the States of
Denmark did not esteem it belonging to themselves to alter the Succession of
the Crown, when they did not only choose Frederick I. who was Son of John King
of Denmark, but also afterward, in a public Convention of the said Estates,
they did promise to John, Son to the banished King Christiern, the Restitution
of his Fathers Kingdoms, not only, but also the immediate Succession after the
Death of Frederick I. But John the Son of Christiern II. dying about the same
time, when Frederick I. dyed, the Crown came to his Son Christiern III. whom in
a direct Line have Succeeded Frederick II. Christiern IV. Frederick III. and
Christiern V. the present King of Denmark. Out of these Heads, which I have
thought fit to mention here, it may be evident, whether the Succession of
Denmark was precarious, as this Author has taken a great deal of pains to
persuade us. And whether this long and constant Succession in one Family, were
Anciently depending from a free choice or not, will be worth our enquiring
into. Meurs. hist. Dan. part 1. lib. 3. Factus igitur Rex Sueno, quem Canuti M.
nepotem Dant non amore aliquo ducti, sed necessitate coacti, quia e prosapia
Regia nemo alius superesset, Regem sibi elegerunt.

Pontan Rer. Dan. Hist. Lib. 5. sed Sueno ex sorore, ut indicavimus, Canuti M.
genitus, solus se Magni conatibus objecit, fretus non tam amicorum praesidiis,
quam sua virtute and natalibus, quibus id quod poscebat, omni ratione deberi
existinabat.


Canute Surnamed the Hardy, 1044. having no Issue, had by Compact Resigned the
Crown of Denmark, after his death, to Magnus King of Norwegan, who by force of
Arms taking Possession of the same, was opposed by Sueno, Canute's Sister Son,
till Magnus after a Reign of Eight Years, coming to dye of a fall from his
Horse: He was declared King of Denmark, though in no ways beloved of the Danish
Nobility, as having Waged continually War against them in the time of Magnus;
yet being the only one that was left of the Ancient Race of the Danish Kings,
was received as King of Denmark. Pont. Rer. Dan. lib. 7. Abelem qui parricidio
meruerat ab omni non modo successionis, sed haeredii quoque ^ure excludi, Regem
creant. (1.) Quod nimirum frater ejus Ericus filios sibi superstites nullos
reliquisset. (2.) Et Abel inter fratres, qui superstites erant, natus esset
maximus. (3.) Quod metus alias foret, ne Slesvicensem Ducatum, quo potiebatur,
a Regno separaret.

Meurs. Hist. Dan. Part. 2. Lib. 2. Abelus igitur, fratre Erico per infandum
scelus caeso, Regnum occupat; quippe ille nullos liberos reliquerat: Et hic
fratrum natu maximus Regno proximus censebatur, etc. Ille datis ad Senatum
literis causam suam agere, and de multis fratrem accusare, tum testari, illum
nullo suo scelere, verum casu, pluribus in scapham defilientibus, periisse.
Haec cum reputarent proceres, Regem sibi necessarium potius quam dignum creant
ipsis Kalend. Novembris.


Afterward when in the Year 1250. Abel had caused his Brother Eric V. King of
Denmark to be murdered, though the States abominated the Fact, yet Eric having
left no Children, and he being the Eldest among the Brothers that were left,
was made King of Denmark, being Preferred before his Younger Brother
Christopher, who Reigned after him. How the States did promise the Crown to
John the deposed Christiern II's. Son, after the death of Frederick I. has been
said before: and how in our Age the States of this Kingdom, set Frederick III.
the present King of Denmark, Father upon the Throne in spite of a Faction that
were for Advancing his Younger Brother, begotten of another Mother and the
Second Wife of Christiern the IV. to the Royal Dignity, cannot be out of the
Memory of such as are acquainted with the Transactions of these Countries.
Besides, these undeniable Examples there are also obvious amongst the
Historians Testimonies sufficient to convince any Body that is not prepossessed
with a vain conceit of his own opinion, That the Succession was not Anciently
depending from the will of the States, but that their Kings had, and did claim
a Right to the same for themselves and their Heirs, both Males and Females.
When after the death of Waldemar, the States declared Olaus Haquin and
Margarets, (King and Queen of Norway) Son King of Denmark Pontan. Rer. Dan.
Histor. Libr. VIII. Olaum Hacquini Norvagiae and Margaretae filium Regem
declarant, utpote qui matris aspectu non modo regni proximus esset, etc. Pont.
Lib. 9. Rer. Dan. Page 516. Albert. Crantzius Histor. Norvag. Lib. VII.
the Danish Historiographer gives this among others for a Reason, because he
was from his Mothers side the next to the Kingdom. And in the same Book he has
given us an Extract Crantz. hist. Dan. 2. cap. XVII. Broderus filius Jarmerici
quem ille destinatum supplicio priusquam interiret morte jussit revocare. Ne
omnino Regnum haerede careret.
out of the Records, wherein the said Margaret Mother to this Olaus, and
Daughter of King Waldemar is called Queen of Norway and Sweden, and the true
Heiress of Denmark. That noted Historian Crantius speaks much to the same
purpose, both of Olaus and his Mother Margaret. He says, that the two Kingdoms
of Denmark are Hereditary to Olaus, and that after the Decease of him, there
being no Male Heirs left, all was fallen to Queen Margaret. Crantz. hist. Dan.
2. cap. XVII. Broderus filius Jarmerici quem ille destinatum supplicio
priusquam interiret morte jussit revocare. Ne omnino Regnum haerede careret.
The same Author calls Siwald the First, Heir and Successor to his Father King
Ungrin, in the Kingdom of Denmark; and speaks much to the same purpose of
Broderick, Son of Yarmerick King of Denmark, And truly the Name of Heir of
Denmark is so frequent in the ancient Histories of Denmark, especially before
the Times of Charles the Great, that it would be infinite to mention them here,
since even in latter Times the same has not been out of date there. Meursius
does not only call Christiern Son to Christiern Heir of that Kingdom, but also
bestows the same Title upon John the Son of the deposed Christiern the II. And
here I cannot but insert the Reasons, which were alleged by the States of
Denmark, among others in their Proclamation, for the declaring Frederick I.
King of Denmark, after they had renounced all Obedience to Christiern II.;
Their Reasons are these, Because he was the Heir of Norway, Meurs. Lib. 1.
and had his Offspring out of the most glorious Family of the Danish Kings;
That He was born a Kings (Christiern I's) Son, and that therefore this Honor
did belong to him in his own Right before any other Prince, Chytr. Saxon.
and that he ought to have a Portion or Patrimonial Share out of his Fatherly
Kingdom. From hence I think may be easily understood, that the States of
Denmark, even in latter Times, (did not assume to themselves the free disposal
of the Crown, and that the Succession was not precarious, and as our Author
would have it, according to good Behavior. This will appear more clear to us
if we consider, that the same Right of Succession has not only in former, but
also latter Times, ever since the Oldenburg Family has swayed the Scepter in
that Kingdom, been deprived, not only to the next Male Heirs, though Minors,
but also to the Females and their Offspring. Of the Female Succession we have
Two Instances since the Oldenburg Family came to the Crown. The first is, That
it was agreed by Marriage Contract betwixt Christiern II. and Isabel, Sister to
the Emperor Charles V. Chytr. in Saxon, ad an. 1522^
That if they should leave no Male-Heirs behind them, the eldest Daughter
should suceed in the Throne of Denmark. And when afterward the same Isabella
followed her Husband in his Exile, after he was deposed, the States did not
only recall her, but also promised her Obedience; nay, they did declare by a
public Proclamation, That if she would return to the Kingdom, they would
acknowledge her for their Queen and Sovereign Lady. Which Proffer however,
though never so advantageous, she refused to accept of.

Of the Female Succession the Danish ancient History furnishes us with a
remarkable Example in Margaret, Daughter to King Waldemar IV. who being married
to Haquin King of Norway, after the Decease of her Husband and Son Olaus,
succeeded them in both the Kingdoms of Denmark and Norway, and reigned for
about Thirty Years, about the Year 1400. And of several Kings of Denmark, who
came to that Crown by Right of the Female Succession, there are several
Examples in their Histories. Sueno III. about the Year 1155 succeeded Canute
IV. Meurs. hist Dan. Part 1. lib. 3. Pontan. Rer. Dan. ^ist. lib 5.
he being born from Margaret, the Sister of Canute, surnamed The Great, and not
much beloved by the Danes, as having to his Father one Ulpho, an Englishman;
yet being the only One that was left of the Royal Family, was therefore
declared King of Denmark: So was Olaus, Son to Haqui^^, and Margaret, King and
Queen of Norway, declared King of Denmark; Crantz. Chron. Dan lib. 3.
because from his Mother's side, he came from the Race of the Danish Kings, she
being Daughter to Waldemar IV. King of Denmark. This was about the Year 1340.
And not long after, viz. about the Year 1417. Eric, the same Margaret's
Sister's Son, Pontan. Rer. Dan, Hist. lib. 1.
succeeded here in the Kingdom upon the same Pretensions, having been by her
recieved as a Consort in the Danish Empire before. As for the Succession of the
next Heirs of the Royal Family in their Minority, several Instances also may be
found in the ancient Histories of Denmark, as well as these of latter times.
Eric, about the Year 855. succeeded his Father Siward in the Kingdom of
Denmark, being a very Child; Meurs. hist. Dan. lib. 3.
from whence he was surnamed Barn; which in the Danish Tongue signifies a
Child. Waldemar I. being constituted King of Denmark about the Year 1157. when
he was scarce nine Years of Age, is another instance in this kind. Eric VII.
Pontan. hist. Dan. lib. 5^
also Son of King Christopher I. and Olaus Son of Queen Margaret, were both
declared and crowned Kings of Denmark, before they were come to the Age of
Eleven; the first about the Year 1260. the second about the Year 1340. And
Eric, Queen Margaret's Sister's Son, was by her made Consort in the Government,
when he was a Child. Neither has the Succession and Declaration of the next
Heirs, though Minors, ceased since the Oldenburg Family had the Government of
this Kingdom. Meurs. lib. 1. de gest. Christian II
Christiern I. had his Son John declared King in his Life time, when he was
about the Age of Twelve: Likewise had King John his Son Christiern declared his
Successor when he was not above Six Years of Age. Meurs. lib. 2. de g^^. Joh.
And Christiern IV. was at the Age of Seven declared Successor to his Father,
King Frederick, then living; and having received Homage from the States,
actually succeeded him after his Death before he was quite Eleven. Out of the
History of the continual Succession of the next Heirs, belonging to the Royal
Family of Denmark, both Males and Females, and that also in their Minority, it
will be no difficult matter to judge, how great the Rights were of the Danish
Royal Family in the Succession of the Crown; but when I shall have demonstrated
that they also had a right of adopting not only, but also by Testament to
appoint their Successor, and even dividing the Kingdom among their Heirs, it
will then, I think, be evident, that scarce ever any Kings in these very
Kingdoms, which have been esteemed ways heredittry, could pretend to a greater
prerogative.

An Example of Adoption for the Danish Crown, Crantz. Chron. Dan. l. 8. Pontan.
lib. 9. Meurs. Hist. Dan. lib. 5.
we have in the often before mentioned Queen Margaret; who after the Death of
her Son Olaus, being without Heirs, did not only constitute Eric her Sisters
Son her Consort and Successor in the Danish Empire; but also to make his Title
the more firm, did adopt him; and he was as such, receive^ after her Death by
the Estates of Denmark. Lib. 2. c. 4. Chron. Dan.
An Example of disposing of the Crown, by Testament, Albert Krant^ that Ancient
and Celebrated Historian has given us in the Danish King Haldan, who left by
his last Will the Kingdom to Unguin, which being confirmed by the Estates, is
mentioned by this Author as an Act without a Precedent in Denmark at that time.
As for the Division of the Kingdom of Denmark, there are several Examples
extant in their Histories. Canute I. surnamed the great, being King of England,
Denmark and Norway, divided in his Lifetime, about the Year 1030, the three
Kingdoms, without consulting the Estates, between his three Sons, giving to the
Eldest Harald, England; to Canute, Denmark; and Norway to Sueno. Meurs. Hist.
Dan. lib. 3.
And having the two Crowns of England and Norway in his Possession by right of
Conquest; yet he used the same Power in appointing his Successor in the Kingdom
of Denmark.

The second Instance of dividing the Kingdom, is in the Reign of Waldemar,
about the Year 1170, Who having called together the Estates at Samso^, he had
his Son Waldemar crowned King of Denmark. After which another Son being born to
him, who is Name was Eric. Meurs. Hist. Dan. C^nt. l. 1.
he declared him Duke of Sleswick, and to Canute another Son of his he assigned
Laland. But Waldemar the younger, not long after his Coronation happening to
die by a Mischance which he got in Hunting; King Waldemar made a new Division
among the rest of his Sons, and before he died exhorted them to Unity;
alleging that to the best of his Power, he had equitably divided the Kingdom
among them. Pontan. l. 6, 7, 8.
And the several Provinces so, assigned by King Waldemar, to his Son, were
afterward devolved to their Children, and Grandchildren before they were
reunited into one Kingdom. There is one remarkable Instance more in the Danish
History of this Kingdom being divided into three Parts, betwixt Waldemar,
Canute, and Sueno. For aftere the Death of Eric surnamed the Lamb, during the
Minority of Waldemar I. who was declared King before, contended for the Crown
of Denmark Sueno and Canute, the first having on his side the Zealanders, and
Inhabitants of Schonen, the latter the Jutlanders; being at last tired by the
Wars, the Decision was referred to Waldemar I. Meurs. Hist. Dan. lib. 5^
who dividing the Kingdom into three Parts, assigned to himself Jutland, to
Canute Zealand and Funen, and to Sueno, Schonen, Halland and Blekingen, and
that all three should be called Kings. And even since that time that the Family
of Oldenburg has ruled in Denmark, Christiern I, dying Anno 1482. at
Copenhagen, divided the Kingdom, and that by Testament, betwixt his two Sons
John and Frederick; giving to the Eldest the Kingdoms, and to the Youngest the
Dukedoms. And it is remarkable, that when afterward both Frederick and the
Holsteiners urged the Execution of Christiern I's Will, it was alleged for a
reason by them, Meurs de gest. Joh. Reg. l^ ^.
that since John the Eldest had for his share two Kingdoms, it was no more than
reason that the Dukedom should come to Frederick, in recompensation of what
John had obtained. Truly, if the Succession of Denmark had been precarious,
Sweedland being then already fallen off from Denmark, this would have been a
foolish reason, since, the Dukedoms being hereditary, and very considerable in
themselves, the Younger would have had much the better share. Chytr. Saxon.
lib. 10.
And that the said Christiern I, had a right of disposing the same among his
Children, the States afterward did confess themselves in their Proclamation,
wherein having published their reasons for refusing to obey Christiern II, and
receiving Frederick I. for their King, they alleged as one main reason for
Frederick, that there was due unto him his patrimonial share out of his
Father's Kingdom. As out of what I have related here, it will easily appear,
how ill grounded our Author's Assertions are concerning the Danish Government;
so, he that will be so curious as to make a thorough search into the Danish
History will be the better convinced, that the Ancient Kings enjoyed, and
exercised the same Prerogatives, which are acknowledged to appertain to other
hereditary Kingdoms in Europe. It is not to be denied, that in this as well as
other Kingdoms, either during the Minority of some Kings, or else by the
Division of the Kingdom betwixt several Heirs, and other Accidents, many
Irregularities, Contests, Wars and Slaughters have happened; but to draw these
into Consequence, and to attribute the villainous Acts of exasperated Parties to
the whole Government, is to overturn the whole frame of History, and at once to
charge all Governments with the blackest Villainies that can be imagined, since
none have been free of them: And I verily believe, if a due Comparison were
made, there would be as few to be found of this Kind in the Danish History as
in any in Christendom. Let but any Body, who is not biased by his own
Opinions, Pontan. lib. 6.
look into the Reign of Woldemar I. and consider with what severity he did
punish those who had laid hands on Canute his Predecessor; Pontan. lib. 7.
How afterward Eric VII, in his Minority, with consent of the Estates of
Denmark, pursued the Murderers of his Father, and their Adherents, and when
fled into Norway, waged War with that King, partly upon that Score; With how
much reluctance the Estates received Abel for their King, who had caused his
Brother to be murdered! and I say, let but any Body consider the Succession of
these Kings, and what severities have been used in that Kingdom against such as
did attempt the like; he will questionless be convinced how little their
Histories do agree with what our Author has been pleased to tell us of the
Ancient Form of Government of the Danes, viz. That if they found themselves
mistaken in their choice, they used sometimes to destroy him (meaning their
King) either formally, or if he was grown too powerful, by dispatching him
without any more Ceremony, the best way they could; And to elect presently a
better Man in his room, sometimes the next of Kin to him, sometimes the valiant
Man that had undertaken the killing of the Tyrant, at other times a private
Person, who least dreamt of it, etc.

If these were not his own Inventions, he would have much obliged the Public
in only naming his Authors, out of whom he had his secret History of Denmark
since the same has been never known before to the World. What he says, That all
Affairs belonging to Peace or War, Alliances, Disposals of great Offices,
Contracts of Marriages, etc. were debated in the Meeting of the Estates: I will
not absolutely deny, but that the like instances may be given in the Danish
History; but I could also easily show, That the most of these have been
frequently debated without them; as also that the ancient Form of Government
was very much altered before the whole Face of Affairs (as he says) was changed
about 32 Years ago: But that the first would be too long for these
Animadversions; and of the second we shall be obliged to say something
hereafter upon the Chapter, How the Kingdom of Denmark became Hereditary and
Absolute. In the mean time we must not let quite pass by in silence, what he
tells of the Consequence of this Change, and their Effects, viz. frequent and
arbitrary Taxes, and commonly very excessive ones, even in times of Peace;
little regard being had to the occasion of them: The fal^ng of the value of
Estates, Poverty in the Gentry, extremity of Misery in the Peasants, etc. That
the Taxes are now more frequent in Denmark than they used to be formerly in
times of Peace, is what scarce any body of Sense will deny; but that the same
should be the Consequences of the late Change in Denmark, is not so easy to
guess for a considering Person, as this Gentleman fancies: and I am apt to
think, that those who are thoroughly acquainted with the State of Denmark will
rather say, That the Author has laid the Saddle upon the wrong Horse, as the
Saying is, since these Taxes are the Consequences and Effects of that so
unprosperous War betwixt Denmark^ and Sweden, which did end in the Year 1660.
The chief Calamities of which were partly occasioned by the mismanagement and
miscarriages of these Times, which preceded this Change. For who, that is not
ignorant in Foreign Affairs, but knows how considerable a Loser Denmark was by
this War, as Swedeland got most prodigiously, not only in Denmark but also in
Germany. It is then to this increase of the Swedes, and other neighboring
Princes, whose Territories surround Denmark, that these more frequent Taxes are
to be attributed; since he that will duly consider the ancient Contest betwixt
the Northern Crowns; what great Power and Strength Swedeland has acquired to it
self within these Fifty Years; and how the Swedish Territories join to the King
of Denmark's in Norway; how they are only parted in Denmark by that narrow
Straight, called the Sound; as the Dukedoms of Bremen and Verden are only
separated from Holstein by the River Elbe, may easily be convinced, That the
King of Denmark, though his Territories are considerably diminished, yet is
obliged to keep a much greater Army constantly on Foot than formerly, if he
will not run the hazard of being suprized and put to the utmost Extremity, as
his Father was in the War with the Swedes. Besides this, the House of
Lunenburgh, being grown more Potent, and keeping greater Forces on Foot than
they used to do formerly; as also the Duke of Holstein Gottorp, whose
Territories in a great many places are intermingled with those of Denmark,
having of late Years been in the Interest of Sweden, puts the King of Demark to
a vast charge, of keeping a considerable Force constantly on that side. It Is
then from the circumstances of the Affairs of Denmark, and their Neighbors
that the effects of these Taxes (now usual in Denmark) do proceed; which in a
Kingdom less powerful than formerly, and yet forced to maintain a much greater
Force both by Sea and Land, must needs now much exceed those in former Times.
If the Author had not forgot what he himself had remarked at the end of his
first Chapter, concerning the Danish Dominions; That they had this
Inconveniency, that they were disjoined and separated from each other, and
therefore exposed to many dangers, and requiring a more than ordinary expense
to preserve them entire, he might from thence alone, considering the State of
Affairs now in Europe, have reasonably concluded, That the^ Taxes levied in the
Kingdom of Denmark, were rather the Consequences of their Situation now, than
the Effects of the late Change; and that therefore it could with no Justice be
asserted, what he has told us here, That in imposing the same upon the
Subjects, little regard was commonly had (in Denmark now) to the occasion of
them. The Author also ought to have taken into Consideration, when he made this
malicious Assertion, how this would agree with what he has endeavored to
persuade us in several Passages in this Treatise, about the Meanness of the
Danish Court, and the continual want of Money there; as also, what a great
number of Fortresses he gives us an Account of; all which being necessarily to
be maintained by Garrisons, and otherwise, he might easily have found out, that
these things contradict one another; since, if it be true, that the Court has
so small a share for its Use in these Taxes that are paid in Denmark, it is
from thence evident, that a necessity of maintaining so considerable Forces and
Fortresses, but not an Arbitrary Will, without having a regard to the Occasion,
enforces the paying of greater Taxes now in Denmark than formerly. As to what
he says of the Value of the Land being fallen, of the Poverty of the Gentry,
and Misery of the Peasants, every body can easily guess, That in this, as in
all other Matters of that Nature some Grains of Allowance must be given to this
Gentleman's Romantic Expressions, wherewith he has all along endeavored to
ensnare the ignorant sort of People into a belief of his own Suppositions. Yet
is it not to be wondered at, that the value of the Estates should be less now,
when so considerable Taxes are paid out of them. than they were formerly, when
the Gentry, being the sole Possessors of Lands, and having the chief Sway in
the Kingdom, used to be sure to exempt themselves as much as was possible. The
same Reason may be given why the Gentry or Nobility in Denmark in general, do
not live up to that Splendour as they did in former times; since having in those
Days all plaecs of Profit and Trust in their Hands, and paying very small
Taxes, it is evident, that at this time, when to these Places others are
admitted as well as they, and are also obliged to bear a proportionable share
in all Taxes, their Revenues cannot be so great now as they were formerly. Of
the Peasants we shall be obliged to say something hereafter: wherefore we will
go to the next Chapter, which describes the manner how the Kingdom of Denmark
became Hereditary and absolute. After the Conclusion of the Peace, saysthe
Author, between the Two Northern Crowns, Anno 1660, Some considerable care and
time was necessary to redress the Disorders occasioned by so terrible a War.
Denmark had been most violently shaken; and although the Fury of the Tempest
was over^ the Agitation caused by it still continued: The Army was not yet
disbanded, nor could be, for want of Money to discharge Arrears: This caused
frequent Insolences in the Soldiers, with a further Oppression of the Burghers
and poor Country People, who had been in a manner already ruined by the
Miseries attendingthe War, the Nobility, and Gentry, though Lords and Masters
were full of Discontents, and the Clergy not in the condition they wished, etc.
Here the Author gives us some hints rather than reasons, which induced the
Estates of Denmark to make so remarkable a Change in the Government.

But, since from hence does depend the understanding of the true nature of this
Change, he ought, I think, to have been a little more circumstantial in this
Point, if he intended to prove to us what he said in the conclusion of the last
Chapter; That it was astonishing to consider how a free and rich People should
be persuaded entirely to part with their Liberties. Astonishing indeed; But if
this Gentleman, by the People does understand all the Estates of the Kingdom,
as he ought to do, and has done so in other places, when he alleged that
famous Law of the Romans, Salus populi supremae Lex esto, he has not hit the
mark right in this assertion, since, by his own words it may be proved, that
the Nobility mere Lords and Masters, and all the rest depending on them. It
will not be a very difficult task, to find out by what steps the Nobility in
Denmark, did acquire this Power over all the rest; if we consider how the
Nobility first clipped the Royal Prerogatives, after that Crown was transferred
to the Oldenburg Family; and more especially, after the deposing of Christiern
the II. How after the Reformation the Power of the Bishops and Prelates, (who
were, chosen commonly out of the Citizens) being fallen together with their
Revenues, the Nobility made thereby the greatest step, that could be, toward
the advancing their own Power above the Citizens and Peasants not only, but
also the Clergy; who now were no more in a capacity to keep up the balance, as
they used to do formerly. The King's Prerogatives being thus brought into
narrow bounds, and the Clergy's Authority and Power quite abolished, the
Citizens alone were not able to resist long against those, who, sitting at the
Helm, had the chief management of all affairs of moment; and the Peasants,
being most of them depending from the Nobility, by being partly their Tenants,
partly their Vassals, were not in a condition of making, so much as a show, of
resistance, against the Power of their Lords and Masters. Thus the name of the
four ancient Estates of Denmark, viz. the Nobility, Clergy, Citizens and
Peasants remaining, the Power was effectually lodged in the first, which from
time to time did increase to that degree, that not only the whole Senate of the
Kingdom, and all the great Offices of the Court were in their possession, but
also they did claim a right to all the rest of any moment, and a privilege to
be consulted withal in the disposing of any Office of moment, even to be given
to a Nobleman. They did claim a Prerogative, and actually exercised the same of
nominating the Magistrates in the Cities, and had so eneroached upon the rest
of the Estates that neither Clergyman, Citizen or Peasant could purchase any
Lands; and if by Mortgaging or other wise any Lands happened to fall into their
hands, they were obliged by a yearly, public Proclamation to proffer the same
to sale to the Nobility, upon the same condition as they were possessed of it.
From hence came the dependancy of the Citizens from them, and the entire
subjection of the Peasants to their Will, and by possessing most all the Lands
in the Kingdom, and thereby having the Rights of Patronages, in a great
measure, in their own hands; the Clergy was also, for the most part, fain to
dance after their Pipe. It is easy, I think, to imagine, the natural
consequence of this to have been, That they exempting themselves, as much as
could be done, from Taxes, and other burdens, the same did fall more heavy upon
the rest; and these not being able alone, to provide sufficiently for the
security of the Kingdom, this was one main reason, why the Kingdom was so
surprised by the Swedes, and did contribute as much as any thing toward the
Miseries, which these Countries endured in this War. There was another great
reason yet, which, as it contributed greatly to the miseries and misfortunes
this Kingdom was fain to undergo in this War; so questionless was it partly the
Occasion of the great Change afterward made by the States. After the Death of
Christiern IV. a certain Party of the Nobility were for excluding Frederick
III. second Son of the said King Christiern IV. after the death of Christiern
his elder brother, and for setting up Wolmar his younger Son by a second Wife,
whose Sisters were married to several noble Men, which, though they could not
effect, yet were (before Frederick III. this present King of Denmark's Father
was received by them as King) the royal prerogatives more straightened than
ever, and thereby the power of some of the Nobility mightily increased; which
did give occasion to a great many Dissensions in that Kingdom afterward: And
it is very remarkable, that when Charles the King of Sweden surprised the
Kingdom of Denmark the second time, viz. Anno 1658. He used it for a Pretense,
that he came to compose the Differences arisen betwixt the King and the
Nobility. Besides this, the Commons did lay their Calamities, sustained in the
late Wars, in a great measure, at the door of the Nobility; for, that, by
having excluded all the the rest even from military Employments (so that it was
a rarity to find a Commoner above the station of a Captain) and a great many of
these not having done their Duty in defending some Places of the greatest
moment, they had been the chief Occasion of these great Progresses which were
made at that time by the Swedes in Denmark. There was a manifest Instance of
this in the Siege of that almost impregnable Castle of Cronenburg, the most
considerable Fortress of all Denmark; as being built with incredible Charges,
upon Oaken Piles fastend in the very bottom of the Sea; which being defended by
a sufficient Garrison, and abounding in ammunition and provision, under the
Conduct and Command of three Governors, was surrendered to Wrangel the Swedish
General merely out of Fear; he having, by discharging of his Cannon and other
Demonstrations of Joy, deceived the Governors into a belief that Copenhagen
was taken by the Swedes. The woeful Experience then the Danes had had of these
and such like Miscarriages were the true Cause of finding a Necessity of
Changing the Constitution of their Government. With out which, they saw it was
impossible to avoid the same Dangers and Calamities which they had so lately
undergone. It would be too tedious to insert here other Reasons that might be
alleged for this Change; as also the whole Narrative of our Authors concerning
the manner of this Change, wherein he has been more taken up with the
Formalities than the true Causes; yet, out of what he has said, it may appear,
that he contrdicts here, what he had said before, that they were a free People;
wherefore we must insert some of them to make the Case the plainer out of the
Treatise it self. Thus he says; After some few days Session, speaking of that
Session when the Change was made in Denmark, during which the Nobility,
according to their usual practice, debated, how the sums of Money requisite
might with greatest ease and convenience be levied upon the Commons without the
least Intention of bearing any proportionable Share themselves, several
Disputes arose, and many sharp Expressions passed between them and the Commons.
The Nobility were for maintaining their ancient Prerogative of paying nothing
by way of Tax, but only by voluntary Contribution; and showing themselves too
stiff at a time when the Country was exhausted, and most of the remaining
Riches lodged in their hands: They seemed to make use of this Occasion, not
only to vindicate, but even to widen and enlarge their Privileges above the
other two Estates, by laying Impositions on them at pleasure, which Weight they
themselves woold not touch with one of their Fingers any further than as they
thought fitting, On the other hand, the Clergy for their late adherence to the
Interest of their Country, and the Burghers for the vigorous defense of their
City thought they might justly pretend to new merit, and be considered at least
as good Subjects in a State, which they themselves had so valiantly defended.
They remembered the great Promises made to them when dangerous Enterprises were
to be taken in hand, and how successfully they had executed them, thereby
saving from a foreign Yoke not only the City of Copenhagen, but the whole
Kingdom, the Royal Family, nay those very Nobles that now dealt so hardly with
them: They judged it therefore reasonable that the sums of money necessary
should be levied proportionably, and that the Nobility who enjoyed all the
Land, should at least pay their share of the Taxes, since they had suffered
less in the common Calamity as well as done less to prevent the Progress of it.
These Words, I think, do not want any further Observations, since they are
sufficiently explained by what I have said before concerning the Causes of this
Change of Government, and mayrather serve as a Confirmation of what has been
alleged there concerning this point. I will only add, that passage (also
related by the Author) between Otto Craeg one of the chief Senators then, and
Nanson the then President of the City of Copenhagen and Speaker of the Commons.
For Otto Craeg did not stick to tell the President, That the Commons neither
understood nor considered the Privileges of the Nobility, who at all times had
been exempted from Taxes, nor the true Condition of themselves who were no
other than Slaves, (the Word in the Danish is Unfree) so that their best way
was to keep within their Bounds, etc. To which the President replied, That the
Commons were no Slaves, nor would from thence forth called so by the Nobility,
which they should soon prove to their Cost. These passages alone are convincing
Arguments how Free a People the Danes were at that time, and that it is more
like a Romance than a Truth, what he says, in the Conclusion of this Chapter,
That the Commons have since experienced, that the little Finger of an absolute
Prince can be heavier than the Loins of many Nobles. It being apparent enough,
out of what has been said upon this Subject, that the Estates of Denmark were
not only treated by the Nobles as Slaves, but that they also esteemed them as
such; and that things were come to that pass, that they must either be in
continual Slavery to the Nobility at home, and in fear of a foreign Yoke from
their Neighbors, or else strive, by a Change in the Government, to meliorate
in some measure their Condition. What he says concerning the Citizens of
Copenhagen; that they have only obtained the insignificant Privilege of wearing
Swords, in this his, grav^ and sensible men have grossly abused him.

For not to mention here, that this as well as other Privileges were granted
to them before the change of Government, to encourage them to a vigorous
Defense at the time of the Siege of Copenhagen, the some were not so
insignificant: For besides a great many Privileges for the benefit of Trade, a
Vote was allowed them in all public Consultations; a Privilege was given them
to purchase any Lands and Lordships whatsoever, and to enjoy them with the same
Right as the Nobles: They were not to be burdened with any Impositions, but
such as the Nobles did bear; and not that, but by public Consent: They were to
be free from all Contributions or Inquarterings whatsoever in times of Peace;
and their Children were to be admitted to all Honors and public Offices
equally with Noble-Mens Children.

These were no insignificant Privileges at that time, when most of the same
were only challenged by the Nobility; and since the purchasing and enjoying of
Lands, as also their being capable of public Offices and Honors, have also
after the Change of the Government been communicated to the rest of the
Subjects in Denmark; and that the Nobles bear their proportionable Share in
such Taxes as the Necessity of their Affairs obliges them to pay. it is evident
that the Nobility have been the chief Loosers by that Change, and that the
other Estates, by being very near made equal to them in a great many Respects,
are Gainers and not Losers by it. I might take here an Opportunity to enlarge
my self upon some Rules of Policy which were mentioned by our Author upon this
Subject in his Preface, viz. That no People in their right Wits can be supposed
to confer an absolute Dominion; That such a Donation ought to be esteemed of no
greater Validity than the Gift made by a Madman, or a Child, from his lawful
Successors. That nothing which even the representative Body of the People
does, which shall afterward tend to the detriment of the Universality, can then
be obligatory, etc. But that these are Matters of too nice a Nature to be
transitorily treated of; as also what might be said considering the manner of
the Proceedings of the Commons of Denmark (related by the Author at large)
when they obliged the Nobility to concur with them in the Change of the
Government. But thus much may be said according to this Gentleman's own
Suppositions, that if even some Matters, which the representative Body of the
People does, may be invalid, I see no Reason why it should not be justifiable
in the Commons of Denmark to have taken an Opportunity to free themselves of
these Encroachments, which were made upon them by the Nobility; and the Matter
duly weighed, will, I believe, to the most Judicious, appear not so much to be
transacted like Children or Madmen, but like People in their right Wits. What
he has added, That the Clergy were the only Gainers, in the Point, is, I am
sure, what no man that knows Denmark can comprehend, they having not gained any
thing by it, what they had not before, but what all the rest also have obtained
at the same time. As to his Passive Obedience-Principle riding Triumphant,
there has been so much said of it in the Preface, that it would be superfluous
to repeat it here.

In the next Chapter being the VIII. where he speaks concerning the Condition,
Customs, and Temper of the People, he talks of such appearances of Slavery,
Laziness, and idle despondency, of carelessness and insensibility, all which he
has interwoven with his own Tragical Inventions, that one would rather believe
the whole to be fitted for a piece of Tragedy, than History; it would be
ridiculous therefore to answer every particular Whimsical Conceit, of which
this Chapter is almost as full as Hudibras; it will suffice to hint at two or
three passages, from whence may be guessed, with what candor he has related to
us the rest. One instance of this is what he relates, That there is no buying
or selling of Lands here, and tells it as a Miracle, That some Lands were sold
to one Monsieur Taxera a rich Jew, at Hamburg, and one Monsieur Marseilles a
Dutch Merchant, but that they were fain to take these Lands for Money owing to
them from the King: As what concerns the first, I am apt to believe, I have it
from as Grave and Sensible Men as his could be, and besides of such as were
very understanding and not ignorant in this matter, who have assured me, that
this Money was not owing to Texera from the King, neither had he his Lands from
him, but being a very considerable Debt due to him from particulor persons in
Denmark, (whom I could name if I thought it convenient) he took these Lands for
the Payment of the same. The second, it is true, had his Lands from the King in
lieu of Money owing to him, but it is also to be observed, that he having been
Danish Factor at Amsterdam, and having left a very great Estate behind him, it
is supposed he had got the greatest part of it by his Factorship; so, that if
he paid somewhat extraordinary for those Lands, he had questionless got so
considerably by the King, that he might afford to buy it at a better rate than
another would do. And truly a great many the like instances might be given in
other Countries also, and if they were represented so maliciously as these have
been, they would perhaps appear worse than these; since in most Countries,
there are without doubt to be found, who would take Lands, though at an
extraordinary rate, where Money is not to be had. But, what he says in this
Chapter concerning the Prodigality not only of the Gentry, but also of the
Burgers and Peasants, of their expensiveness in Coaches, Retinue, Clothes,
etc. we must take a little notice of, and put him in mind of what he said
before, That they lived very miserably; but these contradictions are with him
so common, that it was impossible to remember them all; I will only add, that
it is to their too free and expensive way of living, and the Sumptuousness
especially of their Weddings, Christnings and Burials, that ought to be
ascribed to what has been observed; That the People in general, are not so rich
here as in some other places. A great many more Observations might be made upon
his malicious way of representing matters in this Chapter, of which scarce any
one is related without Passion; but we will add but one more upon what he says
concerning the Peasants: In Zealand, says he, they are all as absolute Slaves
as the Negroes are in Barbados; neither they, nor their Posterity, to all
Generations, can leave the Land, to which they belong. There is no computing
there by number of Acres, but by number of Boors, who with all that belong to
them, appertain to the Proprietors of the Land. Yeamontry, which is the
strength of England, is a state not known or heard of in Denmark. If any of
these Wretches prove to be of a diligent and improving temper, who endeavors
to live a little better than his Fellows, and to that end has repaired his
Farm-House, making it convenient, neat, or pleasant, it is forty to one, but he
is presently transplanted from thence to a naked and uncomfortable habitation,
etc. Here is the full and true account of the Peasantry in Denmark wherein he
has again been most miserably deceived by his grave and sensible men, that
instructed him. For that they are as aboluute slaves as the Negroes, in this as
well as in the rest, he has been strangely misinformed: The Vassals then in the
Islands of Zealand, Laland, Falster, and Moenen, (for in the other parts of
Denmark few of them are to be found) are such as either they themselves, or
their Forefathers, have by paying a certain Fine to Landlords, purchased to
themselves certain Farm-Houses and Grounds thereunto belonging, under
Conditions of paying certain yearly proportions of the Product of the Land, and
doing some other petty Services to the Landlord. Now it being sufficiently
known to all that understand the Rights of Vassalage in this and some other
Countries, that these yearly Contributions out of the Product of the Lands, and
Services to be done to the Landlords, are determined by most ancient Laws; I
will give any Man leave to judge, with what sincerity the Author has described
to us the State of the Peasantry: He might as well say, that these in England
and all their Posterities, who possess Copyholds, cannot leave the Land which
belongs to them; since it is all the same Case, only that here we have power to
sell, and transfer our Right to another, which cannot be done there, without
the consent of the Landlord; but for the rest it is rather esteemed among them
a Privilege, That they cannot be put out of a Farm at pleasure, which Tie is
by the Laws of these Countries made reciprocal, betwixt the Landlord and
Vassal. And this Tie is so insignificant in this Country, that you meet with
frequent Examples, not only of such as for the value of three pound Sterling,
buy their freedom from their Landlords, but also a great many Peasants out of
Jutland, Funen and other Islands, where they are not Vassals, transplant
themselves into the other parts, and by paying a Fine make themselves Vassals;
they finding it more commodious to live in that State, than with the Title of
Freeman to be incontinual fear of being ruined by their Landlords, if they do
not pay their yearly Rent. And since all these Peasants are possessed of some
Lands, less or more; nothing can be more more vain than what he endeavors to
persuade us, that there is no computing there by Acres, but by Boors. And as it
is not in the Power of any Landlord to remove a Peasant from his Farm-house,
without his consent, so he has no propriety in his Goods; and a Peasant now,
that has got any thing by his Industry, may purchase Lands as well as the best
Nobleman. What he says, that no Yeomantry is there, is also of the same Stamp
with the rest; since in those parts of Denmark, where the Peasants are not
Vassals (as it is not in the most part of that Kingdom) there are to this day
Peasants who possess Lands by right of Inheritance, and the rest are Tenants by
paying yearly Rents, as we do here in England.

Another Grievance he tells us of Quartering of Soldiers; but, if in a Country
where Necessity obliges to keep a Standing Army, Soldiers should not be
quartered in the houses of the Subjects, the Soldiers would be in a very bad
Case; and since no body is exempted from that burden in Denmark, and that by
paying a small matter you may keep the Inmate from your Door, and House, this
is not esteemed so burthensom as it does appear at first Sight. He says that
the Tables of the better sort are well furnished with Dishes, but he does not
like the Cheer: Truly it is no new thing that People used to their own Country
Diet, do not like that of other Countries: Like the Kentish Esquire, who being
treated in France with such Dainties as are frequent there, could not be
persuaded to stay above three days, because he longed for such Apple-Dumplings
as he used to eat at his Father's House; and yet the Cheer may be nothing the
worse for it. But I perceive the chief want was in Denmark, that they had no
crammed Capons: to this may be answered, that in Denmark where Corn is
extraordinary cheap, the same are rather fed in the Houses out of hand as they
call it; and it is also notorious, that the same, as well in other, as this
Country, are preferred before crammed Fowl, except by some that are
particularly fond of a large fat London Rump. In the mean time, the Danes, to
my Knowledge, loving a dainty Bit as well as any body, would have been very
much obliged to this Gentleman if he would have vouehsafed to have set his Name
to this Treatise, that, sometimes over a Glass of Wine and fat Capon, they
might have celebrated in after Ages (as they do with their Geese on Martin's
Eve) the Memory of him in whose days the Mystery of Cramming tame Fowl was
first revealed and established at Copenhagen. The next relation he makes of a
Country woman that would not sell him Green-Geese to his Company, he gives us
as an instance of their simplicity and superstition; for a Week after she
brought four to them, saying, That she had had no luck with them, since the
Kite had eat Eight of them. A most remarkable History to prove the simplicity
of a whole, or at least the greatest part of a Nation; it being evident that in
the most civilized Nations, some Country People are soon surprised at any thing
that is new to them, and generally addicted to their little superstitious
Fancies.

And yet, I can affirm it, that I have eat about the beginning of June, in the
King of Denmark^ Territories (though not in Copenhagen) as delicious Green
Geese at a Gentleman's Seat, as ever I eat any where else. And I remember a
certain Frenchman living in these parts, who having a particular way of feeding
Capons, used to sell them at 10s. Sterling a piece. But leaving these Tri^les;
we must return to other more serious Matters. The two next following Chapters
containing a particular Recital of the King's Revenue, and of the Army, Fleet
and Fortresses; little can be added to it of any Moment, but only to put the
Reader in mind, that if an equitable Balance be made betwixt the said Revenue,
and the Number of Land and Sea-forces; as also of the Fortresses and their
Charge: It will from thence be evident, how unjustly the Author has dealt with
us, when he endeavored to persuade us, that the Taxes in Denmark were the
Effects of an absolute Government, and that little regard was had there in the
occasion of them. The eleventh Chapter treat, of the Court, wherein you may
meet with so many Extravagancies, that it would be endless to pretend to refute
them. He make bold with the King and Royal Family; he pretends to tell you what
is commendable or not in them: As for the Ministers of State, he describes
their H^mors, Capacities^ and other Qualifications to a hair; as if he (like
the Turkish-Spy) had dived into the most obstruse Secrets of them. I know, that
boldness (like action in an Orator) takes oftentimes much more with the vulgar
Sort of People, than true Sense; but when it transcends all the Rules of
Decency, and Reason it self, it cannot but be odious to all, who are lovers of
Moderation and Truth.

This Gentleman must have a very mean Opinion of the Capacity of the English
(though questionless he has a very calm ordinary one of his own) to persuade
himself, that his vain and confident Assertions could ensnare the more
judicious Sort into a belief, that a nameless Romantic Politician, who has
committed so many Errors, (and some of them very obvio^s, even to Men of
indifferent parts and knowledge) in this Treatise, ought to be taken for a
proper Judge of the Qualifications and Conditions of a whole Court. What he
lays concerning his Majesty, the present King of Denmark, that he neither
loves, nor has a Genius for business, must needs seem the oddest Assertion that
can be to those, who have seen and known, with what Activity that King appears
everywhere, how seldom he is absent from his Council, when any matter of Moment
is in debate, and how he in Person assists frequently in the highest Court of
Justice, and there takes particular notice of the matters in Controversy. Of
his Excellency Guldinlieu, he speaks much to the same purpose, as that he loves
his Divertisements rather than to embark himself deep in the public Affairs,
when it is known to all who understand the Danish Court; that, as it cannot be
denied, but that this great Person understands the enjoyment of pleasures, so
he never addicts himself to them, so much as to neglect the public Business;
What he has also said of his having burnt his Fingers en^ some occurrences, and
that King Frederick his Father thought once of making him King of Norway,
cannot be looked upon by unbiased Persons, who are acquainted with the Affairs
of Denmark, otherwise than an unanswerable Slander forged by his grave and
sensible Men. If we should take notice of all particulars of this kind, which
according to his whimsical fancies he has related of the Ministers of State, it
would exceed the compass of these Remarks. One thing I cannot but hint at,
which is the too much reservedness of Mons: Ehrenshild, so much ridiculed by
this Gentleman, in calling him patrem difficultatum and alleging his celapeut
estre, as a great Infirmity, when by all refined Politicians reservedness has
been always looked upon in a States Man, much preferable before a forward
Confidence; the first being commonly the product of a far seeing prudence with
the latter, the effect of a conceited Vanity. There is another pretty Notion in
this Chapter, which we must not pass by in silence, viz. That he compares the
Court of Denmark rather to some of our Noblemen's in England than White Hall;
and, that upon a Sunday an hour before Dinner (being the rightest Court Time)
the number of such as appear in the Antichambre and Bedchambre seldom amount to
above 20 or 30. I will put it to the Judgmnnt of any sensible Body, that will
compute only these Officers of the Court by him named; (besides others, as
Lords of the Bedchamber, Gentlemen of the Privy-Chamber; The Queens
Attendance, and others not mentioned) the considerable Number of Superior
Officers in the Army and Fleet; And more especially. if any one will take the
pains so peruse the Proclamation of the King of Denmark, inserted by the
Author, concerning Precedence of the several Officers both Civil and Military,
as also what this Author ha^ said before, concerning their Sumptuousness of
Apparel and Equipage; and compare all this with what he says now concerning the
Court, whether it have as much as a Probability of Truth in it. Much the same
Allowance must be given to what he says, concerning that most sumptuous and
magnificent Palace of the K. of Denmark, called Fredericksburg, which being
computed to have cost at least a Million Sterling. he says, falls short of many
Noblemens Country Houses in England. It is hard, that, to verify his
Assertion, he would not name one of them; since all that ever I could meet
with, who knew Fredericksburg, and have also been in a great many Noblemen's
Seats in England, do unanimously take this for a most unaccountable
Rodomontado. But these Remarks having increased in bulk beyond our Intention,
we will not insist upon what he says in the 12th and 14th Chapters, concerning
the Inclinations of the King of Denmark toward his Neighbors, as also of his
Interests in relation to other Princes, since a great deal may easily be said,
but scarce any thing be determined, in matters of this nature: But in Chap.
13th, where he treats of the Differences which some years ago were betwixt
Denmark and the Duke of Holstein Gottorp; he has shown himself very partial in
not mentioning the true Cause of these proceedings. One of the chiefest was
(not to mention others) that the Duke of Holstein Gottorp, holding that part of
Sleswick which he possesses as a Feef of Denmark; notwithstanding this, having
been assisting to the Swedes in the subduing of the greatest part of Denmark,
at the Treaty at Roschild, 1658. had forced the K. of Denmark to declare him
independent of that Crown, to maintain which he had ever since been in the
Interest of Swedeland.

I do not therefore see, how the King of Denmark, with Justice could be blamed
to recover his Just Right. And when he saw a fair Prospect of being even with
Swedeland, for what they taken from his Crown, to begin with drawing out first
that Thorn which stuck so close to him, that without being freed from it, he
could not have promised to himself the same Success as he afterward had
against the Swedes.

In the Fifteenth Chapt. treating of the Laws and Courts of Justice, as things
are indifferently well related; so we will go on to the Sixteenth Chapter,
where the State of Religion, of the Clergy, and Learning is represented; the
greatest part of this being taken up with railing against the Clergy; upon
which Point we have said enough in the Preface; we only will only put him in
mind, That Learning is not at so low an Ebb, but that lately Denmark has had
its Puffendorf, a Man to be compared to the best of our Age; and that if I had
a mind to speak of the Living, I could name him some, who would be able to give
other Proofs of their Learning, than our Author has done in this Treatise,
though he pretends to be much beyond the common Sort: I will add but a few
Words concerning what he says, That a Popish Chapel, permitted to be built at
Gluckstadt, has been the first there since the Reformation; that to my
Knowledge at least twenty Years ago, not only Popish Chapels, but also of most
other Religions; as of Calvinists, Independents, Anabaptists, etc. have been
erected at Altena, a place near Hamburgh, where these several Sorts of
Religions are tolerated; but no religious service allowed them. At Fredericia
also a free Exercise of Religion has been allowed a great many Years ago, which
are two convincing Instances; that this Gentleman having been deceived by his
grave and sensible Men, has given us a great many things for a confessed Truth,
which he had not sufficiently been instructed in.

But to come to the Conclusion: The Author in this whole Book having been so
abounding every where with his own Fancies, and new Modeled Opinions has been
the Occasion, that these Remarks are increased beyond intention; if every thing
should have been but touched upon, there would have been matter sufficient for
a very large Book; But to have examined in particular, all his speculative
Assertions, would have required whole Volumes. It Is for this reason that I have
been obliged to let a great many of less moment slip by untouched; and as to
these of more consequence, I have treated of them with as much brevity as the
nature matter would permit: Since by hinting only the Heads, and referring my
Reader to the true Ancient History it self. I did not question but the more
curious would take an opportunity to compare the same, both with the Author's
Suppositions, and the historical Account it self. What he has related of such
matters as are not extant in Histories; wherein the sacred Laws of History have
obliged me to contradict his ill-grounded Relation, I will only say thus much:
That as the Kingdom of Denmark is very well known to me, so I am sure I have
related nothing, but what I not only very well know, but also can easily prove,
by unquestionable Witnesses who are not ashamed to own their Names. And if this
Gentleman's Friends, who instructed him had had a little less Gravity, but
somewhat more Knowledge in these Affairs, which they pretended to understand,
we might questionless have expected a more fair Account of Denmark.

FINIS.

