THE Cruel Murderer, OR THE Treacherous Neighbor; BEING A True and full
Relation of the horrid Murder of Alice Stephens, and Martha her Daughter; with
the manner of Burning their Bodies, by Firing the House wherein they were
Murdered; Committed by Thomas Reignolds of Aldon, in the Parish of Stoksay in
the County of Salop, the 23. of January, 1672.

Together with his TRIAL and EXECUTION.

Psalm. 9. 16. The wicked is snared in the works of his own hands.

Prove. 14. 27. The fear of the Lord, is a Fountain of Life to depart from the
Snares of Death.

LONDON, Printed for Edward Robinson, Bookseller in Ludlow. 1673.

A True and full Relation of the horrid Murder of Alice Stephen, and Martha
her Daughter, etc.
NO Man can possibly be so great a Stranger to his own course and conversation
of Life, as not to discover the spreading growth of sin; by our own woeful
experience we find it to be too true, that when with delight and complacency we
inure our selves to the practice of lighter sins for quality and degree, at
last growing impudently confident, we fear not to comply with the Devils
Temptations to Sins of a deeper die, especially when occasion and opportunity
presents us with a fair invitation thereunto, for custom in sin (by the just
Judgment of God) unhappily deprives the Sinner of all senseof, and remorse for
Sin; upon this stupidity and senselessness of Conscience, there unavoidably
follows a ready yiedling to any wicked actions, that are but probably and
temptingly propounded.

Commonly the beginnings of sin are bashful and modest, the Devil is so
politic in his contrivances to compass our eternal ruin* that he modestly
lays his foundation with temptations to sins (that in the eye of carnal reason)
seem little and inconsiderable; if he chance to find us so facile as readily to
comply with those, then like a confident Beggar he importunately sollicites our
consent to greater sins; nay, such is the unluckly consequence and unavoidable
danger of sin, that it frequently falls out, that the courteous Sinner to
secure himself from the shame that attends some little sins, thinks himself
necessitated to conceal their guilt by the commission of greater ones.

He therefore that sincerely desires to secure his soul from the mortal wounds
of grosser sins, must be sure at first not to disregard lesser scares, for a
modest and private way of sinning, will at last conclude in a public and
shameless committing of sin.

Our Alwise God has thought good by the least, to hedge in and secure
obedience to the greater Commandments, he therefore that dares frequently
attempt to encroach upon this enclosure, and securely violate the lesser
circumstance, will at last grow impudently bold, and daringly invade Gods
Prerogative, in commanding us in matters of greater moment; he that neglect to
pay tites of mint and cumming, will quickly let go the weightier things of the
Law; a Lascivious g^a^ce of the Eye at first ushered in lustful thoughts into
David's heart, this fire quickly broak out into Adultery, and in the end to
conceal the shame thereof, 'twas concluded with the Murder of innocent Vriah.
The best way therefore to secure our selves from the Devils dangerous
temptations, is courageously to reject his allurements to little sins, and then
he will utterly despair of prevailing with us in grosser impieties.

Possibly we may foolishly propose to our selves certain bounds and limits in
our proceedings in the way of sin, but when once we have forfeited the Divine
Protection and Assistance, by our frequent deviations, it to too often falls
out that men violently rush upon destruction, never considering whether their
Souls are posting, till they find themselves amidst the infornal Regions of
Darkness, a clear demonstration of this truth, you have here presented to your
serious consideration in the following lamentable passages.

This Thomas Reignolds (as it appears by his own Confession, and the report of
his Neighbors) was from his very infancy much addicted to several vices; his
Parents (though poor) yet kept him at School so long, till he was able in a
compotent manner to read in the Bible, but by his own carelessness, and his
Parents forgetfulness of their duty to call upon him to read, when he was
apprehended and cast into a Prison, he could hardly read at all, for a week or
fortnight at least he denied that he could ever read, but at last being
discovered to be a Liar herein, by the Minister of the Parish where he lived,
he was desired by him to read the 51. Psalm, which he did so pitifully, that
he seldom pronounced a whole word true, being sharply reproved for this great
loss, which would have been very advantageous to him in order to his
preparations for death, which was then posting upon him, he began with a sigh
or two to confess how careless he had been in serving God, both in public in
the Church, and in private in his Closet duties; he spent very many Sabbaths in
idleness, in sporting and playing, and several in the Alehouse; particularly
in the House of Thomas Corfield, who lived near unto the House of John
Stephens, where he committed the following Murders. Last Summer Assizes he was
Arraigned at Salop, for stealing six pounds out of the House of Edward Maddox,
and though with dreadful imprecations he continued to deny that he had the
Money, yet upon his Trial there was so good evidence (upon several very
probable circumstances) brought in against him, that he was in great danger of
being found guilty, his best friend to save his life, was John Stephens, whom
he now will required, by murdering his Wife and Daughter: he was not twenty
years of Age, when be acted these following villainies:

On Wensday being the 22. of January last past, the day before Thomas Reignolds
committed the following murders, he was not then to be found, that night he
lay at Corlfieds house, and the Mother and Sister of the said Thomas Reignolds
coming late there to look for him, Corfield and his Wife returned them this
answer, that he had not been in their House of three months before, this
Corfield did (as Reignolds says) without his knowledge or consent. The next
morning intending to return to his Fathers House; as he went homewards very
early, he called at the house of John Stephens, to inquire for a pair of
Gloves, which he supposed he might leave there the evening before; not finding
them there, John Stephens being to go to Stoke Castle, to his accustomed days
labor, Thomas Reignolds accompanied him part of the way toward Aldon. Not far
from the house of John Sthephens there is a Broomy Close, where Reignolds left
him, telling John Stephens that he would go and search there for his Gloves,
for he did not know (as he said) but he might have dropped them there the day
before; no sooner had he parted with John Stephens, and had entered into the
Close, but as he was hanging down his head, and diligently looking for his
Gloves, two men (one in Black and the other in light Gray Clothes) appeared to
him, asking him what he sought for, he said for a pair of Gloves which he had
lost; they bid him not trouble himself about his Gloves, for if he would be
ruled by them, and do as they would have him, he should not want Gloves or any
thing else; he asked their names, which they gave to him; he in black called
himself William Pugh, and the other Richard Tallet; these two persons appeared
in so good Habit, that the talked with them (as he says) with his Hat in his
hand, and when once he had entered into discourse with them, he had no power to
leave their company, when therefore he had promised them obedience upon the
forementioned conditions, they turned about and enquired the names of several
Neighboring Towns, as Ludlow, Onibury, Staunton, and Bromfield; not long after
(as he says) they proposed to him the following murder, and being asked by
the Minister (to whom he first made this confession) what induced him to
embrace their motion to so barbarous an action, he said, that he thought John
Stephens who had sold a Cow about three Weeks before, had received the money
for her, without delay therefore or any further scruple, Thomas Reignolds
followed these two men up to the House of John Stephens, he as was said before,
was gone to work to the House of the Right Worshipful Sir Samuel Baldwyn;
Thomas Reignolds therefore with the two men after him, entering into the house,
he found Alice Stephens Spinning at the Wheel, near unto the fire, she being
very heavy of hearing, he insensibly came behind her, and laying hold of her
under her Chin, he drew back her head with the one hand, and with the other he
so suddenly cut her throat, that she had not time so much as to say, Lord have
Mercy upon her soul, no sooner had he thus imbrued his hands in this innocent
blood, but he looked behind him, but could not (as he confessed) see the two
Men.

As yet his conscience was not awakened, neither was he in the least troubled
for what he had done, or terrified with beholding this poor creature lying in
her own Blood. Leaving therefore her dead body, he began to search the house
for the reward which the Devil (or his own wicked thoughts) proposed to him for
this horrible Murder, but finding no Money (for as it happened it was not then
received) he met with nothing that he could conveniently carry away, save only
her wedding Rings, as he was above in the Chamber busily searching about, he
espied Martha the Daughter of Alice Stephens coming homewards, (for she
happened to be out of doors when her Mother was murdered) the better therefore
to secure himself by concealing this first murder, to add Blood to Blood; in
pursuance of this his cursed resolution, he instantly left the Chamber, and
posted toward the door of the house, and no sooner was this young girl entered
in, but he laid Violent hands on her, and being much too strong for her (she
was about 14. or 16. Years of age) he so suddenly cut her throat also, that she
had time to say no more, but where is my Mother.

When he had thus inhumanely butchered these two innocent souls, he not not
long after, returned back again to the house of Thomas Corfield, and continued
drinking there the greatest part of that day.

This double Murder was committed between Nine and Eleven of the Clock on
Thursday the 23d. day of January, in the beginning of the night he left
Corfields house, and went back toward the house of John Stephens, and entering
thereinto, he dragged Martha Stephens from the door (where he left her, after
he had Murdered her,) into a Hovil joining to the house, then taking some Fire
from the Harth, he conveyed it into some Straw that was in the Hovil, and
thereby he burnt the house, and with it consumed to Ashes the greatest part of
both their Bodies.

Thus having by murder and fire most inhumanely deprived this poor man (not
only of the best part of his worldly comforts, but also of the greatest part of
his goods, which by his hard labor he (...) gathered together, Thomas
Reignolds takes sanctuary again at Corfields h^^^e, and (as it appears by his
confession) he continued drinking there till Richard Corfield returned from the
fire, and then being spoken to by him to go home, he immediately departed
toward Aldon; and finding his Father and Mother with the rest of that poor
family gone ^o their rest, and the doors of the house shut, he conveyed
himself in through a wall that was broken down on the backside of the house;
and laying himself down upon his bed, he thought to take some rest, but the
inward gripes and pangs of his guilty conscience, did so intolerably torture
and torment him, that he could not lay his eyelids together.

Seeing therefore he could find no rest within doors, he rose up again, and
went out of the house, instantly the two men (as he confidently says) appeared
to him again, the first question that they asked him, was, whether he had any
Enemies in the Town, whereunto he returned this answer, that he had two, naming
Edward Maddox, who (as was said before) indicted him the last Summer Assizes for
stealing six Pounds out of his house; and Richard White (both of Aldon) who
went to the Justince for a Warrant to appehend him. They ask him, if he would
not be revenged on them, whereunto he replied, how should he be revenged on
them, they tell him, by consuming all that they had.

Upon this suggestion his devilish malice instantly complied with that
revengful motion, wherefore being resolutely bent to follow their hellish
directions, he went back into his Fathers house, and took out thence (as he
confesses, unknown to any of the Family) a large stick of fire; with it in his
hand he posted to the house of Edward Maddox of Aldon, intending first to fire
his house, but perceiving the wind to blow the fire toward his Fathers house,
for fear lest that also should be burnt with it, he desisted from his purpose
there, and went immediately to the house of Richard White of the same Village,
and about Midnight he put the fire into some Broom wherewith his Oven was
covered to keep it dry, and never left blowing it, till it began to flame when
he had done this work of the Devil, he went into a close at the end of the
Town, to see the issue thereof; and (as he says) he walked several times about
it, being willing to return to the house, and quench the fire, before it broke
out into a violent flame, but he could not (as he confesses) find the way out,
he was so terrified and amazed. Had not therefore the fears that seized upon
Richard White and his Wife, in beholding Stephens house on fire, with the
strong jealousies that his Wife and Daughter were murdered before the house
was burnt, they also with three small Children had been consumed to Ashes, with
their Dwelling House, out Houses, Grain, Hay, Impliments of Husbandry, and
Household Stuff, with this house the next house was fired and burnt to the
ground, and the rest of the Town was in very great danger. All this time whilst
these two houses were Burning this barbarous Villian stood upon the edg of the
Common (called Aldons Mind) where he did the Murder and fired the first house.

Now all persons began to suspect Thomas Reignalds, he fearing therefore lest
he should be taken upon suspicion, resolves not to enter the Town again, but
instantly to betake himself to the woods, and as he was flying his two old
companions appeared to him again, no sooner did he see them, but he began to
discover his fears and jealousies to them, they encouraged him with fair
promises that he should not be taken, and (as he says) they went with him to a
Hay barn belonging to Mr. R^uland Baugh of the Stone House, and there they
continued talking with him, till he was fast a sleep, the next morning when he
did awake, his guilty Conscience (as he confesses) did so terrify and torment
him, with the lamentable cries of that Innocent Blood he had so barbarously
spilt, that he found as little ease, as if he had been laid upon a Bed of
Thorns. Under these horrors, and terrors, he past away the day; on Friday
night, those two men appeared to him again, telling him that he was very secure
there, and so persuaded him to alter his resolution of flying that night, he
being very drowsy quickly fell a sleep; waking again the next Morning, though
he missed his companions; yet he found his old terrors were mightily
increased; and he was beyond expression affrighted with the horrid
representations of the grave and hell, whether he feared his Soul and Body were
posting. In this miserable condition he continued all Saturday, at night his
miserable comforters visited him again: the first question that now they
proposed to him, was whether he were not hungry, he said, yes I am very hungry,
and more thirsty (and well indeed he might for from Thursday to Saturday-night,
he had not tasted a bit of Bread, or drunk so much as a drop of of Water) they
tell him that if he would follow them, they would bring him where he should
have both Meat and Drink. It is not to be douted but that he cheerfully
embraced their Motion. Instantly therefore they went with him to the house of
Richard Jennings of the Parish of Onibury, which Thomas Reignolds confesses he
broke open, thereupon they entered with him into it, where he drank Metheglin,
and took from thence a Cheese and a Loaf of Bread, which were taken with him
next day. (He was asked whether these two men did Eat and Drink with him, he
said no, they only stood by him) when therefore by this means he had allaid the
violence of his hunger and thirst, these two men returned with him to the
Hay-Barn again, still encourageing him not to fly, but however his intentions
were about Cocks-Crowing (when he had taken a little rest) to forsake the Barn,
and fly for his life, but when he was once fallen asleep, he did not awake till
Sunday-morning when he was apprehended.

On Tuesday the 11th. of March, he received his Trial, he pleaded guilty: and
on the Thursday following the Sentence was passed upon him; he was adjudged to
be Hanged in Chains on Aldons Mind, near the place where he did the murder.
Accordingly on Thursday March the 20th. he was Executed.

He expressed much sorrow for what he had done, and was troubled at nothing so
much as the Murder of the Girl; he wept much on Wensday, the day before he
received the Sentence, and no sooner did he see John Stephens, but he fell upon
his knees, desiring him with much earnestness to forgive him.

What truth may be in the circumstances of this Confession, it is not easy to
determine, to some I know these apparitions will seem incredible, I shall only
mind such that it is very improbable that a Condemned person should thus
dissemble with God and the world, that the Devil has appeared several times in
a bodily shape, is a truth denied by very few but Atheists; he that believes
the Scripture cannot question the possibility hereof; to me Saul and the Witch
of Endor puts the question out of all controversy; that it was not Samuel, but
the Devil personating him; several of the Ancient Fathers were of opinion, as
Tertullian, Justin, Martyr, St. Austin, and St. Jerome, with others, as they
are cited by D^ Rainolds in his 88. and 89. Prolections de lib. Apocryphis, And
indeed it is not probable, that seeing the Lord would not answer Saul by Dreams;
nor by Urim, nor by Prophets, 1 Samuel 28. 6. Yea, seeing Samuel would not see
Saul before his Death; 1 Samuel 15. 35. It seems altogether improbable that he
should appear to him now he was dead, especially to encourage that unlawful way
of consulting the Dead by a Witch, which was so severely prohited in the Word
of God; there are several other reasons urged in the forequoted Prolections,
and all Arguments to the contrary (seem to me) fully answered; though therefore
I have not so much credit for this Villain as to make these Apparitions
Articles of my Faith upon his bare Confession, yet the probability of the
thing, makes me the more confidently to entertain it; but the Reader herein is
left to his own liberty, (...) not if he does indifferently weigh all
circumstances, he wi(...) it as a probable ^^th, then reject it as an
impossible thing.

To conclude, this strange and unparalelled Murder, with the following firing
of the two Houses, I have thought good to publish to the World, that all (but
especially young) men, may take warning thereby, and be persuaded to break of
all their sinful courses, particularly these sins of Drunkenness,
Sabbath-breaking, Carding, Swearing, Lying and Stealing, these were the Sins
that made way for these almost incredible Villainies; if this faithful Relation
does happily procure these effects in any that reads or hears it, I have
attained my end and an ample reward of my small pains; and you thereby instead
of bequeathing shame to your selves and your Relations, will find much comfort
and contentment on Earth, and everlasting joy in Heaven.

FINIS.

