SADDUCISMUS DEBELLATUS: Or, A True NARRATIVE OF THE SORCERIES and WITCHCRAFTS
EXERCISED By the DEVIL and his Instruments upon Mrs. Christian Shaw, Daughter
of Mr. John Shaw, of Bargarran in the County of Renfrew in the West of
Scotland, from Aug. 1696 to Apr. 1697. CONTAINING The JOURNAL of her
Sufferings, as it was Exhibited and Proved by the Voluntary CONFESSION of some
of the WITCHES, and other Unexceptionable Evidence, before the Commissioners
Appointed by the Privy Council of Scotland to Enquire into the same.

Collected from the Records.

Together with Reflections upon Witchcraft in General, and the Learned Arguments
of the LAWYERS, on both Sides, at the TRIAL of Seven of those Witches, who were
Condemned: And some Passages which happened at their Execution.

JOB 2. 6. And the Lord said unto Satan, behold he is in thy hand; but save his
Life.

MATH. 15. 22. Have Mercy upon me, O Lord, thou Son of David; my Daughter is
grievously vexed with a Devil.

ROMANS 19. 20. And the God of Peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly.

LONDON, Printed for H. Newman and A. Bell; at the Grasshopper in the Poultry,
and at the Cross-Keys and Bible in Cornhill near Stocks-Market. School

THE PREFACE.
WISE Men do justly suspect, and are hardly brought to believe, the Accounts of
extraordinary Stories; especially about Witchcraft: Because the frequent
Impostures which the Romanists have obtruded on the World in their Miracles and
Legends; the many Relations of odd things as done by Demons or Wizards, which
yet, were either false, or merely the product of Natural Causes; the Ignorance
of several Judges and Juries, who have condemned silly Creatures merely upon
their own Ridiculous Confessions, or other slender proof; and the difficulty of
conceiving the Manner or Philosophy, of some Operations and Appearances, tho
undoubtedly true in Fact; are good prejudices against a Sudden belief, and may
serve as precautions to make an Exact Inquiry into those Matters before we
believe them.

But they are Men of weak Souls, and destitute of clear thoughts; who deny all,
because they have discovered Error in some; or condemn all Facts, as false,
because they know not how they came to exist: By the same rule of reasoning
they may argue that there are no Enthusiasts, because the best Men have been
sometimes mistaken for such, and that there are no Criminals, because several
have been punished that were not truly such: Because many Historys are
fabulous, that there are none to be trusted: And that all the Phenomenon in
Nature, whose invisible causes they cannot comprehend, are mere Delusions.

The following Narrative, as to the truth of the matter of Fact, is the best
attested piece of History of this kind, that has occurred in many Ages: the
most of the matters therein represented having gained the assent of private
Scepticks; and been proved before public Judges. So that its more surprising
than Witchcraft it self, that any Man should seriously deny the Being of any
such thing, and from thence doubt the falling out of such strange Providence
at a distance, when the certainty of the matter of Fact has dispelled all
Objections in the places where they happened.

Many Authors have proved, at large, that there are Witches and Witchcrafts,
from Reason, Scripture, Antiquity and the Experience of all Nations and Ages:
And they have solved the difficultys which might obstruct the belief of this
positive proof, by Hypoth^ses of Philosophy: Where it is to be observed, that
tho such explications of the natural manner of Phenomena are subject to cavil,
yet the existence of a thing which has so certain an^ positive Evidence cannot
be denied in sound Reasoning; because Angels and Men not being made for civil
converse together in this World, and all Communion with Devils being forbidden
us, the Scripture needed to unfold little of their way of acting; and still the
next Age, may discover what this could not, as there have been those things
explained already in this Age which were thought unexplicable in the last.

Therefore such a short hint, as may somewhat Illustrate the Events in the
subsequent discourse, is sufficient in the present Case: Especially since
Providence designs those eminent occurrences, rather for our Practical
Instruction, then for a Subject of ^otional Speculation.

The Devil can assume a bodily Shape, and speak to Man out of it: As he did to
Eve, to our Savior, and in some Heathen Oracles; to make Men capable of
entering into Contract with him, for Satan is willing thus to ensure Mortals of
being Enemies to Heaven, to other Men, and to their own Salvation. The
Insatiable Itch that prying Wits have after hidden and curious Knowledge, the
desire of Honor, Revenge and of the knowledge of Secrets, in some who are
Great in the World, the desire of Riches, and many times likewise of Revenge in
Worldlings and the poorer sort of people, and the eager pursuit after the
Enjoyment of Sensual Pleasures by those that are Voluptuous, do by the just
Judgment of God render all those sorts of Persons liable to his Tentations and
easy to be prevailed upon by his proposals to gratify them in those things
which they seek after as their chief good. We see daily, how the Lusts of
Criminals inflamed by Satan, divert their Horror not only of Eternal and
distant, but also of Temporal and imminent Torments; and Pervert those
instincts of Nature which might otherwise frighten them from a surrender. But
further, he commonly facilitates his Conquest over Witches, by decoying them
gradually to his Lure, through the mediation of Others that are already
embarrr'd with him, till they be sufficiently prepared for making an Explicit
Transaction to obey him.

That accordingly he has de facto prevailed in making Sorcerers and Witches,
appears from the Testimony of the Wisest and Best of Men in all Ages and
Nations.

The Heathens, by Nature and Practice, discovering this truth, made Laws
against Malefico's and Mathematico's, and some of the last (tho they assumed
the name of an Art much encouraged by the Legislators; being known, under the
pretext of that, to consult the Devil, as to the distinies of Men and States)
were punished by the Senate and People of Rome. And even the Persians, in some
good Reigns, did the like. In the Old Testament we have an account of the
Magicians of Egypt and Babylon, who were baffled by Moses and Daniel; of Balaam
and the Witch of Endor; and that Iesabel, Manasseth, and the ten Tribes were
punished by just Judgments for their Sorceries and Witchcrafts amongst other
Crimes; and there also we have an account of the Laws made against such, as
distinct from those against other Criminals. The New Testament gives us an
account of Simon Magus who bewitched the People of Samaria; of Elimas the
Sorcerer that was struck blind at Paul's Rebuke; of the Pythonisse who seems to
have been possessed by consent, because she was not Tormented, but got profit
thereby; and of such as confessed, showed their Deeds, and burnt their Books in
Ephesus; which are all of them undeniable Instances of Witches and Witchcraft.
There are also Prophesies of False Christ's with signs and wonders, able to
deceive, if posible, the very Elect: General Councils have made Canons against
those Wretches; and the experimental Knowledge of injured Mortals in all Ages,
with the public Sentences of Courts of Judicature thereupon, are delivered
down to us by all Historians.

Pet. Mamo^ius in his Book de Lamiis, gives us an account, that Gulielmus
Linensis, a Popish Doctor was justly put to Death tho he dyed Penitent, he
having confessed Witchcraft, had the written Covenant with Satan in his Pocket,
and owned that his share of the Devils Service was to Preach and persuade
people that Witches were only silly deluded Melancholians, and therefore their
Confessions were no proof. His success in this work of Darkness was such, that
the People and Judges did Slacken their procedure against those Miscreants, by
which means the Witches were vastly multiplied in a few Years, as we are told
by the same Author, who gives an account of the whole Process, from authentic
Records.

It is observed, that Satan has ofttimes changed his Scene in the different
periods of time, and turned himself into such Shapes as he found most
convenient for his purpose. ^o that the manner of his Apparition has been
different, according to the state of the Times. Of old he appeared Devil like,
and was worshipped as such by those that deprecated his Mischief: as some of the
barbarous Indians do to this day. In the darkness of Popery he was transformed
into a more innocent sort of Spirit called Brounie or Fairie, (that pretended
to fortell Deaths, to reveal the Deceaseds will, discover hidden Murders, and
do other friendly Offices, etc. Which were subtle means of inducing people to
rely on him) Those Spirits were then very frequent, he having the impudence
thus to appear openly proportiona^ly ^o the knowledge of Men, over whom his
reign was so universal: And as Travelers and Authors in^orm u^ he continues to
do so in the more Northerly Regions to this day. But since the Ligh^ of the
Gospel has broke out in our Horison, he oftener works externally by Magicians
and Witches, and internally on the lusts of Men, being now mostly restrained to
his own Sphere or Subjects. Yet still he ensnares too many, partly by aping the
Ordinances of God; especially as they are corrupted in the Romish Church,
whence so many Monks and Nuns, as being well (...) ^o his hand, have been
easily overcome by him. Thus he keeps public (...) in the Night as things of
extraordinary merit: They formally worship him by many (...) (...). ^e imprints
on them a kind of Sacrament: He inflicts dread^ul Penances on such (...) have
not executed the commanded mischiefs: He teaches them odd word and ^ignes, upon
repeating of which Exorcisms, he effects the Operations agreed on beforehaud.

But though what he does of himself, or by the Watchword of Sorcerers or
Witches, may, by collection, and an artful disposal of Matter and Form; appear
very surprising: Yet he cannot work against Nature; or overturn the Course of
it; since that is only in the Power of its Author who alone can do true
Miracles, or know immediately the thoughts of Men. It is probable moreover that
since the Fall Satan's natural Power is below that of good Angels; and it is
certain, that he is often baffled in his Designs by Providence: yet beyond all
doubt he retains so much poweras (being permitted by God) is sufficient to
bring about, by unseen natural Means, most of the extraordinary Appearances,
that the Generality of the Learned, have ascribed to him: And particularly
those in the subsequent Narrative: Many of which, tho they are beyond the
Efficiency of Disease, Deceit, or any visible Cause; yet may be the Effects of
some such unperceived Means, as follow.

There is no difficulty in Satan's transmiting in a short time an Account of
Things which are past; since its known he goes to and fro in the Earth: Yea, he
may have certainly foretold some future Events, as that of Alexander's Success
against Persia, etc. seeing he understands and may steal, the great Revolutions
of the World out of the Prophets; wherein they are so graphically described: Or
he may discover his own Resolutions whenever he is commissioned or permitted to
execute a Judgment; as in the case of those who, for seeking their Horoscops,
are given over to him by God; and thus he gave Saul an exact account of his own
End by the Philistines. But without some such aids Satan can only guess like a
Phisician by the Symptoms, or a Politician by the Crisis of States: which is
the Cause that most of his Oracles are Ambiguous.

His transporting of Witches is elsewhere explained. He can raise Hurricanes
(as appears in Job) which are known to carry very ponderous Bodies over great
Tracts of Sea and Land. Its easy for him to Condense a part of the Vehicle;
which may protect the Breathing and yet cut the Air, like the Fence of Dyvers,
etc. the beak of a Sloop: In which also he affects the magnifying of his own
natural Power, and to make his followers believe that it is no less then that
of the good Angels, who transported Ezekiel and Elijah through the Air. His
covering of the Witches from sight, at some times, is also cleared, from the
difficulties which seem to attend it, in another place of this Book: Where it
appears very possible that his skill in Optics, Reflection and Refraction of
Light etc. To which his Power and Agility as a Spirit Subministrats Materials;
may effect all that can be proved to be matter of Fact in that Case.

Glanvil, More, and others lay down another Hypothesis in both, viz. That the
Soul is separable from the Body in some Cases, without Death: When by God's
Permission, Satan with the parties Consent, gets power over both Soul and Body;
whereby he may carry away the one from the Helm of the other, and bring it back
again into its Seat; provided the vital Spirits which make the Body a fit
Receptacle, be well preserved by Ointments, that constrict the Pores, till the
return of its Guest: But Death ensues from a Separation when the Organs of the
Body are rendered altogether unapt to obey the Soul's Commands in its Functions.
If such an opinion could be true, Satan might employ this captivated Spirit to
actuat any shape he thinks fit. But there needs not so much Metaphysics to
unridle the Appearances of Witches in the shape of Beasts, and the like: Since
their real Persons may be covered with a Vehicle; which by disposal of the Rays
coming from it, may deceive the Eyes by the same Impressions that come from
the true sight of such things. His power of representing another thing in lieu
of that which is truly present; is so certain that it is found he may make up
the Image or Resemblance of Persons who are not present at all: For it is not
doubted but Spiritual Devils may sometimes be permitted to represent by
Phantoms the most innocent and praiseworthy Men, as well as Incarnate Devils,
are suffered to tr^duce them. He that accuses the Brethren and imitats an
Angel of light, may likeways personate the Children of Ligh^ by his Delusions:
Yet the Antecedents, Concomitants, and Consequents, of such providence, do
generally discover the Falsehood; so as the just man, for the (...) part shall
not perish in his Righteousness, and God, in his ordinary Providence, will not
laugh at the trial of the Innocent; tho sometimes it falls out, that the Sons
of Belial may swear away the life of an Innocent Naboth.

There are several other things of less difficult Explication. Particularly,
the Devil, or Witches might have been heard in converse by the Maid and not by
Others; the sa^e (...) as a sound directed through a speaking Trumpet reaches
the Ears to which it is aimed without dispersing it self toward those that are
not in a straight line betwixt 'em. The confederate Devil may, upon the Witches
desire, infuse poisonous Humors, extracted from Herbs, of the same invisible
Operation with the Steem of Mad-dogs, or the Pestilence; which being joined to
the rapid course of the Patient's own Spirits, Humors, and Blood, and Satan, by
ingyring himself into them, may, through the natural Means of Pulsion, set 'em
in such a Career as may very well produce those extraordinary Motions which are
mentioned in the following Account. The Devils delight much in the Torture, or
destruction, of young Children, out of Envy to Christ, who is tender of such
Little Ones; and because the Crime is the greater the less the Patient has
offended, or can resist. They use, or make others to repeat, Scripture-words
for gaining Credit, or alleviating the Terror, or to disgrace the Word, by such
a Mock-use; as they did in the time of our Savior, and therefore their
Testimony was by him rejected. It Is observable from many passages; that he
hastens, sometimes, and effects the Discovery of Witches by his Malice against
their present temporal Enjoyments, the uncertainty of their Continuance in his
Service, and unsatiable Desire for their full Ruin: Yet some of them, who are
most maliciously bent, he thinks fit to keep here, as useful Instruments; and
Providence permits others to Live, that by a wilful filling up the measure of
their Wickedness, under the means of the Gospel, they may be rendered finally
inexcusable.

As for those, whom, in Secret Judgment, the Devil is permitted to Torment;
but, in Mercy, not to overcome: He may be influenced thereunto by a design of
Perverting them with Terror, whereof he is at last disappointed: And it is
likewise certain, that the Defacing of God's Image in Man, especially in
Despite of Jesus Christ, who honored that Nature by Assuming it, is his chief
Delight: or he may be constrained to make such stupendous Appearances against
his Will (because he is most successful when he is least known) for a visible
Testimony superadded to the greater Gospel proofs, in gross times, that there
are Spirits, and a Devil to Torment Sinners, as it is observable that this was
denied by Mr. Aikenhead, yet he died in full Conviction of it) by the Passages
contained in the Ensuing Narrative: Or Providence may suffer things to fall
out, that, though they be Intended by the Devil for an Instance of Malice; they
may, by their Notoriety, be a Means of Promoting the Discovery, and bringing to
Justice those Miscreants, whom he made use of as his Instruments; and who,
perhaps, may have lived long in Rebellion against Heaven, and Destroying
Mankind by Services of the same Nature, as fell out in the Case now in hand.

In the last place, God may permit such things for the Magnifying of his own
Grace, which was so Conspicuous in Enabling this Young Girl to resist the
Fierce and Cunning Assaults of the Wicked One; and there is no doubt but the
Devil himself has the greatest Malice against those Countries or Persons, over
whom he perceives his Reign to be nearest at an end.

There are many other Profitable Instructions that may be learnt from this
Wonderful Providence, for such Dispensations have their own Language, and the
Man of Wisdom shall see God's Name.

The use of Charms for Men or Beasts, certain Characters, Words, Verses, and
Spells: The observation of Times and Seasons as Lucky, or Unlucky: The belief
of having Success by care rying about one some Herbs, Plants, or Branches of
Trees: And many the like Superst^tions; which can have no natural Causality on
the effects desired, are the very Rudiments of witchcraft, and an Implicit
Application to the Devil for Virtues which God has denied to those things:
Whence they are to be abhorred as sinful in themselves, and Introductory to an
explicit Engagement with the Devil. So, gross Ignorance, profane Looseness,
stupid Forgetfulness of God, and neglect of his Worship in Closets and
Families; Malice, Envy, Revenge, Discontent, oppressive fear of Want, and
distrustful anxiety of Spirit: And Lastly, a Libidinous temper, Curses,
Imprecations, and sinful Curiosity, are to be avoided, as paving the way to the
same Mischief.

Let none enveigh against a Profession of Religion, because some, under that
specious covert, have been found in League with the Devil. It Is because of the
glorious Luster and Excellency of our Holy Faith that these Miscreants paint
themselves with it; that they may be the less suspected, and the more able
subtly to gain others, and do their Masters Work: It was no stain on the
Apostles that One of their Number had a Devil, was a Traitor and Cheat: Nor
that Satan transformed himself into an Angel of Light, on Design that the good
ways of the Lord may be evil spoken of. Neither let us be under a Slavish Fear
and Terror of that Hellish Tribe, in truckling to their Humor, least they
should do Harm, which savours of Worshipping and Paying Homage to the Devil;
whereas we ought only to make the Lord of Hosts our Fear and our Dread.

There is no just ground to reflect on particular Persons or Families, upon
account of such Troubles. For no Man knows either Love or Hatred by all
that is before them: All things happen alike to all: We must not suppose, that
these were Sinners above all the Galileans, or above all that dwelt in
Jerusalem: The infinite wise God may thus Try our Faith, Patience, and
Christian Fortitude. Job and our Savior were Assaulted; and Seven Devils cast
out of Mary Magdalen, a Chosen Vessel. A Daughter of Abraham was bound by Satan
for Eighteen years; and his Messenger was sent to Buffet the Great Apostle of
the Gentiles. The Woman of Canaan, Math. 15. 22. And the godly Man, Mark 9. 24.
had their nearest Relations vexed in this manner: And blessed be the Lord that
he has le^t such Instances on Record for Prevention of s^umbling; though it
must be confessed, that the same Charity which judges well of all things,
cannot but alter its Remark when its proof is sufficiently clear from the way
in which the Person affected did formerly walk, since Presumptions do always
yield to Truth, and Lawyers have a Maxim, that in re clara non est locus
conjecturis.

The Deaf Adder that stops her Ears at the Charming Voice of a Sunshine
Gospel, will, one way or other, fall into the Charms of Satan, or his
Instruments: When Men will have none of Christ, he gives them up to their own
Lusts, and the power of their Spiritual Adversary; as, when Israel had forsaken
their God* he gave them up to Worship the Host of Heaven. What holy Caution,
and pious Use of our Baptismal Covenant, ought we to make, as the best Amulets
against being either Enticed by the attempts of his Instruments. But how much
ought we to be humbled? And how great diligence ought to be used in the
discovery of so many hidden Achans that are in the Camp of Israel? Yet Poverty,
Age, the Features, yea, Ill Fame, or the like slender grounds, which could not
be worthy of being represented to a Magistrate; ought not to move us to
Suspicion, much less to defame: Since Charity hopes all things, and we ought to
do to others, as we would be done by.

These things we doubt not will meet with a very different Reception,
especially in this unhappy Age and place of the world, where Britain may be
termed the Unfortunate Island; Africa never having been more fertile in the
production of Monsters: since its observed, that through all the Successions of
Men, there was never before any Society, or Collective Body of Atheists till
these dreggs of time; though there might have been here and there some misshapen
Births. But Wisdom is Justified of her Children, and it is the Season for
Sampson to awake when Dalilah gives the Alarm, that the Philistines are upon
him. What Peace, so long as the Whoredoms of Iezebel and her Witchcrafts are
so many. But good things are hoped of our Magistrates, who have already so
happily begun.

The Apostle said of Job's Trials, ye have heard of the patience of Job, and
have seen the End of the Lord. So, in this Narrative, you have a Deplorable
Account of this Maids Dreadful Fits, and of the Powers of Darkness that combind
together, not only for the ruining of her Body; but also for murdering her
Soul. In the mean time the hearts of many were bleeding for her, and much
Application was made to God in her behalf: Diverse Solemn Facts were observed,
both in her Fathers Family, in the Parish, and throughout the Bounds of the
Presbitry, and else-were; her Case was expressly minded in Public addresses to
the Throne of Grace, till at length there was a General Fast Religiously kept
in most parts of the Synod, that God might give an effectual Check to Satan's
Rage and Dominion in the Country. Boasting of Prayers is to be abhorred; yet
it is our Duty, with all Gratitude, to Acknowledge God to be the hearer of
Prayer, and to Proclaim to the World the Excellency of them upon this very
occasion: For he has not turned away his Ear from us; it being the comfortable
result of this History, that the Girl has been perfectly well for many months:
so that we may well say, that she is a Brand plucked out of the Fire; and the
Instruments wherewith the Witches thought to have destroyed her, have fallen
upon some of their own heads.

The Devil could not enter the Herd of Swine, nor touch one Hair of Job's Head,
without Permission from him whose Kingdom Rules over all: Whence it appears,
that tho our Enemies be Indefatigable and Invisible, yet we are under the
Conduct of a Watchman who neither slumbers nor sleeps; to whom Darkness and
Light are both alike; and Greater is he that is in us, than he taht is in the
World: So that unless we wilfully ^orfeit our Privilege, (...) is no fear of
our being able to resist the Wicked one; since neither Angels, Principalities,
nor Powers, shall be able to separate us from the Love which is in Christ Jesus
our Lord: And though no Argument can be drawn from any merit in us, yet we
shall carry the day against all the Militia of Hell, under the Captain of our
Salvation.

It will not be a natural sturdiness of temper, nor a formal mentioning of the
Name of God or Christ, that can shelter us from those Devourers, as appears by
the Seven Sons of S^eva, Acts 19. They wrestle most successfully against
Principallities and Powers, who fight upon their Knees, by Prayer; this is the
true way of resisting the Devil, so as to make him flee from us.

If Satan's Possession of Bodies be so great a Plague, how much worse is it to
have him reign Master of our Souls? Wherefore let us Watch and Pray against
every sin, the least of which is more pleasing to him, and worse to us then to
be Tormented Bodily.

If Satan, as a Spirit, can Insinuate himself into our Humors, it is no
wonder, if, by having such an advantage of our Temper, he influence the
Phlegmatic Person to Sloth, the Choleric to Anger, the Sanguine to Lust and
sinful Pleasure, the Melancholic to Despair, etc. So that they that think they
stand, have need to take heed least they fall: And to Pray, that the Watchman
of Israel may make an Hedge about them and their House, and about all that they
have on every side.

Let this not only rouse our Diligence, and stir up our Gratitude, for not
being afflicted in the same manner; but let it also raise up our Admiration and
Love of Jesus Christ, who has freed our Souls and Bodies from the power and
slavery of Satan: And finding our selves too weak to resist those deluding
Pleasures which occasion our being deserted by God, and given up to this
fearful Thraldom; let us run to the Rock of Ages for protection and support,
our sufficiency being only in God.

Seeing Devils take so much pains to contract for the Souls of Witches; the
Saducee's the judicially blinded in their Reason, are hereby rendered
inexcusable by very sense; ill Books, which corrupt and ensnare curious
Fancies, who are seldom endowed with accurate Judgments, ought to be
restrained: As also such ridiculous Pamphlets, as no doubt by the Instigation
of Satan, have lately been sent abroad, designedly to frustrat any good use
which might be made of such extraordinary Providence as these contained in the
ensueing Narrative. The Authors of those Pamphlets having either forged other
subjects or disguised this.

The Publication of this Narrative has been delayed so long, partly, that there
might be the more narrow Scrutiny made into the Matters of Fact; and partly, by
some Accidents which did retard it. The Reader is not to expect any Accuracy of
Style; because the designed brevity occasioned the wraping up of much Matter in
few words, naked and Exact Truth in every Circumstance being our chief Aim.

THE NARRATIVE.
ABout the end of August One Thousand Six Hundred Ninety Six, Christian Shaw,
Daughter to John Shaw of Bargarran Gent. in the Parish of Erskine and County of
Renfrew; a smart lively and well inclined Girl, of about Eleven Years of Age,
perceiving one of the Maids of the House, named Catharine Campbel, to steal
some Milk, she told her Mother of it; whereupon the said Maid (being a young
Woman of a proud and revengeful Temper, and much addicted to Cursing, Swearing
and Purloining) did, in a mighty Rage, imprecate the Curse of GOD three times
upon the Child; and at the same time did thrice utter these horrid words, The
Devil harle (that is Drag) your Soul through Hell. This past on Monday, August
17. in presence of several Witnesses, who afterward gave Evidence of it.

Upon the Friday following, being August 21. about Sunrising, one Agnes
Naismith, an old ignorant Woman, of a Malicious Disposition, addicted to
Threatenings, (which sometimes were observed to be followed with fatal Events)
came to Bargarran's House; where finding the said Christian Shaw in the Court
with her younger Sister, she asked How the Lady and young Child did, and how
old the young sucking Child was? to which Christian replied, What do I know?
Then Agnes asked, How she her self did, and how old she was? to which she
answered, that she was well, and in the eleventh Year of her Age.

On the Saturday-night after, being August the 22. The said Christian Shaw went
to Bed in good health; but as soon as she fell asleep, began to struggle and
cry, Help, Help: And then suddenly got up, and did fly over the top of a bed
where she lay, to the great Astonishment of her Parents and others in the Room,
with such violence, that probably her Brains had been dashed out, if a Woman,
providentially standing by, had not broke the force of the Child's motion; she
was afterward laid in another Bed, and remained stiff and insensible as if she
had been dead, for the space of half an Hour; and for Forty eight Hours after
could not sleep, crying out of violent Pains through her whole Body, and no
sooner began to sleep or turn drowsy but seemed greatly affrighted, crying
still Help, Help.

After this a pain fixed in her left Side, and her Body was often so bent and
stiff, that she stood like a Bow on her Feet and Neck at once, and continued
without power of Speech, except in some very short intervals, for eight days;
during which time, she had scarce half an hours intermission together, the Fits
taking her suddenly, and coming on and going off by a Swoon, or short
Deliquium, but she appeared perfectly well and sensible betwixt whiles.

About the middle of September her Fits returned, in a manner differing from
the former, wherein she seemed to fight and struggle with something that was
invisible to the Spectators; and her Actions appeared as if she had been
defending her self from some who were Assaulting, or Attempting to hurt her,
and this with such Force, that Four strong Men were scarcely able to hold her;
and when any of the People present touched any part of her Body, she Cried out
with such vehemence, as if they had been killing her, but could not speak.

When she was seized with those Fits, her Parents sent to Pasley, for John
White an Apothecary, their near Relation, and afterward for Dr. Iohnston; who
ordered her to be let Blood, and Applied several Things to her, without any
discernable Effect: All the while of these later Fits she was afflicted with
extraordinary Risings and Fallings in her Belly, like the Motion of a pair of
Bellows; and with such strange Movings of her Body, as made the Bed she lay on
to shake.

Some days after she was able to Speak during her Fits, and Cried, that
Katharine Campbel and Agnes Nasmith were cutting her side, and other parts of
her Body; Which were at that time Violently Tormented: And when the Fit was
over she still Asserted, That she had seen those Persons doing the things which
she complained of in her Fit; (it being observable, that in the Intervals, she
was still as well and sensible as ever) and could not believe but that other
Persons present saw them as well as she: In this condition she continued with
no considerable variation, either as to the Fits or Intervals, for the space of
a Month.

After which she was carried to Glasgow, where Doctor Brisbane, an able
Physician, ordered Mr. Henry Marshall, Apothecary, to prepare Medicines for
her; So that having stayed in Glasgow about Ten days, she was brought home to
her Father, and had near a Fortnights Intermission. But then her Fits returned,
with this difference, that she knew when they were coming, by a Pain in her
Left-Side: And in these Fits her Throat was prodigiously drawn down toward her
Breast, and her Tongue back into her Throat; her whole Body becoming stiff, and
extended as a Dead Corpse, without sense or motion: and sometimes her Tongue
was drawn out of her mouth over her Chin, to a wonderful length, her Teeth
closing so fast upon it, that those about her were forced to thrust something
betwixt, for saving her Tongue. And it was often observed, that her Tongue was
thus Tortured when she attempted to Pray. In this condition she was for some
time, with sensible Intervals, wherein she had perfect health, and could give a
full account of what she was heard to utter while in her Fits. Her Parents
resolved to carry her again to Glasgow, for the greater convenience of being
under the Doctors Inspection and Care, and for the further discovering the
Nature of her Distemper, and making use of the most probable Natural Remedies.
But being on her way thither, in her Grand-mothers House at Northbar, she
thrust, or spit out of her mouth parcels of Hair, some curled, some plaited,
some knotted, of different Colors, and in large quantities: And thus she
continued to do, with several fainting Fits every quarter of an hour, both in
her passage to Glasgow, Nov. 12. And after she arrived there, for the space of
Three days; then from Monday to Thursday following, she put out of her mouth
Coal-finders about the bigness of Chestnuts, some of 'em so hot, that they could
scarely be handled, as Dr. Birsbane Witnesses in his Atttestation. Then for the
space of Two days, in her Swooning-sits, there came out of her mouth great
Numbers of Straws, by one at a time, folded up, but when out returned to their
Natural Shape; and it was observable, that in one of them there was a Pin:
After this there issued out of her mouth Bones of various sorts and sizes, and
then some small Sticks of Candle-firr (a sort of Firr in this Country that
burns like a Candle) one of 'em about Three or four Inches long; which, when
any attempted to pull out, they found them either held by her Teeth, fixed upon
them, or forcibly drawn back into her Throat; particularly Archibald Bannatine
of Kellie, Junior; observing a bone in her mouth, like that of a Duck's Leg,
and essaying to pull it out, he declared he found something drawing it back
into her Throat; so that it required a deal of strength to pull it out. It is
to be observed, that hitherto she knew not how these things were brought into
her mouth, and when they were pulled out, she immediately recovered of her fit
for that time. After this there came out of her mouth some quantity of Hay,
intermixed with Dung, as if it bad been taken out of a Dunghill; which stunck
so, that the Damsel could not endure the Taste and Smell of it, but was forced
to wash her mouth with Water. Then for a days space she put out of her mouth a
Great number of Feathers of Wildfowl; after that a Stone, which, in the
Judgment of Beholders, had been passed by some Person in a Fit of the Stone;
with some small white Stones, and a whole Nut-gall (with which they use to Dye
Cloth and make Ink) also lumps of Candle grease, and Egg-shells: Of all which
there were many Witnesses.

When the Sticks abovementioned came out of her mouth, she foretold that she
was to be grievously Tormented with sore Fits that Night, which accordingly
fell out: For a little after, she fell into a Swoon, wherein she had no use of
her Senses: and though the Spectators called to her aloud, and moved her Body,
and Mr. Bannatin abovenamed, gave her a very sore Pinch in the Arm, she was
not sensible of it. After she recovered from the Swoon, but continuing in her
Fit, she fell a reasoning with Katharine Campbel after this manner, Thou sit'st
there with a Stick in thy Hand to put in my Mouth; but through God's strength
thou shall not get leave: Thou art permitted to Torment me; but I trust in God,
thou shall never (...) my Life, tho it is my Life thou design'st. And callin^
(...) ^or a Bible and Candle, said, come near me Kate, and I Will let thee see
where a godly Man was given up to Satan to be Tormented: But God kept his Life
in His own hand: And so I trust in God, thou shall never get my Life, and all
that thou shall be permitted to do unto me, I hope through God's mercy, shall
turn to my Advantage. This Man was Robbed of All, and Tormented in Body, and had
nothing left him but an ill Wife. Come near me Kate, and I Will read it to thee.
And reading that Passage of Job, when she came to the place where his Wife said
to him Curse God and Die, the Damsel considering these words alittle, said; O!
what a Wife was this, that bid her Husband Curse God and Die? she who should
have been a comfort to him in his Trouble, turned a Cross to him? Then after
reading of the Chapter to the end, she looked toward the foot of the Bed and
said. Now Kate, what think thou of that? Thou see, for all the power the
Devil got over Job he gained no Ground on him; and I hope he shall gain as
little on me. Thy Master the Devil deceives thee, he is a bad Master whom thou
serv'st, and thou shall find it to thy Sorrow, except thou Repentest; there is
no Repentance to be had after Death: I Will let thee see Kate, there is no
Repentance in Hell, And turning over the Book citeing Luke, Chap. 16. near the
latter end, and reading the same said, Kate thou see, there is no Repentance
in Hell, for this Rich Man besought Abraham to testify to his five Brethren,
that they come not to the place of Torment, where he was; but Repent and turn
to the Lord, for there is no getting out if once they come there; now Kate,
thou hear'st this, what think thou of it? I Will let thee hear another place,
which should pierce thy very Heart, And turning over the Book said. she would
read about Adam and Eve, thou know Kate, the Serpent (the Devil thy Master)
thought to have ruined Mankind at the beginning, his Malice was so great at
that blessed State wherein they were, seeing himself cast down from all hopes
of Mercy, he used all means possible to subvert their happiness, by suggesting
to them fair Promises, and a prospect of Advantage in causing them to Eat of
that forbidden Fruit; and were made Subject to God's Curse for ever: But God
did not suffer them to remain in this Condition, but of his infinite Mercy
showed to them a better way whereby they might have Life Eternal by revealing
to them that blessed Promise, the Seed of the Woman shall bruise the Head of
the Serpent. Now Kate what think thou of that Promise? But observe this,
thou wilt get no Advantage by it, it is not made to thee, who have renounced God's
Service, and Listed thy self under the Devil; thou art his Slave, thou deny'st
this; but I know thou art a Hypocrite; for I remember, when thou wast in my
Mothers House, thou boughtest a Catechism upon a pretense to learn to Read, to
cloak thy Sin: Will thou hear me? know thou the reward of the Hypocrit? I Will
let thee hear it; I remember Mr. William Gillies was Lecturing the other day
upon the 23 of Matthew, where many a woe is pronounced against the Hypocrit,
Eight dreadful Wo's here Kate, and some of them belongs to thee: But I Will tell
thee more, know thou the reward of the Hypocrit they shall be cast into the
Lake that burns for ever, that is their Portion; do thou hear this now? Thou
turn'st thy Back to me, when I am telling thee truth; if I were reading a
Story-Book, or telling a Tale to thee, thou would hear that. Remember it
will be thy Portion too, if thou do not Repent, and Confess, and seek Mercy.
Again turning over the Book, she read about Pilat, saying; Pilat he made a show
of cleansing himself of Christ's Blood, he washed his Hands and declared
himself Innocent; but for all his washing he had a foul Heart, he would not
loose his Office for the saving of Christ's Life: He knew well enough that
Christ was an innocent Person; but he perferred his Honor before Christ;
Therefore to please the Jews, and to quench the struggling in his Conscience, he
washed his hands, and then delivered Christ to be Crucified by them. Thus she
continued for more then two Houns space; reasoning at this Rate, and exhorting
her to Repent, quoting many places of Scripture, in the Revelations and
Evangelists. And when any one offered to take her Bible from her, she uttered
dreadful Schreeks and Out-crys, saying, She would never part with her Bible as
long as she lived, she would keep it in spite of all the Devils.

Before we pass from this it will be needful to give the Reader notice of some
few things. 1. That while she called for her Bible and a Candle, she neither
heard nor saw any of those Persons who were then actually and discernably
present in the Room with her, and that Katharine Campbel to whom she directed
her speech was not discernably present to any Body but her self. And the pinch
Mr. Bannatine gave her in her insensible fit, she complained of afterward, but
knew not how she came by it, nor did she blame any of her tormentors for it. 2.
That these words set down as spoke by her, were the very same both for words
and order as nearly as they could be gathered and remembered by the hearers,
without any addition of their own. 3. That although she was a Girl of a pregnant
Spirit above her age, knew much of the Scriptures, and had a pretty good
understanding, above what might be expected of one of her years, of the
fundamental principles of Religion; yet we doubt not but in so strong a Combat,
the Lord did by His good Spirit graciously afford her a more then ordinary
measure of Assistance.

Sometime after the trash abovementioned issued out of her mouth she fell into
extreme violent fits, with lamentable out-crys, four Persons being hardly able
to hinder her from Climbing up the Walls of the Chamber, or from doing her self
hurt, in the mean time she had no power to speak, her back and the rest of her
Body was grievously pained, and in this condition she continued four or five
days with the usual intervals: During which she declared, that four men,
Alexander and James Anderson, and other two (of whom she gave particular and
exact marks, but knew not their names) were tormenting her. It was observed,
that many of those she named were known to be Persons of ill fame, as were
these two Persons last mentioned: It is also remarkable, that for some time she
knew not the name of the said Alexander Anderson, till one day that he came a
begging to the door of the house, where she was, then she immediately cried out,
that was he whom she had seen among the Crew.

After this she fell into other Fits, wherein she saw the Persons before-named,
with some others, and heard and saw several things that past among them.
Particularly, she sometimes foretold when she was to have the sits, and how
often she should have them, (which fell out accordingly.)

About the Eighth of December, being brought home again from Glasgow, and
having had six or seven days respite from her Fits, she fell into a frightful
and terrible Relapse: The occasion whereof she declared to be, her seeing the
Devil in Prodigious and Horrid Shapes, threatening to devour her; she would fall
down dead, and became stiff, with all the parts of her Body stretched out, like
a Corpse, without sense or motion; those Fits came suddenly, without her
knowledge, and she did as suddenly recover and grow perfectly well; and they
usually came on her when she offered to Pray: Sometimes she knew when the other
Fits were a coming, how long they would continue, and when they would return:
In which Fits her eyes altered strangely, and turned in her head, to the
Admiration of the Spectators, with a continual Pain about her Heart; sometimes
her Joints were contracted together, and her Forehead drawn forcibly about
toward her Shoulders; these Fits she took by falling into a Swoon, and would
instantly recover in the same manner. During this time her Fits altered again,
as to their Times of Coming, and Continuance, in which she sometimes
endeavored to bite her own fingers, or any thing else that came in her way;
she did the like when she saw the Persons beforementioned, or any one of them
about her, she would Point out where they were to the People with her, but they
could not see them; and sometimes she declared, that she had hold of them by
their Clothes. Particularly, December 17. being in a sore Fit, she cried out of
several Persons that were Tormenting her; and being in the Bed, grasped with
her hands toward the Foot of it, and cried out, that she had catched hold of
the sleeves of one I. P's. Jerkin (or Jacket) which was, as she said, ragged at
the Elbows: And, at that very time, the Damsels Mother and Aunt heard the sound
of the rending or tearing of a Cloth, but saw nothing, only they found in each
of the Girls hands a bit of Red Cloth, which looked as if it had been torn off
of a Garment; of which kind of Cloth there was none in the Room, nor in any
part of the House: At the same time she told them, there was such an one among
the Crew going to Pinch her Tongue, which was thereupon instantly pulled back
into her Throat, and she lay Dumb for a considerable space. Sometimes after her
Recovery from her Fits, she told that she heard several things spoken by her
Tormentors, but durst not make them known, because they threatened to Torment
her more if she did; and accordingly when her Mother or others prevailed with
her to tell them any thing, she was instantly tormented. She added that her
Tormentors appeared to her usually with Lights and strange sorts of Candles,
which were frightful to look on.

Thus she continued till the first of January, 1697. in such fits as
beforementioned with some alterations, and had likewise other swooning Fits,
wherein she continued for two or three hours together, sometimes more,
sometimes less, with very short Intervals, in which Fits she did not complain
much of pain; but had a great palpitation in her breast, and sometimes strange
and unaccountable motions in other parts of her Body, which continued in a
greater or lesser degree during the whole time of the Fit, wherein she was
somewhat lightheaded, and not so solid in her mind as at other times; tho in
the Intervals of these, as of all other fits she was composed enough, and these
Fits, as all the rest, came suddenly on and went as suddenly off by a Swoon.

Before we proceed any further it is fit to observe, 1. That Agnes Naismith
beforementioned, being brought by the Parents a second time to see the Girl,
did (without being desired) pray that the Lord God of Heaven and Earth might
send the Damsel her health and discover the truth: After which, the Child
declared that tho the said Agnes had formerly been very troublesome to her;
yet, from that time forward she did no more appear to her, as her Tormentor;
but as she thought defended her from the fury of the rest. 2. That Katharine
Campbel, beforementioned, could by no means be prevailed with to pray for the
Damsel, but on the contrary cursed them and all the Family of Bargarren, and in
particular the Damsel and all that belonged to her, with this grievous
Imprecation; The Devil let her never grow better, nor any concerned in her be
in a better condition then she was in, for what they had done to her. Which
words she spoke before diverse credible Witnesses. 3. That Bargarren having
prevailed with the under Sheriff to imprison the said Katharine Campbel, she
never after appeared to the Damsel, (tho formerly she was one of her most
violent Tormentors) except once or twice, when it was found upon enquiry, that
she was not in the Prison, but either in the Jaylors house, or when she had
liberty to go to Church. 4. That at the time when the Damsel voided at her
mouth the hair and other trash as above related, Katharine Campbel being taken
into custody, there was found in her pocket a ball of hair of several colors,
which being thrown into the Fire the Child from that time forward vomited no
more hair, she declared that she heard her Tormentors say that Katharine
Campbel made the Ball, of the hair cut off of Christians head when her trouble
began.

Upon the first day of January about ten a clock at night, she swoon'd and fell
into Fits differing from the former, in that, after her swooning was over she
lay still as if she had been dead, yet at the same time she was heard talking
mournfully with a low Voice, and repeating several Storys in meeter, which they
thought to be an account of the Rise and Progress of her own trouble; and thus
she continued (naming some of the forementioned Persons at times) till her
Parents and others offered to Rouse her, by Touching and Moving her Body,
whereupon she uttered horrid Shreeks, and cried as if she had been pierced
through with Swords, and assaulted for her Life. After this she fell a Singing,
Leaping and Dancing for a long time, laughing with a loud Voice, in an unusual
manner, tearing down the Hangings of the Bed, and pulling off her Head-cloaths;
in which Extravagances she was acted with such Force and Strength that her
Father and the Minister tho joining their whole Strength, could not hinder her
from Dancing and Leaping. But after Prayer, the Minister finding her Composed,
enquired if she remembered what she had done in the time of the Fit; to which
she replied, That she distinctly remembered her miscariages, and in particular
her Singing and Dancing, adding, that the Witches enclosed her in a Ring (or
Circle) and Dancing and Singing about her, was the occasion of her Dancing,
which she then gladly performed with the rest. For some days after she had Fits
much after the same manner, with some small variation: In one of 'em she tore
off her Head-cloaths, and would have stripped her self of all her Clothes if she
had been permitted.

About the Eleventh of January, she fell into Fits different from the former,
in which she was carried away from her Parents and others that were about her,
with a sudden flight, and the first time (to their great amazement) through the
Chamber and Hall down a long winding Stair toward the Tower-gate, with such a
swift and unaccountable motion, that it was not in the power of any to prevent
her, her Feet did not touch the Ground, so far as any of the Beholders could
discern; and as she went she was heard to laugh in an unusual manner: But by
Divine Providence the Gate being shut, her motion was stopped till such time as
some of the Family could overtake her, who endeavoring to carry her back, she
immediately fell down and became stiff like a dead Corpse, and being brought
back to her Chamber, lay so for a considerable space: upon her recovery she
declared, that there were about Nine or Ten Persons who carried her away as if
she had been in a Swing, wherein she then took pleasure, her Feet not at all
touching the Ground, to her apprehension.

The Night following she was suddenly carried away, as before, from her Parents
and others through the Chamber and Hall, and sixteen large steps of a winding
Stair toward the top of the House, where she met with Apparitions of strange
and unaccountable things, but was carried down again (...) she thought in a
swing by six Women and four Men (...) the the Gate, where she was found, and
thence (...) up as formerly with all the parts of her Body distended and stiff
like one dead; she lay so for some time, and when recovered, declared, that
both then and before, she had endeavored to open the Gate, and that those she
saw about her helped her, with a design to get her to the Court to drown her in
the Well, which she heard them say they intended to do, and that then the World
would believe she had destroyed her self. It is observable that in one of these
fits afterward, she was stopped at the Gate, tho it was not bolted nor locked,
yet the Providence of God ordered it so that neither she nor her Tormentors
could open it so that they left her there as usual.

Before we proceed further, it is fit to take notice that as soon as the
Damsels affliction was observed to be extraordinary and preternatural there was
(besides former private Prayers and Fasts by the Family) at the desire of the
Parents and Minister of the Parish, and by the Presbytries special order, a
Minister or two appointed to meet one day every Week to join with the Family,
the Minister of the Parish and other good Christians of the Neighborhood, in
Fasting and Praying. And on the 12th. of January it being the turn of Mr.
Patrick Simpson a Neighboring Minister to be there; when he came he found the
Minister of the Parish, and the other who was to join with him absent upon
Necessary Occasions, yet resolved to carry on the Work with the assistance of
three Elders and some other good People that were present. When he first saw
the Damsel he found her under some lesser Fits which came and went off quickly:
she was quiet and sober during Prayer, but in time of singing the 93 Psalm she
fell into a sore Fit, of greater continuance, first Laughing, then making a
sound like Singing, after that pulling her head-Cloathes over her Face, and
lastly turning so outrageous in her Motions that her Father could scarce hold
her till the Fit abated: After her Recovery she was quiet and composed all the
time of Prayer, and while the Minister Lectur'd on Mark 9. from 14. verse to
the 30. was very Attentive, carefully looking for the Scriptures quoted, and so
continued till the Religious exercise was ended, and sometime after, when she
acquainted the Company that she had something to tell which she heard some
among her Tormenters say; but durst not reveal it; upon which the Minister and
her Mother urged her to be free and not to obey the Devil, but before she got a
Sentence fully pronunced in her Mothers Ear, she fell into a violent Fit, so as
her Mother and others could scarcely hold her till the Violence thereof began
to abate, and then her Mother told the Company that she was speaking of a
Meeting and a Feast her Tormentors had spoken of in the Orchard of Bargarran,
but was able to say no more. After her Recovery, her Mother desired her to tell
the rest of it, and she began again to Wisper in her Ear, but could not get one
word uttered till she was seized again with a Fit, as violent as the former,
whereupon the Minister desired them to forbear troubling her any further. But
it was observed afterward that Elizabeth Anderson, James Lindsay and Thomas
Lindsay, three of those that tormented her confessed that they and others had a
meeting in the Orchard at that time, tho neither of 'em knew what the Girl had
said, or what the others had confessed concerning it.

A little after this, she was again suddenly carried from them down a Stair,
which goes off from a Corner of the Chamber to a Celler just below it, whether
her Brother and Sister were providentially gone a little before, to bring some
drink with a lighted Candle, which she soon put out: But they crying and
holding her by the Head-Cloaths, quickly discovered to the rest where she was.
Upon which Mr. Alexander King Minister of Bonnil made have down Stairs where
her Brother and Sister had lost their hold of her; but Mr. King having caught
hold of her again, keept her in his Arms till another Candle was brought, and
endeavoring to bring her up Stairs, declared that he found something forcibly
drawing her downwards, but still keeping his hold, she fell as one Dead upon
the Stairs, and being carried up and laid in Bed, she lay* so for a
considerable space. When recovered from her Fit, she declared that the Occasion
of her going down Stairs with such Force, was, that the Crew had suggested to
her while she was lightheaded, that the Devil was in the Meal Chist in the
Celler, and that if she would go down and put out the Candle, she might force
him out of it. When some Fits of this kind were ready to seize her, she now and
then gave notice thereof to those that were present and earnestly desired their
help to prevent her Motion, which usually proved to be of good effect, wherein
the Divine Mercy toward her is much to be observed. When she was in these
flying Fits, she used to utter horrid Shreeks and cries not like those of
Rational Creatures: and there were heard for three nights together, when the
Damsel was asleep in Bed, Shreeks and cries of the same kind in the Court, when
none of the Family was without Doors, to the great afrightment of those that
heard them, because they exactly resembled the Cries and Shreeks the Girl used
to utter in her Fits; and in one of her Intervals hearing the Family talking of
those Cries and Shreeks, and alleging they had been uttered by some wild beast
or other, she told them they were mistaken, for it was Margaret and two others
of the name of Margaret called by the Crew their Maggi's, that uttered those
Shreeks, the Devil having promised to them at that time to carry her out of the
House that they might drown her in the Well, where there were eighteen more
waiting for her.

After this she fell into freting and angry fits, in which she was cross to all
those about her, nothing they did or said proving to her satisfaction; but when
restored to a right composure of mind, she declared that her Tormentors did
still suggest to her and advise her to go to such and such remote places of the
house alone, and bring with her a String or Cravat or some such thing,
promising her Almonds and other sweetmeats, and bid her bring her apron with
her to hold them in, and accordingly when she was seized again with fits of
this nature she did resolutly endeavor to repair to those places with a
String, Cravat and Apron, and would suffer none to be in her Company, which put
her Parents and others under a necessity of detaining her by force, and being
thus prevented she would utter hideous Shreeks and cries.

Thursday January 14th. at night a young Girl appeared to her with a scabbed
face amongst the rest of her Tormentors, telling her she was to come to the
house to morrow about ten a clock, and forbidding her to reveal it.

The next day in the afternoon the Damsel earnestly enquired at her Mother and
the rest of the Family what Beggars had come to the gate that day, and of what
Countenance and visage they were? But not knowing her design in such a
question, they gave no heed to it; yet she still insisting on it, and being in
Company with her Mother and another Gentlewoman, about four a clock at night
she said to them, she thought she might tell them somewhat (the time being now
past) that she was forbidden to reveal; but as she begun to tell it, she
presently fell a crying that she was tormented and pricked through her whole
Body, however recovering from her fit, she went on and told 'em that a
scabbed-fac'd Lass appeared to her yester-night and was to be at the gate this
day at ten a Clock. Whereupon the Servants being enquired at what sort of
Beggars had been there that day, they declared that among others, there had
been a beggar Woman at the door and a young Lass with her who had Scabs on her
Face, and received their Alms.

January, 16th and 17th, When recovered of her swooning Fits, she voided at her
Mouth a great number of Pins, which she declared I -- P. -- and a Gentlewoman,
who had been always one of her most violent Tormentors, had forced into her
Mouth.

January 21, Her Fits altered again, after this manner, she would fall into
them with heavy Sighs and Groans and hideous Out-crys, telling those about her
that Cats, Ravens, Owls and Horses were destroying and pressing her down in
the Bed: And at the same time her Mother and another Gentlewoman being in the
Room with her, did declare that immediately after they had taken the Girl out of
her Bed in this condition, they did see something moving under the Bed-cloaths
as big as a Cat.

The same Morning in the interval of her Fits, she said, she heard her
Tormentors Whisper amongst themselves, and suggest to one another, (naming I --
P. -- the Andersons and others) that the Devil had promised and engaged to
them, to carry her out at the Hall Window, to the end they might Drown her in
the Well which was in the court; and then they said the World would believe she
had destroyed her self; and the same day and several days after, when seized
with her Grievous Fits, she did attempt with such force to get out at that
Window, that the Spectators could scarcely with their whole strength prevent
her.

About this time, nothing in the World would so discompose her as Religious
Exercises, if there were any discourses of God or Christ, or any of the things
which are not seen and are Eternal, she would be cast into grievous Agonies;
and when she assayed in her milder Fits to read any portion of the Scriptures,
repeat any of the Psalms, or answer any Questions of the Catechisms (which she
could do exactly well at other times) she was suddenly struck Dumb and lay as
Dead, her Mouth opened to such a Wideness that her Jaws seemed to be out of
joint, and anon they would clap together again with incredible Force. The same
happened to her Shoulder blade, her Elbow, and wrists. She would at other times
ly in a benumbed Condition, and drawn together as if she had been tied Neck and
Heels with Ropes; and on a sudden would with such Force and Violence be pulled
up, and Tear all about her, that it was as much as one or two could do to hold
her in their Arms: But when Ministers and other good Christians (seeing her in
such intolerable Anguish) made serious Application by Prayer to God on her
behalf, she had respite from her grievous Fits of this kind, and was ordinarily
free of them during most of the time of Prayer, tho seized by them before;
usually when Ministers began to Pray she made great disturbance by idle loud
talk, Whistling, Singing, and Roaring, to drown the Voice of the person
praying. Particularly January 22. She was more Turbulent then at other times,
and continued some space after the Minister began to Pray, Singing and making a
hideous Noise, fetching furious Blows with her Fist, and Kicks with her Feet at
the Minister, uttering reproachful Talk to him, and calling him Dog, etc. Yet
being Composed, and her Fits over before Prayer was ended, the Minister, when
he had done, finding her Sober and in a right Composure of Mind, enquired why
she made such disturbance? She replied, she was forced to do it by the Hellish
Crew about her, and that she thought they were none of her own words that she
uttered.

January 24th. She said that some things relating both to her self and to
others had been suggested to her by her Troublers; but that they had threatened
to Torment her if she should offer to make them known. And accordingly as she
Essayed to express her Mind, she was cast into two grievous Fits, in which she
cried out of violent pains; all the parts of her Body becoming stiff and
extended like a Corpse, her Head was twisted round, and if any Person offered by
force to obstruct such dangerous Motions, she would roar out exceedingly;
sometimes her Neck-bone seemed to be dislocated, and yet on a sudden became so
stiff that there was no moving of it; and when those grevious Agonys were over,
she again Essayed to express her Mind in Writing, but to no purpose; for she
was cast instantly into other two very grievous Fits, wherein she was struck
Dumb, Deaf and Blind, and her Tongue drawn to a prodigeous length over her
Chin. And when the Fits were over she declared, that the Andersons I. P. the
Gentlewoman, and I. D. with the rest of the Hellish Crew, some of whom she
could not name, had been Tormenting her in her Fits, and that there had been
fifteen of them about the House all last Night; but were now all gone save one
who was to stay about the House till her Fits were over. And accordingly her
Brother and Sister declared that they saw in the Morning a Woman in the Garden
with a red Coat about her Head, sitting at the Root of an Apple Tree; but
Bargarren with most of the Servants being abroad, that Matter was not further
searched into.

That same day about Six at Night, she was seized with variety of grievous
Fits, in which sometimes she lay wholly Senseless and Breathless, with her
Belly swelled like a Drum, her Eyes were pulled into her Head so far that the
Spectators thought she should never have used them more, sometimes when she was
tying her own Neck-cloaths, her enchanted Hands would tie them so strait that
she had certainly strangled her self if the Spectators had not prevented her;
sometimes she offered with violence to throw her self into the Fire, and diverse
times she struck furiously at her near Relations. In her Fits she would maintain
Discourse with her Tormentors, ask Questions concerning her self and others and
receive answers from them; which none but her self could hear: She Reasoned
particularly with one of them after this manner; O what ailed thee to be a
Witch! thou say it is but three Nights since thou wast a Witch, O if thou
would'd Repent, it may be God might give thee Repentance, if thou would seek
it, and Confess; if thou would desire me I would do what I could; for the Devil
is an ill Master to serve, he is a Liar from the beginning, he promises but he
cannot perform. Then calling for her Bible, she said, I Will let thee see where
he promised to our first Parents, that they should not Dye, And reading the
passage, said, now thou see he is a Lier; for by breaking of the Commandment,
they were made liable to Death here and Death everlasting. O that is an Uncouth
word; long Eternity never to have an end, never never to have an end: Had not
God of his infinite Mercy, ordained some to Eternal Life through Jesus Christ.
The Devil makes thee believe thou will get great Riches by serving him; but
come near, and having uttered this word she lost the power of her Speech, her
Tongue being drawn back into her Throat; yet beckning with her Hand to the
Spectre to come near her, and turning over the Book, kep't her Eye upon that
passage of Holy Scripture, Job. 27. 18. And pointing with her Finger at the
place, and shaking her Head, turned over the Book again. And recovering Speech,
said, I Will let thee see where God bids us seek and we shall find, and reading
over the place said, it is God that gives us every good Gift, we have nothing
of our own, I submit to his will tho I never be better; for God can make all my
trouble turn to my Advantage, according to his Word, Romans 8. 28. which place
she then read, and thus continued Reasoning, for the space of an Hour.

Sometimes she cried out of violent pain, by reason of furious Blows and
Strokes she had received from the Hands of her Tormentors, the Noise of which
those that stood by heard distinctly, tho they perceived not the Hands that
gave them. One Night sitting with her Parents and others, she cried out
something was wounding her Thigh; upon which, instantly her Mother putting her
Hand in the Damsels Pocket, found her folding Knife opened, which had been
folded when put into her Pocket, but her Uncle not believing the thing; did
again put up the Knife and leaving it folded in her Pocket on a sudden she
cried out as before, that the Knife was cutting her Thigh, being unfolded by
the means of I. P. and others: Upon which her Uncle searching her Pocket, found
the Knife opened as formerly. This happened twice or thrice to the Admiration
of the Beholders, who took special Notice that neither she her self nor any
other visible Hand opened it.

January 25th. She was again seized with her Swooning Fits, with this
remarkable Variation; her Throat was sometimes most prodigiously extended, and
sometimes as strangely Contracted, so that she appeared in palpable danger of
being Choked, and through the violence of pain in her Throat and difficulty of
Breathing struggled with her Feet and Hands, as if some body had been actually
Strangling her, and she could neither speak nor cry out to any; with these kind
of Fits she was frequently seized for several days; and in the intervals
declared that the forementioned persons, and others (whom she could not then
name) were strangling her, and that the occasion of her not having power to
speak or cry in the Fit, was a Ball in her Throat, which also was visible to
the Spectators; for they did clearly discern a Bunch in her Throat (while in
the Fit) as big as a Pullets Egg which had almost Choked her.

Sometimes she was kep't from eating her Meat; having her Teeth close together
when she carried any food to her Mouth. Also she was diverse times kept from
Drinking when at Meat; no sooner tasting the Drink, but she was in hazard to be
Choked; sometimes she held the Cup so hard betwixt her Teeth, that it was not
in the power of those that were with her to unloose it. And when any thing had
fallen out amiss in the place where she was, as the falling and breaking of a
Cup, any Body's receiving harm or the like; she would fall a laughing and
rejoice extremely; which was far from her temper at other times.

February 1st. She attempted to tell some things that she had been forbidden by
her Tormentors, upon which she was grievously Tormented; at the beginning of
her Fits she would look odly; sometimes toward the Chimney, sometimes toward
other places of the Room, but could not always tell what she saw; yet
ordinarily she would Name such and such Persons, who, she said were then come to
cast her into Fits. And when any desired her to cry to the Lord Jesus for help,
her Teeth were instantly set closs, her Eyes twisted almost round, and she was
thrown upon the Floor in the posture of one that had been some days laid out
for Dead: And on a sudden she would recover again, and weep bitterly to think
what had befal'n her. That same day, when her Fits were over, she said, she
perceived it was by means of a Charm, that such Restraints were laid upon her
as she could not tell what the Witches had forbidden her to make known, but the
Charm might be found out (as she said) by searching beneath the Bed where she
lay; and having quickly done it her self, she found (to the apprehension of the
Spectators) an Egg-shell open in the end, which being thrown into the Fire, did
melt after the manner of Wax, without any such Noise as Egg-shells use to make
when thrown into the Fire. After this she said, she should not now be handled
so severely, upon Essaying to make known what the Witches had forbidden her,
only her Tongue would be drawn back into her Throat, which accordingly
happened. She did likewise inform her Friends of many things she had not
liberty to do before the Charm was found out, particularly that her Tormentors
had frequently solicited her to become a Witch her self, and promised her great
Riches, and perfect Health to induce her thereunto. Which Tentation, she
through the infinite Mercy of God still resisted, reasoning with them after this
manner: The Devil promises what he cannot perform* and granting he could
fulfill his promises; yet I am sure from the Scriptures, Hell and the Wrath of
God will be the final reward of all such as yield to this Wickedness. To which
she received this reply (which indeed none but her self could hear) that Hell
and the Wrath of God so much talked of, was not so formidable as represented.
She also said, the Witches had Importunatly urged her to give her Consent to
the taking away the Life of her young Sister, who was at that time upon her
Mothers breast; which Tentation also she was enabled throw the Grace of God to
resist. She told her Parents likeways, there had been a Charm laid upon the top
of the House where her young Sister was (the Child having been sent out to
nursing by reason of the continued Affliction of the Family) and that the Charm
had been placed there by pinched Maggi, who thereby did design the taking away
of her Sisters Life; and that this was the Cause why she had so often for some
Weeks before desired her Mother to bring home her Sister, constantly affirming,
that the Child would daily decay as long as she stayed there: Whereupon her
Parents observing the decay of the Infant; even to Skin and Bone, they brought
her home, where she recovered. And the Girl being asked how she came to the
knowledge of these things? Replied, that something speaking distinctly as it
were over her Head, had suggested these and other things of that Nature to her.

February 2d. Being in the Chamber with her Mother and others, she was on a
sudden struck with great Fear and Consternation; and fell a trembling, upon the
sight of one John Lindsay of Barcloch, talking with her Father in the Hall. She
told her Mother, the foresaid Lindsay had been always one of her most Violent
Tormentors, and that she had been threatened with extreme Tortures, if she
should offer to Name him; whereupon she was desired to go toward the place
where he was, and touch some part of his Body, unknown to him, which having
done, with some Aversation, she was instantly seized with extreme Tortures in
all the parts of her Body. After which Lindsay was Examined thereupon; but
giving no satisfying Answer, was desired to take the Damsel by the Hand, which
being unwillingly prevailed with to do, she was immediately, upon his Touch,
cast into Intolerable Anguish, her Eyes almost twisted round, and all the parts
of her Body becoming stiff, she fell down in the posture of one that for some
days had been Dead, and afterward got up on a sudden, and tearing her Clothes,
threw her self with violence upon him, and when her Fits were over, the
Spectators did also take the Damsel by the Hanud, but no such effects followed.

About Six at Night there came an Old Highland Fellow to Bagarren, who calling
himself a Weary Traveller, said, He behooved to Lodge there that Night; but the
Servants refusing him Lodging, gave him something by way of Alms. At this time
the Damsel being in the Chamber with her Mother, and another Gentlewoman, said,
To her best apprehension, there was one of the Wicked Crew in or about the
House at that time; whereupon her Mother made have with her Daughter down
Stairs toward the Kitchen. And finding there unexpectedly the Highland Fellow,
whom the Girl then Accused, as one of her Tormentors, she desired him to take
her Daughter by the Hand, which he being urged to do, the Girl immediately,
upon his Touch, was grievously Tormented in all the parts of her Body.
Whereupon Bargarran gave Orders to secure him. The next Morning the Minister
being come to visit the Damsel, called for the Highland Fellow, and having
Examined him about this matter, without any satisfyfying Answer, he brought the
Child out of ^he Chamber, covering her Face, and almost her whole Body with his
Cloak; and giving Signs to the Highland Fellow to touch her in this Posture, as
he had Ordered him before, without the Damsels knowledge, he did it with great
Aversion; and the Girl not knowing of his Touch, was instantly cast into
Intolerable Agonies; yet others afterward touching her, no such event
followed. And when her Fits were over, she besought the Highfand Fellow to
allow her the Liberty to Discover the Persons that Haunted and Molested her,
whom he had forbidden her to make known: Upon which the Old Fellow looking at
her with an Angry Countenance, her mouth was instantly stopped, and her Teeth
set: But being desired by those present to speak her mind freely; whether he
would or not, at length she Replied, That she was Afraid to do it. And when by
the Importunity of the Lairds of Dargavel and Porterfield of Fulwood, and some
other Gentlemen there present, she Essayed to declare her mind, she was seized
with her Fits again.

Before this time, the lamentable Case of the Afflicted Damsel and Family had
been Represented to His Majesty's most Honorably Privy Council, who, upon
serious Application made to them, granted a Commission to a Noble Lord, and
some worthy Gentlemen, to make Enquiry into the matter. By virtue of this
Commission some suspected Persons were seized; particularly on February 4.
Alexander Anderson (an Ignorant, Irreligious Fellow, who had been always of
evil Fame, and accused by the afflicted Damsel) was by a special Order from the
Commissioners for Enquiry, apprehended and committed to Prison; as was also
Elizabeth Anderson his Daughter, upon strong Presumptions of Witchcraft; for
the other Year Iean Fulton her Grandmother, an Old scandalous Woman, being
Cited before the Kirk Session, and accused for Cursing, and Imprecating
mischief upon several Persons, which had been followed with fatal Events; the
fore mentioned Elizabeth Anderson her Grand child, who lived in the House with
her, did declare before the Session, she had frequently seen the Devil in
company with her Grand mother, in the likeness of a small black Man, and that
he usually vanished on a sudden, when any Body came to the Door. Upon this
Presumption was the said Elizabeth Anderson seized with her Father, and
committed to Custody; but at first most obstinatly denied any manner of
accession to the Sin of Witchcraft, until afterward, that being seriously
importuned in Prison by two Gentlemen, she did, before she came to Bargarran's
House, confess her Guilt. And that she had been at several Meetings with the
Devil and Witches, and, amongst others, she Accused her own Father, and the
forementioned High-land Fellow, to have been Active Instruments in the Girl's
Trouble; and before she was Confronted with him, gave exact Marks of this
Highland Man, though she knew not his Name; yet when she saw him did Accuse him,
and Affirmed he was the Person she spoke of.

February 5th. A Quorum of the Commissioners being met at Bargarran, and the
Persons then Accused by Elizabeth Anderson to have been at Meetings with the
Devil, and Active Instruments of the Damsels Trouble, Viz. Alexander Anderson
her Father, Agnes Nasmith, Margaret Fulton, James Lindsay, alias Curat,
Katharine Campbel, were all of them Confronted, with Christian Shaw, before the
Lord Blantyre, and the rest of the Commissioners, and several other Gentlemen
of Note and Ministers; and Accused by her as her Tormentors. And they having
all severally Touched her in the Presence of the Commissioners, she was, at
each of their Touches, seized with Grievous Fits, and cast into Intolerable
Agonies; others then present did also Touch her, in the same manner, but no
such effect followed. And it is Remarkable, that when Katharine Cambel touched
the Girl, she was immediately seized with more grievous Fits, and cast into
more Intolerable Torments than upon the Touch of the other Accused Persons;
whereat Cambel her self being Daunted and Confounded, though she had formerly
declined to Bless her, uttered these Words; The Lord God of Heaven and Earth
Bless thee, and save thee both Soul and Body; after which, the Damsel, when the
Fits were over, in which she had lain a most pitiful Spectacle, did declare she
was now loosed, and that she might freely Touch any of the Accused Persons, or
they her after this, without Trouble, which accordingly, upon Trial, fell out:
And being enquired how she came to the knowledge of that, answered as formerly
in the like Case; That something Speaking distinctly as it were over Head,
suggested this to her; And likewise, usually gave her the Knowledge of the
Names of her Tormentors, and Places in which they Lived.

February 6. The Girl being seized with sore Fits, something was seen in her
mouth like pieces of Orange-Pills, which were Invisibly conveyed thither; she
seemed; in her Agonies to Chew them; and having got them down her Throat, she
fell down as if she had been Choked, struggling with her Feet and Hands, and at
the last Gasp, and her Throat swelling in a Prodigious manner, to the
Affrightment of the Spectators; when she recovered she was Lightheaded for
some time, and would say, O it was a very sweet Orange-Pill which I got from
the Gentlewoman; declaring also, that there had been others there, particularly
Margaret L. or Pinch't Maggi, whose Surname she had neither Power nor Liberty
to express, neither durst she of^er to do it, least she should be Tormented as
was Threatened, and always came to pass when she Essayed to do it, either by
speaking or writing, as had appeared the day before in presence of the
Commissioners.

About this time, Thomas Lindsay, a young Boy, not yet Twelve Years of Age, was
seized, upon strong Presumptions of Witchcraft; he had said before several
credible Persons, that the Devil was his Father, and if he pleased he could fly
in the likeness of a Crow, up to the mast of a Ship; he sometimes caused a
Plough to stand, and the Horses to break their Yokes upon the pronouncing of
some words, and turning himself about from the right hand to the left, contrary
to the Natural course of the Sun. This he would do upon the desire of any Body
for a halfpenny. Upon these and the like Presumptions he was Apprehended, and
at first continued most obstinate in denial; yet afterward confessed to the
Minister, in his own House, before Credible Witnesses, his Compact with the
Devil, and that he had received the Insensible mark from him, which is visible
upon his Body: As also, that he had been at several meetings with the Devil and
Witches, where he said were present his Brother James, with others, and
particularly those who had been Accused by Anderson. This he Confessed, with some
others of the like kind, before he was Committed to Custody.

After this, Bargarran made diligent search for James Lindsay, Elder Brother to
Thomas, he having been all along Accused by the Afflicted Damsel, as one of her
Troublers, by the Name of the Gleid, or Squint-eyed Elff, (the rest of her
Tormentors having called him so, because of his Squint eyes) when he was
brought to the place, he did at first Obstinately deny his Guilt, yet, at
length, by the endeavors of Mr. Patrick Simpson, a Neighboring Minister,
ingenuously Confessed it, and did agree in every material Circumstance with the
other two, though he knew not what they had Confessed, he having neither seen them
before his Confession, nor had any occasion of Information in Conference with
others, being immediately brought thither from the Prison of Glasgow, where he
had been shut up some Weeks before as a Vagabond, in order to be sent to
Foreign Plantations.

A more particular Account of what all of them freely Confessed and
Acknowledged before the Commissioners for Enquiry, we have, for the
satisfaction of the Reader, subjoined to the Narrative; with an Abstract of the
Report made by the Commissioners, to the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council, concerning the who^e Affair.

February 11. There was by the Presbitry's Appointment a Public Fast kept on
the Damsels account in the Church of Erskine, in which Mr. Turner, Minister of
the Place, begun with Prayer, Expounding Rev. 12. from Verse. 7. to Verse. 13.
Mr. James Hutchison Minister at Killellan took the next turn of Prayer, and
Preached on 1 Pet. 5. 8. and Mr. Simpson concluded the Work, Preaching on Mat.
17. 20, 21. The Girl was present all Day; and before she came to Church that
Morning, told, That while she was in one of her Fits the Night before, she
heard the Devil speaking of that Public Fast, and what Ministers were to be
there; and that the Old Man Mr. James Hutchison, should stumble, and his
Peruick fall off as he went up to the Pulpit, and all the People should Laugh
at him; and he should break his Neck in going home. And when she came out of
the Church, she said, The Devil was a Liar, for no ^uch thing fell out as he
had threatened. She was all Day very quiet in Church; though troubled with some
of her light Fits, during which some Specter appeared, as she told afterward.

About Six at Night there were present in the Chamber with the Damsel, Mr.
Simpson with his Wife, the Lady Northbarr; and others, discoursing and
conferring about her Case; and while they were thus conferring together, she
told them, she would gladly make some things known, if she durst, for her
Tormenters; and afterward attempting to do it, was instantly seized with a
violent Fit; in which she leapt strait up, and appeared as if she had been
choked, so that it was as much as one or two could do, to hold her fast in
their Arms: And when the Fit was over, Mr. Simpson going about Family Worship,
did Expound Psalm 110. and speaking of the limited power of the Adversaries of
our Lord JESUS CHIST, from the latter part of Verse 1. she was on a sudden
seized with another grievous Fit, and some Blood issued from her mouth, which
raised Grounds of Fear and Jealousy in the minds of the Spectators, as to the
occasion of it; yet they could not get her mouth opened, her Teeth being close
set. And in the Interval of the Fit being asked, If she found any thing in her
mouth that had been the occasion of that Blood; she replied, She found nothing,
nor knew not the Cause of it; but opening her mouth, they found one of her
Double-Teeth newly drawn; yet though search was made for the same, it could not
be found: After which the Minister proceeded upon the same Subject, but was
again interrupted by her renewed Fits, yet closed the Exercise with Prayer;
after which she was taken to Bed, without any farther Trouble that Night.

February 12. Margaret Laing and her Daughter Martha Semple, being accused by
the three that had Confessed, and accused by the Girl to have been active
Instruments in her Trouble, came of their own accord to Bargarran's House, and
before they came up Stairs the Girl said, she was now bound up, and could not
accuse Margaret Laing to her Face: And accordingly the Girl's Mother having
desired some of those who were sitting by her to feel her Body, they found her
so stiff and inflexible, that there was no moving of it, and immediately again
found some parts of her Body contracted and drawn hard, as if by Cords; after
this Margaret Laing and her Daughter, having gone to the Chamber to the Girl;
did in presence of the Ministers and others, desire the Damsel to come to her;
for she* would do her no Harm, and laying her Arms about her, spoke very fairly
to her, and questioned her if ever she had seen her or her Daughter amongst her
Tormentors, to which the Girl did positively reply, she had frequently seen her
Daughter; but declined throw fear to accuse her self, saying faintly No; after
which Margaret and her Daughter returning into the Hall, and the Minister
requiring at her why she said No, seeing she had accused her before, she
answered, you must take my meaning to be otherwise, upon which she was seized
with a grievous Fit; and after her recovery being urged again to tell her Mind
freely, whether or not Margaret Laing was one of her Tormentors, the Child
thereupon Essaying to say Yes, and having half pronounced the Word, was cast
into unexpressible Anguish; and again in the interval of the Fit, she Essayed
to express the same thing, and saying only the word Tint (that is lost) was on
a sudden struck with another fit, and when the fit was over, and the Child
returned to the Chamber, Margaret Laing who was sitting near the Hall door,
spoke these words The Lord bless thee, and ding ( that is beat, or drive) the
Devil out of thee. A little after which, Margaret going down stairs, the Damsel
came to the Hall and said, her Bonds were now loosed, and that she could accuse
Margaret Laing to her Face, and declared the occasion of her being so
Restrained while Margaret was present, was her letting fall a parcel of Hair at
the Hall door as she came in; being a Charm made by her for that end, which
also had been the occasion of her uttering the word Tint in the former fit: And
accordingly a parcel of Hair had been found at the Hall-door, after Margaret
Laing had gone straight from the Hall to the Chamber, which immediately was cast
into the Fire and burnt. And its remarkable, that it could be attested that
there was no Hair, or any other thing else in that place before Margaret Laing
came in, and the Girl being enquired, what way she knew Margaret Laing had laid
the forementioned Charm upon her, replied, that something speaking distinctly
to her as it were over her Head, informed her so.

About Eight at Night she was severely handled in her Fits, much after the
former manner, and while she was in her swooning Fits, there was seen in her
Mouth a Pin, wherewith she seemed almost Choked; but by Divine Providence it
was got out, tho with great difficulty. After this she was somewhat composed,
and did not much complain of pain; but was distinctly heard to entertain
discourse with some invisible Creatures about her, and the Reply's given by
her, and heard by those who took care of her, gave them ground to conclude she
was tempted to set her Hand to a Paper then presented to her, with Promises
that upon her yielding thereunto she should never be troubled any more; as also
that she should have sweet meats, a Glass of Sack, and a handsome Coat with
silver Lace: She was also distinctly heard to say, resisting the Tempter, Thou
art a filthy Sow, should I obey thee; this was not the end of my Creation, but
to Glorify God and enjoy him for ever; and thou promisest what thou can not
perform: Art thou angry at me for saying thou Sow, What should I call thee but
thou filthy Sow? Art thou not the filthy Devil, for as brave as thou art with
thy Silver and Gold Lace? Would thou have me Renounce my Baptism? Do thou
promise to give me brave Men in Marriage, and fine Clothes, and perfect Health,
if I should consent thereunto? Do thou say my Baptism will do me no good,
because thou alledgest he was not a sufficient Minister that baptized me? thou
art a Liar, I Will be content to dye ere I renounce my Baptism. O through the
Grace of God I Will never do it. And thus she continued Reasoning, being both
Blind and Deaf, for the space of two Hours; and when she came to her self did
declare it was the Devil, who first presented himself tempting her in the shape
of a Sow, to Renounce her Baptism, as is hinted; and that he did chide her when
she called him, thou Sow, and immediately appeared to her again in the shape of
a brave Gentleman, having Gold and Silver Lace on his Clothes, still urging her
to renounce her Baptism, which Temptation through the special assistance of the
Grace of God she effectually resisted: she also said, that it had been
suggested to her by the Spirit, speaking to her as formerly over her Head,
after the Combat with the Tempter was past, that one of her Tormentors would be
at the House to Morrow.

February 13. She was seized with a sore fit about Twelve a Clock of the day,
in which she continued for more than two Hours, both Deaf and Blind. Those in
the Room with her cried to her aloud, and pinched her Hands and other parts of
her Body; but all to no purpose. And in this posture she was hurried ^o and Fro
with violence through the Room: And when any Body offered to hinder the
dangerous and violent Motion she seemed to be in, she would Roar exceedingly,
sometimes she would desire her Father and Mother and others to come and take her
Home (supposing her self not to be in her Fathers House) when she was in this
deplorable Condition, Margaret Roger who lived in the Neighborhood, came to
the House of Bargarren enquiring for the Lady; and having come up stairs, the
Parents of the Damsel remembering the Girl had said the Night before, that one
of her Tormentors was to come that day to the House, brought Margaret Roger to
the Chamber where she was, and so soon as she entered the Door; the Damsel tho
she could discern none of those who were present with her, nor answer them when
they cried to her; yet presently saw her and ran toward her, crying, Maggi,
Maggi, where have thou been? wi^t thou take me with thee, for my Father and
Mother have left me. Whereupon the Spectators being Astonished, caused Morgaret
to speak to the Child; which she having done, the Girl distinctly heard and
answered her every word. After this, the Three that had Confessed, were also
brought up to the Chamber where the Damsel was; and as soon as they entered the
Door, she ran also to them, Laughing, as if she had been overjoyed, Answering
them when they spoke to her: and Margaret Roger being Confronted with them,
They declared that she had been at Meetings with the Devil and Witches in
Bargarran's Orchard, Consulting and Contriving the Childs ruin.

The LORD's Day following, being February 14. After some short Intervals, she
was again seized with her Fits, in which she said, Margaret Laing, and her
Daughter Martha Semple, were Tormenting her, and cutting her Throat; which
words, through violence of Pain, and difficulty of Breathing, she uttered with
a low, and scarcely, audible Voice; and upon the Naming of Margaret Laing and
her Daughter, she was Tossed and dreadfully Tormented in all the parts of her
Body, being made sometimes to stand upon her Head and Feet at once, sometimes
her Belly swelling like a Drum, and falling again on a sudden; and sometimes
her Head, and other parts of her Body were like to be shaken in pieces, so that
the Spectators feared she would never speak more. And when the Fit was over,
she declared, Margaret Laing said to her, while in the Fit, That she would give
her a Tosty (which imports hot and severe handling) for Naming her.

At this time she was seldom free of her Light-headed-fits, which, for the most
part, were all the respite and ease she had from the unexpressible Agonies she
endured in her more grievous Fits; unless when asleep: And while she was in
these Fits, no Body could persuade her to Pray; yet, when in a right composure
of Mind, she would Weep Bitterly at the Remembrance of this, expressing her Fears,
least it might be an Evidence that God would for sake her.

February 18. About Two in the Afternoon, she being in a Light-headed-fit,
said, The Devil now appeared to her in the Shape of a man; Whereupon being
struck with great Fear and Consternation, she was desired to Pray with an
Audible Voice, The Lord Rebuke thee Satan: which Essaying to do, she instantly
lost her power of Speech, her Teeth being set, and her Tongue drawn back into
her Throat; and attempting it again, she was immediately seized with another
grievous Fit; in which her Eyes being twisted almost round, she fell down as
one Dead, struggling with Feet and Hands, and getting up again on a sudden, was
hurried with Violence too and fro, through the Room, Deaf and Blind; yet was
speaking with some Invisible Creature about her saying, With the Lord's
strength thou shal't neither put Straw nor Sticks into my mouth. After this she
cried in a pitiful manner, The Be has sting'd me: then presently sitting
down, and untying her Stocking, put her Hand to that part which had been Nip't
or Pinch't; Whereupon the Spectators did visibly discern the lively marks of
Nails of Fingers deeply imprinted on that same part of her Leg. And when she
came to her self, she did declare, That something speaking to her, as it were
over her Head, told her it was M. M. in a Neighboring Parish (naming the
place) that had appeared to her, and pinch't her Leg in the likeness of a Be.
She likewise declared, That the forementioned M. M. instantly after this had
been suggested to her, appeared in her own shape and likeness, as she used to
be at other times. Shortly after this, being still seized with her light Fit,
she whispered in her Mothers Ear, The Devil was now appearing to her again in
the shape of a Gentleman: And being instantly seized with her light Fits, in
which she was both Blind and Deaf, was distinctly heard, Arguing after this
manner. Thou think to tempt me to be a Witch; but through God's strength
thou shall never be the better: I charge thee, in the Name of GOD to be gone,
and thy Papers too; in the LORD's strength I Will not fear thee: I Will stand here
and see, if thou can come one step nearer me; I think thou fear me more then
I fear thee. Then turning her self again, she was hurried To and Fro with
violence through the Room as formerly, saying, She was bitten or pinch't very
sore in the Hands with Teeth, and Nip't with Fingers above Twenty four times;
which occasioned her to utter horrid Shreeks, and Out-crys at every time she
received them, showing and pointing with her Finger to those parts of her Arm
and Leg which had been Pinch't and Bitten, but neither saw nor heard any about
her. And accordingly the Spectators did visibly discern the evident marks of
the Teeth and Nails of Fingers upon her Arms and Legs. In this postute the
Girl continued from Two to Five in the Afternoon; and when her miseries were
over, she sa^d, M. M. told her in the Fit, that Margaret Laing, then in
custody, had ordered her to handle her after that manner. And that Margaret
Laing had a Commanding Power over her.

On Friday and Saturday, February 19 and 20. she was frequently seized with the
forementioned Fits, and violently Bitten, Pincht and Nipt in her Hands, Neck,
and other parts of her Body, so that the marks of the Nails of Fingers and
Teeth, with the Spittle and Slaber of a mouth thereupon were evidently seen by
Spectators. When she was seized with her Blind and Deaf Fits, a Crooked Fellow
appeared to her, having his two Feet deformed, his two heels turning inwards
toward one another, and the fore-parts of his Feet outward, so that the broad
side of his Feet moved foremost; and upon the appearing of this Fellow, her
Feet were put in the very same posture during the time he Tormented her. It is
to be observed that there is a Fellow in one of the Neighbouring-Parishes,
whose Feet are exactly Deformed in that manner, who has been of a long time of
Evil Fame, and Accused by those that Confessed, to have been at Meatings with
the Devil, and the rest of the Crew in Bargarren's Orchard.

Saturday, February 20. The whole Family being gone to Bed, they had left a
great quantity of Peets (or Turff) by the Hall Chimney, which, the next
morning, they saw burnt to Ashes, though there had been no Fire in the Chimney,
nor near them, so that the Plaster and Stones of the Wall, where the Peets or
Turff lay, were, in a great part, turned to Rubbish by the violence of the
Fire, but no other Damage followed, the Hall-floor being laid with Stones, and
the Peets lying within the Brace of a large Chimney.

Febr. 27th. The Chamber-fire having been covered with Ashes in the Chimney
when the Family went to Bed, the next morning, though a good quantity of Ashes
had been left; yet they found all clean sweept away, and no appearance of ashes
nor fire at all, the none in the family had been there after the fire was
covered.

In fits of this kind she continued for several days after, naming the
forementioned crooked fellow, I. R. and M. A. two Women that lived in the
neighboring Parishes, which two latter were accused (by the three that had
confessed) to be amongst her Tormenters, and particularly upon the Lords day
February 12. and the Monday following, the said I. R. appearing to her
grievously vexed her, telling her she was commissioned so to do, the
Gentlewoman M. M. having a pain in her head at that time, and so not being able
to come forth. Concerning which it is worthy of remark, that the Damsel
declared M. M. to have appeared to her about two days after, with her head
bound up with a handker-chief, in which posture she did not formerly appear.

Upon Thursday February 25. She continued in the former fits, weeping bitterly
and complaining of a pain in both her sides, she also told in the interval of
her fits, that she was that night to be in very grievous and sore fits, her
Tormenters being resolved to choke her, by putting pins in her mouth, which
(tho she emptied her self of all that were in her Clothes) yet accordingly came
to pass: In those fits she was both Blind and Deaf, leaping up and down in an
extraordinary manner, and thus continued for some days voiding out of her Mouth
a great quantity of small broken ^ins, which she declared I. R. had forced into
the same.

Upon the Lords day being the last of February, about five a Clock in the
Afternoon she fell into grievous fits, accompained with loud Laughing, Leaping,
and running with violence to and fro, and thereafter wept sore, crying out of
Pain, and that a little Highland Man (whom she knew to be such by his habit and
speech) was now breaking her Leg; which (because of Pain) she scarce could get
told in the fit, and putting her Hand to the part of her Leg affected, the
Spectators untying her stocking, distinctly observed a sore bruise in her Shin
bone; which when touched did so pain her, that she uttered horrid Shreeks and
Cries; and when recovered did declare, that the little Highland fellow had given
her that bruise. After this, she voided at her Mouth a crooked Pin, which she
said the Highland fellow had forced into her Mouth, and designed to Choke her.

The first eight days of March she continued in her former fits; with little
Variation, voiding at her Mouth a great number of small Pins and often fainted
and fell as Dead upon the ground on a sudden, struggling with Feet and Hands; by
all which her Natural Spirits were much Weakened and Exhausted; sometimes also
she attempted to go into the Fire. About this time when Ministers and other
Christians met in the Family for Prayer, she used at the beginning of the work
to make great disturbance, particularly March 2. which day being set apart for
Fasting and Praying, she was for some time very composed, until of a sudden, a
strong blast of Wind forced open the Windows of the Room; upon which she was
instantly seized with a violent fit, whilst the Minister was supplicating God
that she might be delivered from Satan's Bonds: In this fit she was both Blind
and Deaf as to All, except her Tormentors, was hurried with violence to and fro
in the Room, sometimes falling down as one Dead, sometimes Singing and making a
Hideous Noise, sometimes naming M. M. and others, who she said, were there
present Afflicting and Tormenting her, and named the particular places of the
Room where she saw them standing and sitting. And when recovered from the fit,
she told that a Gentlewoman and a little Highland fellow came in with the blast
of Wind, which forced open the Windows. This falling out upon the Tuesday, she
continued in the light fit without any Intermission, till the Sabbath after,
not being seized with any of her sore fits: And having gone to Church the Lords
day following, was perfectly well ^or the most part of the day; yet affirmed
she saw Ianet Wagh and others in one of the Windows of the Church, tho
invisible to all others.

Tuesday being March the 9th. Her Mother and Margaret Campbel her Cousin took
the Damsel to walk with them in the Orchard; and returning back to the house,
her Mother entered the Tower gate first, with the Damsel at her back and
Margaret Campbel tarrying a little while at the gate, her Mother went into the
Kitchen, supposing they had both been with her, whereas the Damsel was of a
sudden carried away in a flight up Stairs with so swift and unaccountable a
motion, that her absence was not in the least suspected, but her Mother turning
about and missing her, cried, where is Christian and Margaret Campbel? And
instantly running up Stairs to look for the Damsel heard a noise and following
the same, found her Leaping and Dancing upon one of the Stairs being seized
with fits, out of which being recovered she told, that I. P. had carried her
away from her Mothers back as she entered the Kitchen door (her feet not
touching the ground to her apprehension) with a design to strangle her in an
high wardrob with Ropes on which they used to to dry Linen, but that the said
I. P. could carry her no further then the place where she was found, and did
therefore leave her in such a violent sit.

Upon the Lords day after being March 14. Her fits altered, her Mouth and Nose
were prodigiously distorted, and her face thereby strangely and horridly
deformed. That same day being at Church in the Forenoon, her Glove falling from
her, was again put into her Hand by some invisible Agent, to the Amazment o^
the beholders. To which we may add here, as that which is worthy of remark,
that all this while an Invisible being haunted her on all occasions,
suggesting many things to her, both concerning her self and others; but yet wa^
never heard by any but her self.

The same day betwixt Sermons, she foretold that she was to be violently
Tormented in the Afternoon; which accordingly came to pass, and in her fits she
named one I. K. a Woman living in the Neighborhood, of whom she said, that she
had seen her in the Church. As also, that she was Master of these kind of fits
she was now afflicted with; withal asserting, that it the said I. K. were not
sent for, she would grow worse and worse; which her Parents finding to be true,
sent in the Evening for the said I. K. threatening her, if the Damsel was any
further troubled with her, that she should be apprehended as others had been;
after which the Damsel being in the mean time in a very sore fit, the
forementioned I. K. prayed (tho not desired) that God might send the Damsel her
Health; whereupon the Damsel was no more troubled with these kind of fits; but
did instantly recover, by falling into a swoon as she used to do before her
recovery out of any of her fits.

Tuesday March 16, she was again seized with her other fits, all the parts of
her body being Stiff; and sometimes she was heard conversing with the
Gentlewoman (as She called her) vindicating her self of what the Gentlewoman
alleged against her, Viz. That she had accused some innocent persons as her
Tormentors, To which the Damsel distinctly Replied, That she was a Liar,
saying, it was you your self, and no other ever mentioned any such thing.

Thus she continued until the Friday after, being never free of the light Fits,
and now and then also falling into Swoons, and appeared to be almost choked by
the means of some Charms and Enchantments, invisibly conveyed into her Mouth;
which, to the Apprehension of Spectators, were like pieces of Chestnuts,
Orange-Pills, Whites of Eggs, or such like, all which were distinctly observed;
when occasionally in the Fit she opened her mouth, and when the Spectators
Essayed to get them out, she kept her Mouth and Teeth so closs, that no Man
could open the same. And when recovered out of the Fit, she told, that L. M. a
Woman living in the Neighborhood, had put them in her mouth.

Upon Friday, March 19. She was violently Tormented with sore Fits, in which
her Neck was distorted, and bended back, like a Bow, toward her Heels, she
struggling with her Feet and Hands, and was sometimes stiff, blind and deaf, and
voided at her mouth a great number of small Pins, which she said the
forementioned L. M. had put there. About six a Clock that same Night, being
violently Tormented, she fell a Crying, That if the Gentlewoman was not ^hended
that Night, it would be in vain to Apprehend her to morrow: ^or, said she, I
have (...) (...) suffer at her hands betwixt Twelve and One a Clock in the
Morning. After this, the Damsel (...) up her Eye lids with her Hands, and
looking upwards, said, I^ ha^ art thou that tells me, that the Sheriff and my
Father are coming here this Night? After which the Sheriff, her Father, and
James (...), Macer to the Justiciary Court instantly came up stairs, to the
Amazement of those who remembered what the Damsel had just said. The Girl
continued afterward Blind and Deaf, yet was heard, in the presence of the
Sheriff, etc. Discoursing distinctly with some invisible Being near her,
saying, Is the Sheriff come, is he near me? and stretching out her hand to feel
if any Person were near her, the Sheriff put his Hand in hers; notwithstanding
which, she said to the Invisible Being, that Discoursed with her, I cannot feel
the Sheriff, How can he be present here? Or how can I have him by the hand as
thou say, seeing I feel it not? Thou say he has Brown Clothes, Red Plush
Breeches with Black stripes, Flowred Mu^ling Cravat, and an Imbroidered
Sword-Belt, Thou says, there is an Old Gray-Hair'd Man with him, having a Ring
upon his Hand; but I can neither see nor feel any of them: What, are they come
to Apprehend the Gentlewoman? Is this their Errand Indeed? And the Girl being
enquired at, How she came to the knowledge of these strange things? Replied, as
formerly, in the like case, That something speaking distinctly, as over her
Head, suggested them to her. It is very observable, that the Persons aforesaid
had that same Afternoon got an Order from the Commissioners of Justiciary to
Apprehend the same Gentlewoman, and were so far on their way to put it in
Execution against next morning; but being Witnesses to the Damsels Trouble, and
hearing what she had told, viz. That a delay in that matter would prove
exceeding dangerous to her, they went straight on in their Journey to the
Gentlewomans Habitation, and put their Warrant in Execution that same Night;
The Damsel continued to be Violently Tormented, sometimes lying with her Neck,
and other parts of her Body upon the Ground, as if they had been disjoynted,
and sometimes Essaying to throw her self into the Fire. About Ten a Clock, her
Father (who had not gone with the Sheriff) began to Read in the Bible, and she
repeated the Words after him, though Blind and Deaf, which made the Spectators
to apprehend, that she had the sense of Hearing in those Fits, at least when
the Word of GOD was read: To find out the truth of which, her Father ceased
from Reading; yet she continued to repeat the following Verses of the Chapter,
though none in the Room were Reading, and her self had no Book, but was heard
to say to some Invisible Being, Will thou teach me a part of the Old Testament
as well as the New. She continued in her Fits, and said unto the People that
were present, Now it is Twelve of the Clock; Oh it is now past Twelve:
sometimes lying as one dead through the violence of Pain, and decay of her
natural spirits; sometimes again recovering, she Essayed to express somewhat,
but could not; a great quantity of Crooked Pins issued out of her mouth, and
her body being prodigiously distorted, she complained of great Pain. Thus she
continued until half an hour after Twelve at Night; when, on a sudden, she
recovered, to the admiration of the Beholders, telling them, She might now go
to Bed, being told by some Invisible Informer, That the Sheriff, and the other
Gentleman, to wit the Macer, had now entered the Gentlewomans House; and
accordingly going to Bed, she was no further troubled that Night. It is worthy
of remark here, that the Sheriff and Macer, at their return, declared, that it
was just about that time they entered the Gentlewomans House, which the Damsel
mentioned.

Saturday, March 20. About Ten a Clock in the Forenoon, she was, of a sudden,
seized with Fits, falling down as dead, with her eyes closed, and sometimes
again opening and turning in her head, she saw nor heard none about her, but
was hurried with violence to and fro through the Room, crying with a loud Voice
when any one offered to hinder her motion. Being in this posture, and deprived
of her senses, James Lindsay, one of the Three that had Confessed, was brought
into the Room, and no sooner entered the Door but was perceived by her, and she
ran toward him smiling, saying, Jamie, Where have thou been this long time?
How is it with thee? And answered him distinctly to every word he spoke,
though, at the same time, she neither heard nor saw any other in the Room, nor
could she Converse with them, which was tried by several Experiments for that
purpose, particularly a Tobacco-box, being held before her Eyes by one of the
Company, she did not see it; but as soon as it was put in the hand of James
Lindsay, she enquired at him, Where he had got that Box? She continuing in this
condition, the Sheriff and her Father being present, thought it fit to Confront
M. M. who was now come, to try if the Damsel would hear or see her, as she had
done James Lindsay, which accordingly they did. And as soon as M. M. entered
the Door, the Damsel (though still in the Fit) presently smiled and said, I see
the Gentlewoman now: though she had never seen her Personally before, but only
by her Spectre in the Fits. She likewise heard when she spoke to her, and
Answered distinctly to some Questions proposed by her, such as, When it was she
had seen her (...) her. To which she Answered, She had seen her the other Night
in her Fits: And further Challenged her, Why she had (...) her from making
known the Highland Woman's Name? Adding, Thou pretendest thou know no^ what I
say, thou know well enough. Upon which the Gentlewoman, on a sudden,
(without being de^ired) Prayed, That the Lord might send the Damsel her Health,
saying, "Lord help thee poor foolish Child, and Rebuke the Devil. Which words
were no (...) uttered, then the Damsel fell down as Dead; and being carried to
another Room forthwith recovered of her Blind, Deaf, and Lightheaded Fit,
became perfectly well, and continued so for some time: Being thus recovered,
and M. M. removed into another Room, the Damsel was Examined, Whom she had seen
in her last Fit? To which she replied, She had seen the Gentlewoman: Though, in
the mean time, she was altogethe^ ignorant of her having been personally
present with her.

That same day the Commissioners of Justiciary being come to Bargarren, M. M.
and the Damsel were again confronted, on which the Child (being in her light
Fit) upon the first look of M. M. was suddenly seized with sore Fits, and when
recovered, accused her as being one of her most violent Tormentors,
particularly mentioning such and such times in which She had in an
extraordinary manner afflicted her, as also what words She spoke in her hearing
while in the Fit, and which is yet more remarkable, did question the
Gentlewoman if She did not sometime in December last when She was Tormenting
her, remember how She went away from her in great have, saying She could stay
no longer being obliged to attend a Child's burial at home. In confirmation of
which it is very credibly informed that W. R. a near neighbor of hers had a
Child burried that same day, and that the Gentlewoman came not in due time to
attend the Corpse to the burial place, but the Corpse being near to the
Church-yeard ere She reached the House from whence they ^ame, She returned
again to her own lodging, and so did not accompany the burial at all.

The Lords day following being March 21* She fell into Swooning Fits,
complained of a pain near her heart, and fell down as dead, not only when the
Fits seized her, but also during the Intervals, sometimes Singing after an
unusual manner, and informing the Spectators that I. G. constrained her to that
kind of Music, her own Lips not at all moving in the time, which the beholders
saw to be true, but her Tongue moved, for preventing of which She frequently
put her hand in her Mouth. At this time when either She her self, or those
about her, offered to read any part of the Scripture, She was violently
Tormented, declaring if She did but so much as hear the word of God read that
day, She would certainly be extremly Tortured; in Confirmation of which when
some essayed to read Heb. 11. 2, 4. 6. Isa. 40. Psalm. 3. She uttered horrid
Shreeks and Out-crys, Complaining that She was Pinched, in evidence of which,
the Prints or Marks of the Nails of Fingers were distinctly seen on her Arms,
and being thus pinched or bitten four several times with great violence and
pain, the Skin it self was torn off those parts of her Arms and Fingers where
the Prints of the Teeth and Nails were observed; so that the parts affected
fell a Bleeding, and her Blood was both seen and handled by the Spectators.
While She was in this sad and lamentable condition She seemed to be extremely
affected and oppressed with sore Sickness, as one in a Fever, crying sometimes
to Remove those Dead Children out of her Sight; which She frequently repeated
from six to nine in the Morning, She continued thus the rest of the day, and it
was observed that some Charm, and Enchantments were put in her Mouth as
formerly, of which being very sensible, She fell down on a sudden to the Ground
putting her hand to some Spittle which came out of her Mouth, and lifted up
some Trash which She again cast down to the Ground, so as it made a Noise, yet
nothing could be seen in her Spittle, nor elsewhere by Spectators, tho in her
Mouth they could distinctly observe something like Orange Pills, Whites of Eggs,
and pieces of Chestnuts.

Monday, Being March 21. the before mentioned L. M. or I. G. came to Bargarrans
house, and being confronted with the Damsel, questioned her if ever she had
seen her in any of her Fits, alleging that she withal could be none of her
Tormentors, because she was not now seized with a Fit, tho looking upon her, as
she used to be, when she looked upon any of her other Tormentors; upon which
the Damsel being for sometime silent, I. M. or I. G. did again propose the same
question, to which the Damsel distinctly replied Yes, upon which L. M. replied,
perhaps you have seen the the Devil in my Shape.

As to this Conference there are several things exceeding remarkable, as first,
that the Damsel upon her Answering, Yes, was immediately seized with a Fit.
2dly. That tho after Katharine Campbel had touched the Damsel in presence of
the Commissioners, upon the 5th. of February last, She had ever since that time
freedom to touch any of her Tormentors without being seized with her Fits, as
has been hinted, yet true it is, that in the room of that Charm a new one took
place, viz. When any time She looked upon her Tormentors in the Face, at the
very first look She was seized with her Fits; which Charm She declared was laid
on her by the said L. M. or I. G. And taken off again by her that very Morning
before She came to visit the Damsel, and this She said was suggested to her by
some invisible being, speaking distinctly over her head; and that therefore
the Damsel now had freedom to look L. M. in the Face without being seized with
Fits, which for a considerable time before She could not do when confronted
with any of her Tormentors. 3ly. It is yet more observable, that the same
Morning before ever L. M. came to visit her, it was told by the Damsel to
several Persons in the Family, that L. M. had taken off that Charm, of her
being seized with Fits when looking any of her Tormentors in the Face, but
withal that She had laid on another it is room* to wit, that as soon as the
Damsel should by words confer with any of her Tormentors, so soon should She be
seized* with a Fit, which accordingly w^ verified when She spoke to L. M. or I.
G.

On Tuesday March 23d, The Damsel being asleep in the Bed with her Mother about
three a clock in the Morning was on a sudden awakned (having for sometime
Struggled in her Sleep) in great fear and consternation, and being seized with
her Blind and Deaf Fits, took fast hold of her Mother, declaring to her Father
and her, that the Devil was standing near the Bed assaulting her, upon which
She tried out suddenly: God Almighty keep me from thy meetings. I Will die rather
then go to them, I Will never through the Grace of God Renounce my Baptism; for
I Will certainly go to Hell if I do it: Thou say I Will go to Hell however,
because I am a great Sinner; but I believe what the word of God says, tho I
have many Sins; yet the Blood of Christ cleanses from all Sin, and I will not
add that great wickedness to my other Sins, which thou art tempting me too. Its
no wonder thou lie to me seeing thou wast bold to lie i^ Gods Face. I know thou
art a Liar from the beginning; and the red Coat thou promisest me, I know thou
can not perform it. And although I should never Recover, I Am resolved never to
renounce my Baptism, It is God who has kept me all this time from being a
Witch, and I trust he will yet by his Grace keep me, not because of any thing
in me, but of his own great Mercy, and that he who has kept me hitherto from
being devoured by thee, I hope will yet keep me. This Conference continued near
the space of an hour, her Father, Mother and others being ^ar Witnesses to the
same. And after recovery the Damsel declared that it was the Devil, who (in the
ape of a naked Man in a Shirt, having much hair upon his hands and his Face,
like Swines Bristles) had appeared to her tempting her as aforesaid.

Until Sabbath following She continued in the light Fit, but withal every
Morning and Evening was still seized with her sore Fits, and continued still to
name M. M. (who was at this time set at liberty) the forementioned L. M. E. T.
an Highland Woman, and others as being her Tormentors. It is fit to be observed
here, that M. M. being set at Liberty upon Bail, the very day after She went
home, She again appeared to the Damsel tormenting her in her fits, and
continued so to do several days, particularly on the Saturday March 27 after
She was set at liberty: on which day the Damsel was heard name her in her fits,
and saying to her, will thou say God help me poor mad or foolish child as thou
said the other day before the Judges? art thou wishing the Devil to take me?
where is the Habit thou wast clothed with the other day?

On ^abbath Morning, March 28. the Damsel throw God's great Mercy toward her,
was perfectly recovered from all her Fits, and became as Well, Sensible and
Composed as ever.

If it be questioned, how the Truth of all these strange Things is attested*
There is none of those Particulars, but had the Witnesses Names inserted at the
end of every particular Paragraph, and were attested before the Commissioners
for Enquiry at Renfrew, by the Subscriptions of the respective Witnesses. But
seeing the placing of them so now, would have occasioned the repetition of
several persons Names and made the Narrative swell too much; Therefore we
judged it fittest to set down the Names of the Chief Witnesses altogether at
the end of the Narrative; and the rather because those things fell not out in a
private Corner; but Thousands in this Countery have been Eye and Ear Witnesses
of 'em, and been fully convinced of a Diabolical hand in the Affliction of the
Damsel: We shall only here make mention of a few, Viz, besides the Father,
Mother, Grandmother, and nearest Relations of the Damsel, and servants of the
Family, who were always present with her in her Fits: such of the Commissioners
for Inquiry, and of Justiciary as had occasion to be on the place of the
Events, were as follow, the Lord Bantyre, Mr. Francis Montgomery of Giffen, Sir
John Maxwell of Pollock, Sir John Houston of Houston, Alexander Porterfield of
Porterfield, the Lord of Black-hall younger* the Lord of Glandeertone, the
Lord of Craigens, Porterfield of ^ullwood, John Alexander of Black-house, Mr.
Semple Sheriff of Renfrew: And several other Honorable persons of good Sense
and Quality as the Earl of Marshal^, the Lord of Orbiston, the Lord of
Killmarnock, the Lord of Meldrum, the Lairds of Bishopton Elder and Younger,
Gavin, Cochran of Craigmure, William Denneston of Colgrain, Dr. Matthew Brisben,
etc. And several Ministers, who kept days of Humiliation and Prayer weekly in
the Family, and sometimes in the Parish Church with the Congregation, viz. Mr.
James Hutchison, Minister of the Gospel at Killelan, Mr. Patrick Simson of
Renfrew, Mr. James Stirling of Kilbarchan, Mr. Thomas Blachwal of Paisly, Mr.
James Brisban of Kilmacolme, Mr Robert Tailor of Houston; and of Neighboring
Presbytries, Mr. Neill Gillies, Mr. James Brown, Mr. John Gray Ministers of
Glasgow, while the Damsel was there; Mr. John Ritchie Minister of Old
Kilpatrick, Mr. Alexander King of Bonui^, Mr. Archibald Wallace of Cardross,
Mr. John A^son of Drymmen, Mr. Andrew Turner Minister of the Place, who was
frequently there: besides Mr. Menzies of Cammo, and Mr. Grant of Cullen,
Advocates; who were Eye and Ear-witnesses to several important passages of the
Damsels Affliction, and the convincing Evidences of its flowing from the
Operation of the Devil, and his Instruments. The Truth whereof is further
demonstrated by the Progress and Issue of the Trial, at which were present, at
several Occasions, not only Sir John Hamiltoun of Halcraig, one of the Senators
of the College of Justice, Sir John Shaw of Greenock, Commissar Smollet of
Bonnill, Mr. James Stewart Advocat, who were concerned in the Commission with
the others before mentioned: But also a great Confluence of several of the
Nobility and Gentry out of the Country, such as the Earl of Glencairn, the
Lord Killmares, the Lord Semple, etc.

The Report made by the Commissioners appointed by His Majest's Privy Council
for Enquiry: And of the Confession of Elizabeth Anderson, James Lindsay, and
Thomas Lindsay; Transmitted by those Commissioners to the Council, before
granting of the Commission for a TRIAL. To which is subjoyned, the Sum of the
Confessions of Margaret and Jannet Rogers, who did Confess (During the Trial)
of the Rest, beyond Expectation. Together also with an Account of the
Confession and Death of John Reid, who made a Discovery Agreeable to that of
the former Witnesses, after the Trial was over. And, in the last place, there
are added some Passages which fell out at the Execution of the Seven WITCHES
who were Condemned.
THE Commissioners* for Enquiry having met at Bargarran in February 1697, did
Chose the Lord Blantyre for Chairman, and took the Confession of Elizabeth
Anderson, Aged about 17 Years, as follows.

That about Seven years ago the stayed with Iean Fultoun her Grandmother, and
Playing about the Door, she saw a Black Grim Man go into her Grand-mothers
House: After which, her Grandmother came to the Door, called her in, and
desired her to take the Gentleman (as she Named him) by the hand; which she
did, but finding it very Cold, became Afraid; and immediately he ^anish'd.
About a Month after, her Grandmother and she being in the House together, the
said Gentleman (whom she then suspected to be the Devil) appeared to them, and
fell a Talking with her Grandmother* and whispering in one another Ears: Upon
which, the Grandmother desired her to take him by the hand, being a Friend of
hers; but Elizabeth refusing, her Grandmother threatened, that she should have
none of the Clothes promised her unless she would obey: Yet Elizabeth
withstood, saying, The Lord be between me and him; whereupon he went away in a
Flight, but she knew not how. Elizabeth was not troubled for a long time after,
till her Father desiring her to go with him a Begging through the Country; and
^e saying, That she needed not seek her Meat, seeing she might have Work; her
Father pressed her to go along with him, and took her to a Heath in Kilmacome,
where were gathered together, at that and other subsequent Meetings, Katharine
Campbel, Margaret Fulton (her Grand Aunt) Margaret Lang, John Reid, Smith;
Margaret and Ianet Rodgers, the three Lindsays (besides the two Confessing
ones,) etc. and several others whom she did not know, and the foresaid
Gentleman with them; he came to her the said Elizabeth, bidding her Renounce
her Baptism, promising that if she would consent thereunto, she should have
better Meat and Clothes, and not need to Beg. But (as she declared) she would
not consent. Then he enquired what brought her thither? she answered, That she
came with her Father: Whereupon the Devil and her Father went and talked
together apart, but she knew not what. She declares, that in that Meeting was
conserted the Tormenting of Mr. William Fleeming Minister of Innerkipp's
Child. The said Elizabeth Confesses she was at another Meeting with that Crew
above the Town of Kilpatrick, with the foresaid Gentleman, whom they called
their Lord: And that she went with her Father to the Ferrie-boat of Erskin;
where the Devil, with the rest of the Band, Overturned the Boat, and Drowned
the Lord of Bridghouse, and the Ferriman of Erskine, with several particular
Circumstances concerning that affair, as that some of the Crew would have saved
the Ferriman, but one of them, viz. His Mother-in-Law gainstood it, because he
had expelled her out of his House a little while before the Meeting. She
acknowledges she was present with them at the destroying of William
Montgomeries Child, by strangling it with a Sea Handkerch; that having entered
the house, they lighted a Candle which was somewhat Bluish, and Agnes Naismith
saying, what if the People awake, Margaret Fulton replied, ye need not fear:
She also declares, that about five Weeks before the date, her Father brought
her on foot to Bargarran's Orchard, into which they entered by a breach in the
Wall, and there were present the Persons before-named, etc. and the Devil, who
told them, that no Body would seem them, at which they Laughed. At this
Meeting, they, with their Lord, contrived the Destruction of Christian Shaw:
Some being for stobbing her with a a Rappier, others for Hanging her with a
Cord, a third sort for Choking her, and some intended to have her out of the
House to Destroy her; but fearing they might be taken before the next Meeting,
their Lord (as they called him) gave them a piece of an Unchristened Child's
Liver to eat; (but the Deponent, and the other two Confessers avoided the
Eating of it) telling them, That though they were Apprehended, they should
never Confess, which would prevent an effectual Discovery: And further, several
of them being afraid that the Deponent would Confess, and Discover them, as
she had formerly done her Grandmother, they threatened to Tear her in Pieces if
she did so; and particularly Margaret Laing Threatened her most. After two
hours, or thereabouts, they disappeared and flew away, except the Deponent, who
went home on her Foot. She Confesses likewise, That one Night her Father raised
her out of her Bed, and going to the River side, took her on his Back, and flew
with her over; from whence they went on foot to Dunbritton, and in Mr. John
Hardy, the Ministers Yard the Crew and their Lord being met, they formed the
Picture of Mr. Hardy, and dabbed it full of Pins, and having put it amongst
Water and Ale mixed together, Roasted it on a Spit at a Fire, etc. After which
her Father and she returned in the same manner as they went.

James Lindsay, (Aged 14 Years) Declares,

That one day he met with the Deceast* Iean Fulton his Grandmother, at her own
House, where she took from him a little round Cap, and a Plack, or of a Penny;
at which being vexed, he required them from her again, and she refusing to
restore them, he called her an Old Witch, and ran away; upon which she followed
him, and cried, That she would meet him with a Vengeance. About three days
after, being a Begging in the Country, he met his Grandmother with a Black
Grim man, whom she desired him to take by the Hand, which he did, but found it
exceeding Cold, and his own Hand mightily squeezed; whereupon the said
Gentleman (as she termed him) asked the Deponent if he would serve him, and he
should have a Coat, Hat, and several other things; to which James answered,
Yes, (...) do it: And after this, the foresaid Gentleman (whom the Deponent
knew afterward to be the Devil) and his Grandmother went away, but knows not
how. He acknowledges he was frequently after at meetings with the DEVIL and
WITCHES, particularly those mentioned in Elizabeth Andersons Confessions: that
their Lord came to James at the first public meeting, took him by the hand,
and for^d him to discover: that they contrived before hand at the said meeting
the drowning of Brighouse, and concurrs with Elizabeth Anderson, as to the
design of saving the Ferriman, which his Mother in Law did divert. He being
examined, declared he did not see I. K. and I. W. at the committing of the
foresaid Fact: (And indeed they were then in prison; that they with a Cord
strangled Matthew Park's Child; and that the Person who waited on the Child
finding it stifled, cried out Matthew, Matthew, the Child is Dead: Elizabeth
Anderson concurrs in this particular; and tells that when they had done, they
took the Cord with them. He declares, that he was present at strangling William
Montgomeries Child with a Sea handkerchief, and heard Agnes Naismith say draw
the ^not. That about five Weeks since he was carried to them in Bargarrans
Orchard, and concurrs with Elizabeth Anderson in what was treated there, as to
the destroying Christian Shaw, and the Charm against Confessing.

He likeways acknowledges the Meeting in Dunbritton about Mr. Hardy: And that
he has several times appeared to Christian Shaw both in Glasgow and Bargarran,
with the rest that Tormented her, and put in her Mouth Coal cinders, Bones,
Hay, Hair, Sticks, etc. Intending thereby to Choke her: That he and they did
oft-times Prick and Stob her in the following manner, viz. He had a Needle
which if he put in his Clothes, her Body would be pricked and stobed in that
place where he fixed the Needle, and if he put it in his Hair, that part of her
Head would be Tormented: That he saw her void the Pins they had put in, on
which time he cried out in these words, Help I. D. who was also then present:
That when the Ministers began to pray in Bargarrens House at several occasions,
the Devil and they immediately went away, etc.

Thomas Lindsay being under Age, declares that the same Iean Fulton his
Grandmother awaked him one Night out of his bed, and caused him to take a
Black Grim Gentleman (as she called him) by the Hand; which he felt to be cold:
And who having enquired if Thomas would serve him and be his Man, and he would
give him a Red Coat, he consented: And the Gentleman (whom he knew afterward
to be the Devil) pinched him in the Neck which continued sore for Ten days.
That one day after his Grand-mothers decease, coming by her House, he thought
she appeared to him stroaking his Head, and desiring him to be a good Servant
to the Gentleman to whom she had given him, and forbid him to reveal it. He
declares, that one Night lying in bed in the house of one Robert Shaw, he was
awaked out of his sleep and carried as if he had flew to Matthew Parks House,
where were present the particular persons named by him, and concurrs as to the
manner of strangling of the Child with James Lindsay his brother: And that
another Night being in the House of Walter Alexander, he was brought to the
strangling of William Montgomeries Child, and agrees likeways in the manner of
it with his brother; only he says the Sea-handkerchief with which they
committed the Fact was ^pecled. He likewise concurrs as to the Meeting in
Bararrans Orchard about five weeks ago, and in what was acted there. As also
about Mr. Hardy; with this Addition, That he himself turned the Spit on which
the Picture was roasted, etc.

It is to be observed, that as the three Confessers were apprehended seperatly
upon several occasions, so (after their obstinacy to discover was abated) they
made these Confessions in several distinct places without Communication,
without knowledge of one another Confessions. The Commissioners Examined them
by other trying Questions that were new, on purpose to make Experiment of their
Agreement, or Disagreement: But still found them to agree in, the matters of
Fact (declared by them,) particularly in Strangling of the Children, the Death
of the Minister, the Drowning of those in the Boat, and the Tormenting of
Bargarrans Daughter. The Commissioners did also Confront them both with
Christian Shaw the afflicted Girl, and the other persons accused (whom they had
caused to be apprehended) and both the Girl and the Confessers did accuse them
to their Faces, and convince them by Circumstances with great steddiness and
agreement, tho separatly brought in. The Commissioners did also try some
Experiments about the Girls falling in Fits on the Approach of the Accused, as
is expressed in the Narrative; and Examined her, with those who were commonly
about her, as to the particulars of her Sufferings: They tried to cause her to
Write (since she could not speak) the Name of a Person, whom she first called
Margaret, or pinch Maggie, and asserted to be one of her Chief Tormenters. But,
upon Writing Margaret, and the Letter L. of her Surname, the Girl was presently
taken with a fearful Convulsion, the Pen was struck out of her hand, and she
fell Dead, with heavier Groans than ordinary: After her Recovery, some
Ministers showed her a Passage of the Bible, but as soon as she attempted to
cast her eyes on it, she fell into vehement pangs; but one of the Commissioners
ordering the Book to be closed, she immediately came to her self, etc. In the
last place, the Commissioners called before them those Persons who had signed
the Passages of the several days in the Written Journal of the Girls
sufferings; and, having Examined them upon it, transmitted the same, with the
Declarations of the Three Confessers, and several of the Passages that occurred
in the Precognition, to His Majestys Privy Council, by whom they were appointed
to Enquire into the matter.

Besides all this, the signed Attestations of Dr. Matthew Brisbane, Physician,
and Mr. Henry Marshall Apothecary in Glasgow, did very much Influence them to
the belief of an Extraordinary Cause of those things that befell Katharine Shaw.

The DOCTOR's Attestation.
ABOUT the 24th or 25th of October last, the Lady Bargarran brought a Daughter
of hers, a Child of Eleven years old, or thereabouts, to Glasgow, to take
Advice of Physicians concerning her. When I was first brought to her, I could
hardly be persuaded there was any need of me, or any man else of my Profession;
the Child appeared so brisk, and vigorous in motion, so cheerful, and of so
florid and good a Color, and, in a word, to outward appearance, every way
healthful; but, it was not long, till I found my self obliged to alter my
Thoughts of her; for, I had not been above Eight or Ten minutes in the Room by
her, till she arose from her seat, and acquainted the Company, that she was
instantly to be seized with a Fit; and so being straightway carried to bed, I
observed a considerable stiffness and distention in her left Hypocondre, which
falling in a tryce, she was taken with horrid Convulsive motions in most parts
of her body, but her back and neck especially; this was accompanied with heavy
Groans at first, which, so soon as she was able to frame Words, were converted
into a kind of Expostulatory murmuring against some Women, two whereof she
always Named; one of them she called Nasmith, (as I remember,) and the other
Campbel: All these Symptoms, I thought, were very reduceable to the effects of
Hypocondrick melancholy; and therefore putting her in such a Course, as I
thought proper, against that kind of Malady, I was in absolute Security, as to
her Case; The Child having continued free from all the abovementioned
symptoms, for the space, I think, of a Week in this Town, and some Eight or Ten
days more in the Country. And I was perfectly surprised, when a Friend of the
Lady Bargarrans told me, That the Child was returned to Town again, and worse
than ever; for now she was in great hazard of being Choked with mouthfulls of
Hair, which she apprehended the Women abovenamed to be pressing down her
Throat, had not she her self pulled it out.

Having read many such Stories in Authors, and heard the like from other hands
too, but never seen any such thing, I was the more earnest to see the Child
again; and, for some Weeks that she stayed in this place, I was frequently with
her, observed her narrowly, and was confident she had no Humane Correspondent
to Subminister the Straw, Wool, Sinders, Hay, Feathers, and such like Trash to
her; all which, upon several occasions, I have seen her pull out of her mouth
in considerable quantities, sometimes after several Fits, and at other times,
without any Fit at all, while she was Discoursing with us; and, for the most
part, she pulled out all these things, without being wet in the least; nay,
rather, as if they had been dried with care and art: for one time, as I
remember, when I was Discoursing with her, and she with me, she gave me a
Sinder out of her mouth, not only dry, but actually hot, much above the degree
of the Natural Warmth of a Humane Body. During the time she was thus Exercised,
though she had daily, not only light Convulsive motioos, but Two strange
Convulsions, such as we call (...), to a high degree and rigidity of the whole
Body; yet she fancyed, as at other times, she saw many such People, as have
been already named, about her; but the Voiding, or rather Pulling out of the
things above named, did no sooner cease, but, as in all her Fits, when she was
able to speak, she constanstantly cried out, That they were Pinching, or
Pricking her: Those Fits were both more severe, and more frequent than before,
and followed with an Alienation of mind for some time. I have seen her too when
otherwise, free of all Fits, suddenly seized with Dumbness, her Tongue, being
strangely contracted, that it appeared, to her self, as she expressed it, as if
People were drawing it down her Throat. This I Declare on Conscience, and in
most Solemn manner, is what I have seen and handled; and, were it not for the
Hairs, Hay, Straw, and other things, toto genere, contrary to Humane Nature, I
should not Despair to reduce all the other symptoms to their proper Classes in
the Catalogue of Humane Diseases*

Written and Signed at Glasgow the Thirty First day of December, 1696. By me,
Sic Subscribitur, A. Brisben, M. D.

The Declaration of Mr. Henry Marshall, APOTHECARY.
Being desired by John Shaw of Bargarran, to Declare what I know of his
Daughter Christian's Condition, I do it as follows.

ABOUT the latter end of October last, she was brought hither to have Dr.
Brisbens Advice about her Health, and I was Employed as Apothecary. The Child
was about Eleven years of Age, of a good habit of Body, as far as I could
judge; but now and then fell into Convulsions, Swoons, and a little Lightness
of Head; and when recovered, out of those Fits, she would be perfectly well
again; and, by the Use of the means the Dr. Prescribed, she seemed to be free
of her Distemper: whereupon she was taken back to the Country; but, had not
been long there, till she became worse then before, and was sent hither again
to be under the Doctors Care; and after her Fits she took out of her mouth,
without any Pressure, or Vomiting, Tufts of Hair, Straw long, and folded
together, burnt Coals, pieces of Bones, Leather, Chips of Timber, and several
other things, diverse of which she has taken out of her mouth and given to me,
while we were conversing together: And upon the 20th of November last, when I
went to see her, I found her in a Swoon, whereinto she had fallen just as I
came to the House: when she had lain so for some time, she arose in a great
Rage, beat all about her, Frowning with her Countenance, and uttering a great
deal of unknown Language in an Angry manner: Then she put the Tuft of a
Highland belt, with which she was Girt, into her mouth, and pulled, with her
hand, so hard, that if we had not cut the belt with a Knife, she had, in all
probability, drawn out her Teeth; whereupon she tore the Tuft all to pieces
with her Teeth, and afterward fell a Tearing her Clothes, and her shoes which
she pulled off, and every thing she could get into her hands; then she fell
into a Dumb Fit, as she termed it, wherein all her Body was so Convelled and
Distorted, that I endeavored to put her Arms into a better posture, but found
them so stiff, that I could not bring them to their Natural Posture without
breaking them: Then she arose out of that Fit, and went up and down the Room,
and would have gone through the Wall, muttering the former unknown Language;
after this she fell headlong upon the ground, as if she had been thrown down
with Violence, where she lay for some time as Dead, but afterward arose, as if
she had been somewhat Recovered, and fell a Reasoning, very distinctly, thus;
Ketie, What a^eth thee at me, I am sure I never did thee wrong? Why should thou
Trouble me? Come, let us Agree, let there be no more difference between us: and
putting out her hands, as if she would take her by the hand, said, Let us shake
hands together: then pulling in her hand again, she said, Well, Ketie, I cannot
help it, you will not agree with me: and having pronounced those Words,
immediately she fell into another Fit, and Swoon'd; and out of that into
another Rage, wherein she bit her own Fingers, and tore her Hands upon Pins
that were in her Clothes; after which she appeared Angry, pulled out all the
Pins, and threw them away. And after she had been thus Tortured for more then
half an hour, without any intermission, she Recovered, and became perfectly
well: Whereupon I Asked her, How she was? To which she Replied; She had just
now a very bad Fit, for, during the Fit, she knew no body, neither took any
notice of me, though I moved her Body, and spoke often to her: I asked her
again, What she saw in her Fits? she replied, I saw Katherine Cambel, Agnes
Nasmith, Alexander Anderson, and others that she did not know. I enquired
again, What Katharine Cambel was doing? She told me, She was going to thrust a
Sword into her side, which made her so desirous to be agreed with her: And when
she had told me this, instantly she fell into another Swoon, and Repeated all
that was said before, and much more, which I have partly forgot: and in each of
those Two Fits she continued half an hour. All this I Declare upon Conscience,
and in most Solemn manner, to be a Truth; In Testimony whereof, I have Writ and
Subscribed this at Glasgow, the First Day of January, 16^7. Sic Subscribitur,
Henry Marshall.

While the Trial was depending Ianet and Margaret Rodgers confessed in this
manner, The Commissioners had adjourned to two several times; and though they
were to meet on the Third, yet it was not expected that they would proceed till
Providence should make the Guilt of the Prisoners appear by the further
testimonies of those who might confess; but on the very morning before they
were to meet the third time, those two Women above mentioned, Confessed which
was a surprise to every one that came to attend the Court, since these Women
were not formerly taken notice of as others were; but confessed of their own
free motion without any persons desiring it, nor had they such means of
instruction as were administered to others: Their confessions agreed as to the
meetings and the things acted in them with those of the three former, and the
other evidences of visible matters of Fact: Only they were so punctual as to
Name some of the indicted persons whom they did not see at those Rendevouzes;
and great care was taken to compare their Testimonies with what had been
already discovered, and to try their certain knowledge by new questions when
they were separated from one another, etc. Thus the whole matter was so evident
that the Commissioners, with the general Approbation of the most intelligent
Men of the Countery, who came to attend the Court, approved the going on of the
Process, and bringing seven of the best known Criminals, (for whom an Advocat
appeared) to Trial; accordingly there were some days allowed for the Persons
indicted to give in their Informations upon the finding of the Bill: and at the
Term, there was much time spent in producing Witnesses, an account whereof is
referred to another place.

Upon the 21th. of May 1697. After Trial of the Seven Witches, there is an
Attestation Subscribed by M. Patrick Simson Minister of Renfrew, Walter Scot
Baily there, etc. of this import, John Reid Smith at Inchennan prisoner, did in
presence of the said persons and some others, declare, that about a Year ago
the Devil (whom he knew to be such thereafter) appeared to him when he was
traveling in the Night time, but spoke none to him at the first encounter. At
the second appearance he gave him a Bite or Nipp in his Loyn; which he found
painful for a Fortnight. That the third time he appeared to him as a Black Man,
etc. Desired him to engage in his Service upon assurance of getting Riches and
Comfort in the World; and that he should not want any thing that he would ask
in the Devils Name: And then he renounced his Baptism, putting the one Hand to
the Crown of his Head, and the other to the Sole of his Foot; thereby giving
himself up to Satan's Service: After which the pain of the Bite or Nipp ceased.
He told that hitherto there was none others present with them; but afterward
he was at several Mettings, particularly that in Bargarrans Yard, about the
time when there was a Fast for Christian Skaw, where the Devil appeared in the
same kind of Garb as he first appeared to him, and they consulted Christians
Death either by Worrieing or Drowning her in the Well; and the Devil said, he
should warrant them, that they should neither be Heard, Seen, nor Confess, to
which end he gave every one of them a bit of Flesh, that the Deponent got one
of them, but let it fall, and did not Eat it. He afterward owned this
Confession in presence of the Lord of Iordanhill, the Minister, Mr. Andrew
Cochran Town Clark, and Baily Paterson; And being enquired at by Iordanhill how
they were advertised of their Meetings, he said that ordinarily at their
Meetings the time of the next was appointed; but for particular warning there
appeared a Black Dog with a Chain about his Neck, who tinkling it, they were to
follow, etc. And being enquired at by the Minister if he did now wholly
renounce the Devil (for he had formerly told how Satan had not performed his
promise) and give himself to Jesus Christ, and desire to find mercy of God
through Him: he assented thereunto. It is to be observed that John Reid after
his Confession had called out of the prison Window, desiring Baily Scott to
keep that old Body Angus Forrester, who had been his fellow prisoner, closs and
secure; whereupon the company asked John when they were leaving him on Friday
night the 21th. of May, whether he desired company or would be afraid alone, he
said he had no fear of any thing: So being left till Saturday in the Forenoon,
he was found in this posture, viz. sitting upon a stool which was on the Hearth
of the Chimney, with his feet on the floor and his Body straight upward, his
shoulders touching the lintel of the Chimney, but his Neck tied with his own
neck-cloath (whereof the knot was behind) to a small stick thrust into a hole
above the lintel of the Chimney, upon which the Company, and especially John
Campbel a Chyrurgeon who was called, thought at first in respect of his being
in an ordinary posture of sitting, and the neck-cloath not having any drawn
knot, but an ordinary one which was not very strait, and the sticks not having
the strength to bear the weight of his Body or the struggle; that he had not
been quite dead; but finding it otherways, and that he was in such a Situation
that he could not have been the Actor thereof himself, concluded that some
extraordinary Agent had done it, especially considering that the Door of the
Room was secured, and that there was a board set over the Window which was not
there the night before when they left him.

We shall add but little as to what past at the Execution of the Seven Witches,
because there is no Subscribed Attestation concerning it: And the Design of*
the Publisher is, to Advance nothing but what stands Warranted by Testimonies
of known Credit beyond Contradiction. Yet this is well known, that when they
were going to the Stake, One of the Lindsays was overheard to say to the other,
Now, Brother, it is high time that we should Confess, since our keeping it up
will serve us to no purpose, or the like Expression; To which the other
Answered, That they should never do that, etc. And Margaret Lang, before
Execution, owned, That when the Devil first appeared, she knew him not to be
such till afterward; That he gave her the Insensible Marks found upon her
Body: She yielded to engage her self in his Service by a Covenant; And besides
Public Meetings, she had been above 80 times in private Conferences with him.
Being asked by a near Relation of her own, as to her being in Bargarrans House,
Tormenting Christian Shaw, she Answered in these Words; The Devil having an
Absolute Power and Dominion over me, carried my Shape whither he would: And it
is known how she Confessed Unnatural Lust, and Profound Hypocrisy, etc. Though
truly it did appear from her Mein, and other Circumstances, that these things
dropped from her at Seasons, when Natural Ingenuity, and the Vigor of Truth
got the Ascendant over the Devil. So Agnes Nasmith, etc. frequently told the
Minister, That their Hearts and Tongues were bound up in such a manner, that
they could not express what they would: And sometimes it appeared by Ocular
Inspection of their Visage, that Convulsive-Damps did seize their Heads, when
they attempted to make any such Discovery.

There are Two Remarkable Instances in the Case of Katharine Campbel, who was
the Chief Instrument and Author of the Girls Trouble, viz. An Eminent Minister
Discoursing, before Reputable Witnesses, to the said Katharine, and Enquiring,
if she did not distinctly remember the Godly Counsels, and Gracious
Admonitions, which Christian Shaw, while in a Fit, (mentioned in the
Narrative,) gave her at a certain time? And Instancing some particulars
thereof; She Answered, with heavy Groans, Yes, I Remember. But being Asked, Why
she would not Confess the rest, as well as that Passage? And finding her self
thereby to be caught, she began to Retract, and seemed to be Confounded. This
happened while she was in Prison, before the Trial: And after it, in presence
of several Witnesses, she spoke these words, That the Doom pronounced on her
was most just, and that she could not free her self of Witchcraft: But, upon
such Attempts, she fell down Dead, strangely distended, and that six or seven
times Successively, with a Suddenness, that was both surprising and convincing
to the spectators: On which occasion it was observed, that immediately before
her falling into those Fits, and upon her Essaying to speak, when things were
Charged home to her Conscience; her mouth seemed to be Contracted, and she
uttered heavy Moans; whereupon Convulsions followed; and after rising out of
them, she turned more Obstinate and Inflexible: And whenever there was any
appearance of her being more Plyant, the foresaid Fits did overtake her.

I shall only add some Passages which were omitted in the Narrative, but are
Attested by some of the same Persons that were Witnesses to the other matters
mentioned therein.

Particularly, the Girl Declares, That in one of her Conflicts with the Devil,
he told her, how a certain Minister (for whom she had a special respect) did
Compile his Sermons throughout the Week; what Books he chiefly made use of; and
several other matters, as to his method of study in his Closet, that no Mortal
could know by ordinary means: By which, no doubt, Satan did partly design
(though by a very false Argument) to raise the esteem of Books above Sermons
Collected out of them: Cencealing, in the mean time, both the Gift of improving
Helps, and the blessing promised to the Hearer of the Word Preached. When the
Lady Bargarran received the two pieces of Red Cloth, that the Girl had torn
from one of the Witches sleeves, as is beforementioned; she locked 'em up, and
kept the Key: Notwithstanding which Caution some Friends having come to Visit
the Girl, and being destrous to see the said Pieces of Cloth; she being in
one of her Fits, Laughed, and said. That her Mother needed not to s^ek for them
in the place where they were Locked up; the Witches having taken them away, and
laid them in a Corner of the Cellar; and accordingly being searched for, they
were found in the particular place she mentioned. Another such Passage happened
to a Friend of Bargarrans, who went with him to solicit a Commission from the
Council: For he having brought along with him those pieces of Cloth, buttoned
up in his Pocket, and secured them, as he thought, they were missing in the
morning; but, after search, found at a good distance from his Pocket, though no
visible thing had been in the Room to open it, or carry them off.

In the last place it is to be observed, that the young Girl, Christian Shaw,
discovers a great sagacity in her Discourse and Observationss, but accompanied
with extraordinary modesty: she observed, among other things, that the Doors
and Windows did open and shut upon the Entry of the Witches, and that there
was, at no time, such a number of them about her, as the Room might not very
well contain, with the visible Persons that were present therein: she observed
them to shift their Place with a great Agility, when any other came into it, or
offered to Attacque them, upon her Pointing where they were: And she often
Averred from the Instance of the Spirit that Spoke to her above her Head, told
their Names, and gave her other Means of discovering of them, etc. That Satan
does often Contrive their Ruin, by the most Undiscernible Methods he can;
because, if he did it openly, it would scare others from Engaging with so
Faithless a Master, etc.

Two LETTERS, Giving an Account of what appeared most Material or Curious in
the TRIAL of the Seven WITCHES.
THE Truth of the strange Things mentioned in the preceding Narrative was at
first carefully searched into only by private Persons: But at last became so
notorious, that, upon Application founded on a Journal of those extraordinary
Events, and attested by many of the Gentry in the Country; the Privy Council
gave a Commission for enquiring into it.

The Honorable Persons to whom this was recommended, did, with great
Impartiality and Exactness, make a Report: which influenced the Government to
order the Execution of Justice on some of those Witches, who otherways, might
have lurked without being discovered.

For, hereupon, the Council directed a second Commission, for Trial of those
who appeared to them to be most Charged by the Evidence of the Witnesses,
produced on the First Commission. Several of the Judges were not only persons
of Honor, but also of singular Knowledge and Experience, and accordingly
proceeded with extraordinary Caution, and were so far from Precipitancy in the
Affair, that, after several Diets of Court they adjourned to a long Term, that,
in the mean time, the Prisoners might be provided of Advocates.

Accordingly an Advocate appeared for them, and managed their Defense with all
the Accuracy that could be expected. There were above Twenty Hours employed, at
one Diet, in Examination of Witnesses: And the Jury being shut up spent about
six Hours in comparing the Evidence: Whereupon Seven of the most notorious
Criminals were Convicted and Condemned.

The Crimes charged and proven against them, were not mere spectral
Imaginations; but obvious and plain matter of Fact: viz. The Murders of some
Children, and Persons of Age; and the Torturing of several Parsons,
particularly Bargarran's Daughter: And both these, not at a distance, but
contiguously by natural Means of Cords, Pins, and the like. Besides the other
ordinary Works of Witchcraft, such as Renouncing Baptism, entering in Contract
with, and Adoring the Devil in a Corporal shape, etc. which could not but be
sustained as sufficient ground for a Trial in Scotland, since there is an
express Statute Parl. 9. Act. 73. Queen Mary ordering such persons to be put to
Death.

To make the Probation the more convincing, it was adduced orderly in three
Periods. The First consisted of unsuspected Witnesses, who proved Facts: From
whence it was necessarly inferred, That there was Witchcraft in the Case. The
Second did include, also unexceptionable Witnesses, who Deponed upon Facts;
which made it Probable, if not necessary, that the Persons indicted were the
Witches. The Third did comprehend six Positive Testimonies, of those who did
See and Hear the Witches committing the Crimes charged in the Indictment.

The only valuable Subject of Debate, was as to the Import of these last
Testimonies; five whereof were by Confessants, who had been at the Meetings in
which the Crimes were committed, and the sixth of Bargarran's Daughter, who was
one of the Persons afflicted. The antecedent part of the Probation was by
Witnesses beyond Exception; And the Judges upon a long Debate did fustain Four
of these Six only Cum Nota, and Two of them to be Examined without Oath. So
nice were they in favor of the Criminals Lives, since some of these Witnesses
might have been admitted in such a Crime without any Quality* by the most
scrupulous Judicatory in Europe. But all things were carried on in this
Procedures with Tenderness and Moderation: For even the Advocates, who were
sent to prosecute the Enditement by His Majesty's Council and Advocate, did not
act with the Bias of Partys; but on the contrary, showed an equal Concern to
have the accused Persons absolved, if it could be found compatible with Justice.

This is the Reason for which the Publisher doubts not, but the two following
Letters (one whereof gives an abridgment of the Advocates Speech to the Jury,
and the other, of their Answers to the Objections against the Confessant
Witnesses) will afford a satisfying view of the chiefest part, of the Trial:
since the Objections which were, or might have been made are therein Stated and
Answered, or Anticipated and Prevented; and the intended Brevity would not
premit to print at this time the whole Process, which being extant upon Record,
any who are Cautious may have easy access thereunto.

There is scarce any need to take notice of a late Scurrilous Pamphlet, that
has been Printed in England, pretending to give an account of those
proceedings: For any who reads it may easily find, that the Author has been
either Fool or Knave, or both, there being neither good Language, Sense nor
Truth in the most part of it.

The First LETTER.
SIR,
YOU having told me, that the odd Passages which occur in the West, have put
many of your Neighbors and your self, upon reading all the Books you can get
that treat of Witchcraft: And therefore desired me to transmit to you my
Observations at the Trial: I shall not Prepossess your Opinion by giving them
in my own Form; but herein I send to you the exactest Copy of the Advocates
Speech to the Jury that I could obtain; and by the next Post you shall have
something more Curious: viz. A Collection of their Answers to the Objections
against the Six last Witnesses, that were adduced for concluding the Proof:
Having these, you will want little that could be agreeable to such an accurat
Pallat as yours is.

The SPEECHES to the JURY were* to this Effect.
Good Men of the JURY;
YOU having sitten above Twenty Hours in hearing the Evidence: And being now to
be enclosed, where, its like, you will take no small time to Re-consider and
Compare it: We shall not detain you with summing up the same in Particular; but
shall only suggest some Things, whereof it is fit you take special notice in
your perusal of it: viz. 1st. The Nature of your own Power, and the Management
thereof. 2dly. The Object of this Power which lies before you; wherein you are
to consider, in the First place, Whether or not there has been Witchcraft in
the Crimes libelled? And, in the Next place, whether or not these Prisoners are
the Witches?

As to your Power, it is certain, that you are both Judges and Witnesses, by
the Opinion of our Lawyers and Custom: Therefore you are called out of the
Neighborhood, as presumed best to know the Quality of the Prisoners, and the
Notoriety of their Guilt or Innocence. Your Oath is, That you shall all Truth
tell, and no Truth conceal; which does plainly imply, That you are to Condemn
or Absolve, according to your own Conscience. Such is the excellent
Constitution of Juries in England: and ought to hold more specially in thi^
Circumstantiat ^ase, where there is such a Chain of different Kinds of
Probation concurring against the same Prisoners, as will appear by the Review
thereof in its proper place.

We are not to press you with the ordinary Severity of threatening an Assyse of
Error, in case you should Absolve; but wholly leave you to the Conduct of God
and your own Consciences, and desire that you proceed with all the Care of the
Prisoners Lives that is possible for you, as the Honorable Judges have set to
you a desirable Pattern, by their great Caution in this matter.

As to the Probation it self; you see, that it is divided into Three Parts,
viz. The extraordinariness of the Crimes: The Probability of the concurring
Circumstances: And the Clearness of the positive Probation.

As to the First part, The Crimes, or Corpora delicti, are proven by
Unexceptionable Witnesses, to have fallen out in such an odd and extraordinary
manner, that it points out some other Cause, than the ordinary course of
Nature, to have produced those Effects.

For clearing of this, particularly in relation to the Torments of Bargarran's
Daughter, you may consider not only the extraordinary Things that could not
proceed from a Natural Disease, which ly proven before you; but also several
other Matters of Fact, which is Notorious; have been seen by some of your
selves, and ly here in a Journal of her Sufferings: Every Article whereof is
attested by the Subscriptions of Persons of entire Credit, before the
Honorable Commissioners appointed by His Majesty's Privy Council, for making
Enquiry into the Matter.

This Girl's throwing out of Hair, Pins, and Coals of greater heat than that of
her Body or Blood; as also so dry, that they appeared not to have come out of
her Stomach; nor had she any press of Vomiting at the time, that she declared
the same to have been put in her Mouth by her Tormenters: Is deponed by Doctor
Brisban, in his Opinion not to proceed from a Natural Cause.

She was not Tormented by any of the Criminals after their Imprisonment: Except
two Nights by Katharine Campbell; which being a Surprise, it was thereafter
discovered, that these two Nights the Jaylor's Wife had let out Katharine
Campbell to Spin in her House.

She having been speaking to one of her Tormenters as present (though Invisible
to the Bystanders) and asking how her Tormenter had got those clouted Red
Sleeves; she suddenly gets up, takes hold of them, the Company heard the Noise
of the clothes tearing, and she pulls away two pieces of red Cloth, which all
the Bystanders beheld with amazement in her Hands: Nor was there any other
piece of this kind of Cloth to be found in the Room at that time.

She told, that her Tormentors were giving her a Glass of Sack, an Orange pile,
etc. (thereby ensnaring her to accept of a Favor from them) and accordingly
she was seen to move her Lips, and to have the Orange-pile betwixt her Teeth;
though there was no visible Hand that could have done it.

She advertised beforehand, that one of her Tormentors was to be at the Door
at a particular Hour: And that another of them was in the Kitchen; before any
did tell her thereof* which accordingly fell out: And these being brought to
her presence, became obnoxious to the ordinary Means of Discovery.

When her Glove fell down from her, at a time that several Persons were about
her: it was lifted up again by a Hand invisible to them.

She was not only transported throw the Hall and down Stairs, without
perceiving her Feet to touch the Ground: But also was hurried in a flight up
Stairs: And when a Minister endeavored to retain her; he found a sensible
weight, besides her own Strength drawing her from him.

When she complained, that her Tormenters had bitten and scratched her; the
marks of the Nails and Teeth were seen upon her Skin, with Blood and Spittle:
about the wounds, which were above Twenty four; while neither her own, or any
others Teeth that were visible, could have done it.

She was most vehemently distorted, upon attempting to Tell, or even to Write
the Names of her Tormenters: yet that ceased as to any of them, how soon that
person was accused by any other, and particularly she had liberty, after many
painful Attempts, to Accuse Margaret Laing, so soon as the Charm of Hair to
restrain her (which Margaret had left behind the Door) was found and burnt; the
Girl having told it to have been lost, as mentioned in the Depositions.

She did throw out no more Hair after the finding and burning of a Ball of
Hair, of the same Color and Kind with that thrown out by the Girl (in
Katharine Campbell's Pocket) with Pins in it.

After Agnes Nasmith had Prayed for her, she did appear to her, but not Torment
her.

She foretold, That her Tormenters had Conserted to throw her, at a certain
Hour, in a fit, (whereof they did forewarn her, on Design to Fright her, to
Renounce her Baptism by the Terror) and had left one of their Number to execute
it: And accordingly there was a Woman with a Red-Coat seen under a Tree in the
Orchard, and the Torment was brought on at the time appointed.

When she told, That there was something Tormenting her under* the Clothes; the
spectators saw the Bed-cloaths move in an extraordinary manner, after the Girl
had been raised out of them.

When she complained that she was Beaten: the Bystanders heard the Noise of
the strokes.

She Cried out at a time, That her Thigh was hurt: And one of the Company
having searched her Pocket, found a Knife; but unfolded: However, having folded
up the same, and put it in a second time, she Cries out anew: And, upon the
second search, (though secured by the spring) it is found open, to the great
wonder of the beholders; since they did watch, that no visible thing could have
possibly opened it.

She told of a Charm under the Bed: And accordingly it was found in the shape
of an Egg, which melted away being put into the Fire: She told also, That her
Sister that was Boarded abroad, had Charms put above her in the House, and
would not recover of the decaying sickness till she were brought out of it: And
accordingly, the Child being brought home, straightway recovered.

She told of their Meeting in the Yeard of Bargarran, for Consulting about the
destroying of her: And accordingly the Confessants have Deponed, That they did
meet and Consult her Ruin in that place.

The Story about her telling, That the Commissioners, though at Three Miles
distance, had granted a Warrant to the Sheriff, to Apprehend one of her
Tormenters: Her giving so perfect an account of the Sheriff, and of Mr. Guthrie
who was with him, while her Eyes were cieled and fast: Her being in excessive
Torments (as she foretold till that Person was apprehended, and immediately
thereupon, though at many Miles distance, her telling that her Tormenters were
now taken, betwixt* Twelve and One a clock in the Morning; and the Sheriff when
he returned, did declare the Seizure to have been about that time: Is so
notorious and so well attested that we need only to put you in mind of it.

Her falling in Fits upon the sight, or Touch of her Tormenters, was no effect
of Imagination: For she was fully hood-winked with a Cloak, so as she saw no
body whatsoever; yet upon the approach of her Tormenter, she immediately fell
down dead: whereas she no ways startled upon the Touch of any other: Which
Experiment was tried for ascertaining this Mean of Discovery.

In the Last place, She is naturally Sagacious and Observing: And discovered
her Integrity in the face of the Court. For when the President asked, Whether
or not she knew one of the Prisoners Names that was to be pricked? she
answered, That though she knew her well enough of her self; yet one had told
her the Name of this Prisoner when she was sent for to be confronted with her:
So far did this Girl discover her Aversion from any thing that might seem
intended to aid the Natural Evidence of Truth Unfairly: and her Firmness to the
utmost against Temptations of becoming a With; particularly against the last
Assault of Satan, wherein he persuaded her at least to go to their Meetings;
and she answered, That she would not follow such a base fallen Creature: And he
rejoyning, That she would go to Hell however for her other Sins; and she
Answering, That he was a Liar from the beginning, and the Blood of Jesus would
cleanse her from all Iniquity: Whereupon he disappeared, and she perfectly
recovered upon the Sabbath thereafter, was an happy end put to this fearful
Tragedy of Witchcraft, and confirms, to Conviction, the Reality of it.

As to the Murdering of the Children, and the Minister, charged in the
Indictment; you may observe several Extraordinary things appearing in them;
particularly, the Witnesses Depone, the Minister to have been in Excessive
Torments, and of an unusual Color, to have been of Sound Judgment; and yet he
did tell of several Women about him, and that he heard the noise of the Door
opening, when none else did hear it. The Children were well at Night, and found
Dead in the Morning, with a little Blood on their Noses, and Blewness at the
Root of their Ears; which were obvious Symptoms of Strangling: Besides, that
the Mother of one of them cried out, Matthew, Matthew, the Child is dead. And
the House of the other was Whitened within, with sifting of Meal the Night
before. Both which Particulars were told and discovered by the Confessants,
before the Witnesses, which now concur with them in it, were Examined.

Secondly. The Second part of the Probation consists of several Adminicles, or
Corroborating Evidence proven by Unsuspected Witnesses, which lead us to
suspect those Prisoners to be Witches, as so many Lines drawn from a
Circumference to a Center, and as an Avenue to the positive Probation
thereafter adduced: And these either strike at the whole Prisoners in General,
or some of them in Particular. In General* we need not enumerate all these
Adminicles, but remit you to the Probation, which is so full concerning it;
only you will be pleased to take notice, that it is clearly proven, that all
the Accused have insensible Marks, and some of them in an extraordinary manner;
That most of them have been long reputed Witches, and some of them in 1687. by
a Confessing Witch, whose subscribed Confession has been produced. You see that
none of* them do shed Tears, nor were they ever discovered to do it since their
Imprisonment, notwithstanding their frequent Howlings: So that it is not a
sudden Grief or Surprise. And Finally, That the Girl fell in Fits of Torment
upon the Prisoners approach to her, and that she did name them all frequently,
either in, or out of her Fits.

In particular, you see how Katharine Cambell was provoked by this Girls
discovering her Theft; whereupon she has brought in the rest of her Confederats
to act the following Mischiefs: How thereupon Cambell did Curse and Imprecate
in a terrible manner: How she stayed out of her Bed at Night, and was
frequently Drousie in the Morning: How she was named by the Girl, particularly
the Two Nights she was out of Prison: The Ball of Hair was taken out of her
Pocket and Burnt; whereupon the Girle's voiding of Hair at her Mouth did cease:
She could not express one word, even when on her Knees, of Prayer for the
Girls Recovery: And the Insensible Marks on her were very remarkable.

Agnes Nasmith did not Torment the Girl, after she had Prayed for her: She was
reputed a Witch, and has the Marks. She came early in the Morning to
Bargarran's Yard, when, by her refusing to go in, it appeared she had no
Business: Yea, it is plain, that she had a Resentment, because she got not a
greater Alms the last time she was there. The Girl declared ex incontinenti,
that Nasmith asked her Health and Age; which, in these Circumstances, was a
shrewd Presumption of her Evil Design: And she acknowledged her self* to have
done this, when she asked the Age of another Child; wherein, by Providence, she
was befooled; since that which she thought would have been an Excuse, tended to
discover her Guilt. And Lastly, After this appearance of Agnes Nasmith, the
Girl did take her first Fit, and nominate her amongst the first Tormentors.

Margaret Lang, that Great Impostor, has been a Masterpiece of the Devil; she
has Confessed Unnatural Lust, which is known to some of your Number. She sat
near the Door, where the Charm of Hair was found, which the Girl declared did
keep up her Tongue; and, upon burning thereof, it was loosed. The Girl fell in
Fits upon her approach: She has notable Marks; particularly one, which the
Confessants declare she lately received; and, by Inspection, it appears to be
New. When she came from her private Conversation (no doubt with the Devil) she
Raged as if she had been Possessed, and could not but declare, that she expected
a Violent Death. She looked in the Face of James Miller's Child, and asked her
Age, whereupon that Child Sickned the same Night, and Named Margaret Lang on
her Death* bed; It appears she was ready to show to Ianet Lord a sight of her
Mother, who had been Three years dead. And finally, she has been taken in
several Lies, and Gross Prevarications; particularly, you may remember, how six
hours ago, when the Witnesses were examined on the Ball of Hair found with
Katharin Campbell, a Gentleman (Mr. Stewart of) heard her say to Katharin in
the Ear; This is well bestowed on you, because ye would not put it away when I
desired you, etc. Which the said Mr. Stewart did openly testify in Court upon
Oath; Notwithstanding which this Impudent Wretch had the Confidence to deny
it, tho Katharin Cambell also Confessed, That she had pulled her, and had Spoke
somewhat to her, to which she did not advert, which was no wonder, the
VVitnesses Deponing, at the time being close upon Katharin.

Margaret Fulton was reputed a VVitch, has the Mark of it; and acknowledged, in
presence of her Husband, that she made use of a Charm; which appeared full of
small Stones and Blood. That her Husband had brought her back from the Faries;
and her Repute of being a VVitch is of an Old Date; besides her being named
often by the Bewitched Girl.

As to the Lindsays, they all have the Mark; and were all of a long time
Reputed to be Witches. John Lindsay of Barloch was accidentally discovered by
the Girls taking a Fit upon his coming to the House. John and James Lindsays
were Accused by a Confessing VVitch in Anno 1687, Which Confession is
Publicly Read before you; And there was Money given to the Sheriff-depute for
the delaying of the Pursuit. James Lindsay appeared to William Semple suddenly,
and Flew about like a Fowl, for an opportunity to strike him, in Revenge of the
Quarrel mentioned in the Deposition, and at last prevailed to strike him dead
over a Wall. And Finally, which is a Remarkable Indication, both of Truth and
Providence, the very VVitnesses adduced in Defense of the Lindsays, Deponed so
clearly against them, even beyond the Pursuers VVitnesses, that their Advocate
was daunted at it; and thereupon desisted from calling any more VVitnesses to
be Examined in their Defense.

It is true, some of these Indications may be in One, and others of them in
Another, either from Nature or Accident; and yet that Person not be a VVitch:
But it was never heard or read, that all these Indications, which are so many
Discoveries by Providence, of a crime that might otherways have remained in the
dark, did ever concur in one and the same Individual Person that was Innocent:
Yea, on the contrary, they, by the Wisdom and Experience of all Nations, do as
convincingly discover a VVitch, as the symptoms of a Leprosy concerted by all
Physicians argue the Person affected with the same to be Leprous. But grant
they are not sufficient of themselves: yet their Tendency and Meaning, being
cleared and applied to their proper cause, by a plain and positive Probation;
There wants no more to determine you as to the Prisoners Guilt. And therefore,

Thirdly. As to the Third Part of the Probation, We remit the Positive
Depositions of the Confessants, and against whom they do concur, wholly to
your own Perusal and Examination: Only be pleased to take notice. First, Some
things which very much Add to the Credibility of their Testimonies, arise from
their Examination in Court. Secondly. We shall Explain to you the Import of the
Word Nota, which is added to the Decree of the Judges, admitting these last
Witnesses.

As to the First.

Elizabeth Anderson is of sufficient age, being Seventeen; yet so young and
punctual, that her Deposition appears no effect of Melancholy: She accused her
Father to his face when he wa^ dying in the prison, as now there are two of her
Aunts in the Inditment, which certainly must proceed from the strength of
Truth, since even Dives retained a natural affection to his Relations. She went
on foot to the Meetings with her Father, except only that the Devil transported
them over the Water of Clyde, which was easy to the Prince of the Air who does
far greater things by his Hurri-canes; she tells that Montgomeries House was
Meallie when his Child was strangled: And she declares that she never renounced
her Baptism; but was carried along by the compulsion of a Parent: So that
nothing can be objected against her Testimony in any Judgment, much less in an
Excepted Crime.

James Lindsay it is true, is of less import: yet by his Weeping when he came
in and was admonished of the greatness of his guilt, it appears that he had a
Sense of it: he has a natural Precipitancy in what he speaks, yet that is
commonly the concomitant of Ingenuity, as importing his Expressions not to be
forethought. He concurrs in most things with the others, and yet he has
declared, that he saw not Margaret Fulton at Dumbartoun, etc. Which implys that
he does not file the Prisoners all at Random, but tells what occurred to his
Senses, etc.

Ianet and Margaret Rodgers are instances of a singular Providence, for they
did confess the same Morning that the Court did last sit, of their own proper
motion, there being neither Ministers nor Judges by them at the time. Agnes
Naismith is Ianets Relation, and she tells that she never saw Katharine
Campbel, as Margaret declares that she did not see John Lindsay of Barloch:
which plainly demonstrats that they tell only the dictats of their Natural
Conscience arising from discretion and knowledge of the true matters of Fact:
They both professed their Repentance last Sabbath in the Church: And do persist
with a great Firmness, and you see their Deportment in deponing to be Congruous
and Exact.

Thomas Lindsay and Christian Shaw, being under age, we did not press their
being put to an Oath; yet you saw that they did declare in Court against these
Criminals in such an Harmony with the rest of the Deponents, and gave such a
cause of their knowledge, That it is certain their youngness in years Adds
extremely to the Credit of their Testimony: Because thereby it is incredible,
that they could have contrived or executed the acting so by Concert.

As to the Second.

Since these Witnesses are admitted by the Judges; it necessarily inplyes, that
they meant them to be probative; only they added the words Cum nota: That is,
you must take notice, or Notandum est. That there must something else concur
to prove the Guilt of the Prisoners, besides the Depositions of any two such
Witnesses: But so it is, that all the Circumstantial Evidence, on which you
have seen Probation led, for more then Sixteen Hours of your time, are
strenghtening Evidences, of those Witnesses Credibility, and cannot but have
been taken notice of by you as inferring the same things which they Depone.
Whereby the Nota is fully taken off by the concurrence of four other positive
Testimonys, agreeing with that of two of these Witnesses: by the
Extraordinariness of the corpora delicti: by the Probability of Circumstances:
And finally by the whole Chain of this Affair, and the Sparkles of an Infernal
Fire, which in every place have broke out of it.

It is true there are some few of the Circumstances that are proven only by one
Witness. But as to this, you may consider, 1st. That a Witness Deponing de
facto proprio, is in Law more credited than any other single Witness: And this
is the present Case as to some of the Circumstances. 2dly. The Antecedent,
Concomitant, and Subsequent, Circumstances of Fact, do sustain the Testimony
and makes the Semi-plenary Probations to become full. But, 3dly. The other
Circumstances, undoubtedly proven by concurring Witnesses, are per se,
sufficient: And therefore you saw us, at the desire of the Judges, forbear to
call the far greatest part of our Witnesses; because the time had already run
to so great a length, and it was thought that there was already enough proven
of presumptions: For it may as reasonably be imagined, that the most Regular
and Curious Scheme had emerged from the fortuitous concourse of Atoms roving
without Rule, as that so many Indications should Concenter against each of
these Prisoners, and yet they remain Innocent of Witchcraft.

Now upon the whole, you will take notice, that Presumptions being vehement,
make a more certain Probation then Witnesses: Because Presumptions are Natural
Emanations of the thing it self, which cannot be bribed* Whereas Witnesses are
obnoxious: So in our Law there was one condemned for Theft, another for
falsehood, and a third for Murdering of a Child, merely upon Presumptions, as is
related by Mc. Keinzie in his Criminal Treatise: much more may Presumptions,
add to the credit of, and take off the Nota from, positive Witnesses, For it is
a gross mistake, that several proofs, which have each of them some Import, may
not be joined to make a full Evidence, the same way as two small Candles in a
Dark room, will not suffice; yet several others being added to them, will make
a sufficient light, to discover the Murderer* Two Boys will be able to carry a
Weight which one of them would not be able to sustain; as two units make a full
number: One Witness of whatsoever dignity proves nothing; yet out of the Mouth
of two or three Witnesses every Truth shall be established. And finally, Tho
one Coal make not a Fire that can do the work; yet several Coals added to it
increase the Flame; which is hoped will be sufficient for the operation.

We shall therefore leave you with this Conclusion, That as you ought to beware
to condemn the Innocent, and ought to incline to the safest side: so if these
Prisoners be proven legally guilty; Then, as to what is past, your Eye ought
not to spare them, no^ ought you to suffer a Witch to Live: And, as to the
future; in doing otherways you would be Accessory to all the Blasphemies,
Apos^acys, Murders, Tortures, and Seductions, etc. Whereof these Enemies of
Heaven and Earth, shall hereafter be guilty, when they are set at Liberty. So
that the question seens simply to come to this, whether upon year Oath de
sideli, you can swear, That the Prisoners, notwithstanding all that is proven
against them, are not guilty of Witchcraft? In the Determination whereof we
pray God may direct you to the right course.

The Jury being enclosed near six Hours, brought in their Verdict to Court,
that they found the Indictment.

I am, etc.

The Second LETTER.
SIR.
I have Collected according to my Promise, what appeared to me most Specious in
the Reasonings, either in Court, or private Conversation about receiving of the
Confessants as Witnesses. You are not to imagine, that the Prisoners were
Condemned on the Credit of these: For I do believe the Probation by
unexceptionable witnesses, led antecedent to this last, was so pregnant, that
the Prisoners might have been Condemned on it, though these last had not been
adduced.

I may have missed the Energy of the Argument sometimes, in a Case which in it
self is so abstruse: However, you have it in such manner as I was able to
comprehend it; as follows.

IN order to the more satisfactory Answering of the Objections made against
these last Witnesses, we shall first, lay before you the State of the Case:
And, then, clear up the ^mination of it.

As to the First, The Question is not, whether Partners in the Crime, or others
mentioned in the Objections, can be a Concluding Proof of themselves, though two
of them should concur as to the same Act of Witchcraft: But whether the
Corpora delicti appearing already to imply Witchcraft, and the extrinsick
Presumptions being so pregnant, to infer that these Prisoners are the Witches:
there concurring such Characters, as by the observation of all Nations and
Ages, are the Symptoms of a Witch; particularly the Marks, Fame, not shedding
of Tears, etc. which are Providencial Discoveries of so dark a Crime, that like
Avenues lead us to the Secret of it. And finally, when six persons of different
Ages and Stations, fiye Confessants, and the Girl, do, when separatly examined,
agree in their Answers to every material Question that is put to them, even
though it be New; so that it could not be concerted: We say, whether or not in
such a Case may Witnesses be received to complete the Evidence by a Positive
Probation, of a Matter of Fact which is the Object of Sense, though otherways
they be liable to exception, if such Extraordinariness of the Corpora delicti,
Clearness of the Circumstances, and of the Diagnosticks of the Witches; did not
preceed them; as you have seen it proven they do?

The Case is not, whether these Witnesses would be good in an Ordinary Crime,
which commonly happens to be exposed to other Witnesses, then those concerned
in it: But whether they can be received in this Extraordinary, Occult, and
Excepted Crime of Witchcraft; wherein there are two special Cases to be
considered; viz. Sometimes the Acts thereof are open and admit the choice of
Witnesses; such as Charms used in the Daytime, when the Actor is visible. But
that part of Witchcraft, whereby Witches meet in the Nightime, Adore their
Lord, contrive their mischievous designs, and accordingly afterward put them
in Execution, when other Witnesses are asleep, or the Witches themselves are
covered from sight: We say, that this can be no otherways proven than by these
that are privy to it, joined to the Positive Proof and Presumptions
beforementioned.

We do not allege, that Persons altogether destitute of Knowledge and Natural
Conscience are to be admitted in any Case, such as Infants, Mad, Foolish
Persons, etc. Neither do we contend, That Thomas Lindsay and Christian Shaw,
who are under Age, should be put to their Oath; for they are only to be
examined separatly before the Court, upon Queries, by which it may appear,
whether or not they agree with the four other Confessants, that are to Depone
before them; and this is the Prisoners Advantage in case of Disagreement: But
we insist, that any Person above Nonage, giving Evidences of considerable
Knowledge and natural Conscience (which is a sufficient Fond for all the Credit
that we need in this Case, that is already almost fully proven) is to be
received as a Witness.

As to the 2d. We shall make this as clear as Noonday. 1st. From Reason and
the Nature of the thing. 2dly. The unanimous Judgment of Lawyers in all Nations
and Ages. 3dly. Our own Customs and Decisions. And 4thly. The Singularity of
this Circumstantiat Case.

As to the First. The going to, and coming from Meetings, especially on ^oot;
the falling down, and worshipping the Devil there, untler a Corporal shape
(which he had when he tempted our Savior to do it) The actual Murdering of
Children by a Cord and Napkin; and the Tormenting of Others by Pins, etc. are
plain Objects of Sense: And therefore he Senses are to be believed concerning
them. For as Reason has Things Intelligible, and Faith Things Supernatural; so
the Senses have Things C^rporeal to their Object, as to which they are to be
trusted, until it be Proven, that the Appearance is Impossible, or that the
Witness of it, is an Impostor. It is part of the Witches Purchase from the
Devil, that they cannot be seen on some occasions: So that the Abominations
committed then would remain unpunished, if such Witnesses were not admitted. I^
cannot be thought that Witches (who of all Criminals are the most backward to
Confess) would venture the loss of their own Lives, by Deponing against others,
against whom they have no special Pi^que; yea, for whom they have particular
Affection, as several of the Prisoners are some of the Witnesses Relations. Nor
has the Devil any peculiar Interest to Instigat them thereunto: For several of
the Prisoners have confessed other execrable Crimes: Whereby it cannot be
supposed, That Satan would be divided against himself. God in his ordinary
Providence has taken such care of public Judgments, that the Enemy of Justices
special Power ceases as to that, as appears by the Witches not being able
either to do more Harm, or to escape, after God's Ministers begin to counteract
Satan's Instruments by Imprisonment. And finally, the oddness of the Crimes,
the Concurrence of the Presumptions; and the existence of Matters of Fact,
wherein these Consessants (though not knowing the same otherways) do agree with
other unexceptionable Witnesses, etc. Do sufficiently add to their Credibility:
For as Falsehood being a Crime, is never presumed* so ^ Person found true in
many things, is still presumed to continue such, till the contrary be evinced.

As to the Second. Socius criminis etc. admittitur si delictum sit nefandum
Men. A. I. Q. l. 2d. l C. c. is. 474. N. 27. seq. aut ocultum and veritas
aliunde haberinon p^sit M^s. ^ol. 1. C^n. 466. N. 6. aut di^ficilis probationis
Farin. lib. 2. Op. Criminalium. ^it. 6. Q. 6^. N. 28. Mas. v^l. 3^. Co^. 1360.
N. 4th. Menoch. l. 2d. Cas. 116. l. 1st. Q. 58. nocturno tempere comi^ qu^
dis^ilis dicuntur probationis Boer. deci^. 68. N. 6. Menoch. D. Cas. 116. N.
14. (...) (...) (...) presump^iva and conjectur at a probatio sufficit, verum
etiam in habiles admit^tur faria. ^. 2d. ^r. 6. Q. 55. N. 40* Mas^. l. 2. Con.
1124. N. 13. i^em in dilictis commissis in Ere^, (...), Mo^te alio^ loco
secreto, Gomez. Var. res, Tom. 3d. C. 12. N. 21. Far. D. Tit. 6. Q. 62. ^. 55
sed o^cultum non dicitur quod ac^ non intervenerint, at quod de Natura delidi
vel r^ne (...) and ^poris a^ii tes^s habitu intervenire non po^uerint: ut est
Mal^ficium (...) quo socius (...), etc. a^mittitur. Men. l. 2d. Cap. 5. Cas.
474. N. 33. Campeg. te test. Reg ^6. ^* (...). 6. C^otus (...) (...). part 4th.
N. 97. O^dindorp. d^. ^est. ^il. de personis testium N. 21. In a word all
Lawyers who have writ particular Treatises on Witch^rast in Germany, Italy,
Love^, Fran^, and Spain, etc. Do concl^de, that inhabile Witnesses; and
particularly Socii are to be admitted in VVit^craft; only the strictest of them
do think, that this Admission is to be cum nota; or as Delrio in the place
cited for the Prisoners expresses it, ex his so^is, the Judge is not to
Condemn, nor do we require it.

As to the ^hird. We have the Testimony of our Famous K. Ia. 6th. De^on. lib.
3. C. ult. telling us, That it is our Law, that Boys, Girls, infamous Persons,
etc. Are not to be rejected any more in Witch^rast, than in humane lose
Majesty, even though they assert others to have been present at Imaginary
Meetings: Because this supposes their having entered into a Pre-contract: He
say^, that (...) Mark, and the want of Tears, are pregnant Aids to the
Discovery, Quod Deus prat^ (...) ordi^em voluit ess^ secretae iman^tatis
judictum, and co non permittente ut fedissimi criminis (...) (...). He gi^es an
instance of a Girl, who having named several Witches (...) her (...), they
(...) all Condemne^ upon (...) concurring Presumptions. This is not a (...)
(...), but ^ Man who as Cur^ u^, was Exact: As ^rudent did not publish such
things (...) the Approbation of the best Divines and Lawyers* as a Prince, is
to be Craedited about the Law of His own Country; and as a King has determined
any doubt that might have remained in this ^oint, as far as the Law of our
Government will permit.

But further our Judges and Lawyers have followed His Majesty: For in all the
Processes in the Journals; Fame, and Accusation, and the Mark, are still
sustained, as most pergnant Presumptions; upon which, and a very small
Probation besides, Witches have been frequently Condemned. So in the Processes
against the Bewitchers of Sir George Maxwel of Pollock, and Hamilton of Barns,
Anno, 1677. Socius criminis, tho under Age, is sustained to be a Witness: And
Witnesses are adduced before the Jury for proving, that the Mark was found upon
some of the Witches. Women and Minors have been received by multitudes of
Decisions cited by McKenzie. Tit. prob. by Witnesses, and Tit. Witch^raft. And
he also cites Decisions, where, in parallel Cases, Socii Criminis and others
inhabile were admitted; particularly in Treason and in Falsehood: And all
Lawyers conclude, That Witchcraft is as much an excepted crime as these.

As to the 4th. What ever inhability these witnesses might be under, it is
fully made up, and they rendered unexceptionably Habile by the Chain of this
whole Business. It is true one M^ through the concurrence of corrosive Humors, may
have an insensible Mark; another be enviou^y defamed: A Third may through sudden
Grief or Melancholy, not be able to weep, etc. A Fourth may be loaded with
suspicious Circumstances, when extraordinary things fall out in t^ Country: And
a Fifth may be deponed against by two false VVitnesses, tho neither of these
separatly be truly Witches. But by the known Observation and Experience of
Mankind, none except Witches have had the unhappy Medley and Concurse of All
or Most of these Indicia, and ordinarily, and for the greater part, Witches
have them: So that since the Rules of Judgment are established upon that, Quod
plerumque fit, which does obtain till an excepti^ be apparent in a special
case, the Conjunction of these in one person, does as plainly give (...)
Character, as the most certain symptoms of the plainest Disease, being
universally concer^d in all parts of the World, points out to us that the
haver of them is a person ^ruly affected with that Disease, whereof he has the
concurrent Diagnosticks. In a word, one or other (...) these may concur in the
Innocent; but no VVriters do Attest, that all of them have concentred in any
other person in the World but a VVitch: And on the other hand, their taking
place in Witches, through all parts of the World, must proceed from a common,
and not from a peculiar Humor or Cause.

The specific Aptitude, of some of the nicest of the Indicia, which appeared
from the Probation already led, to discover a Witch, do serve to clear the
ground of the Worlds Observation concerning them. Particularly the Devil, as
Aping God, imprints a Sacrament of his Covenant: Besides that, commonly this
mark being given at the first Meeting, does by its intolerable Pain, force the
Witch to a second Randevouz for curing it, at which the poor wretch being under
this furious necessity, fixes the Paction by renewing it with Deliberation,
ha^ing been diverted in the mean time from considering the Horridness of the
first (...) (...) the Pain. The inability to shed Tears may be a
Characteristick of Harden^ng, the not alw^* in the case of Christians; yet in
these who have ceased to be such; lest the Devil giving the^ such words of
Scripture and Prayer as many have, it should be impossible to discover their
Hypocri^y; and that is not Satan's own interest, since by this Discovery
occasion i^ given to Buffoon the Profession of Holiness. A Report often arises
without ground, but a Consta^ Report that keeps footing* implies for the most
part a surer Cause; especially when it is o^ Persons below Envy; and by Persons
above Calumny. The Girls falling in fits at the approach of the Prisoners might
proceed from Antipathie, arising from the poisono^ Steems of the Witch
accustomed to produce that Effect through a virtue affixed thereun^o by the
Dev^, by Conjunction of natural Causes (the same way as the invisible
^estilence does operat) of his promise of casting the Girl in Fits at the
Witches presence, might have been General; whereby the Witch was eventually
befooled and discovered, as it often falls out: For Satan envies even their
temporal Felicity, and fears lest by continuing here, they should be pluck^d
out of his hands by Conversion: When they come to perceive the Delu^ion of his
Promises to make them Rich and the like, etc.

There was one thing further, which was Tried before your Lordships, viz. None
of the Prisoners that were Tried (tho most Sagacious and Knowing, and perfect
in Memory, so that it could not proceed from Ignorance or Forgetfulness) could
make out the attempt of saying the Lord's Prayer; which may either be a Secret
Judgment for Renouncing their first Lord, from whom it is pecul^arly
Denominated; or by Restraint of their New Lord, who may think that too special
an Homage to his Adversary. But we have hindered you too long with that which
is not necessary: For this being incontravertible Law and Custom, there needs
no Philosophy to support it: Since Legislators do Reason, but Subjects must
Obey: And both the Fool and the Lazy (who have neither Read nor Thought enough
to understand this Subject) are to be left to their own Chimera's: Yet least
they should Insult, we shall Answer in their fashion, such of the Objections as
the Prisoners Advocate thought any ways worthy to be repeated in this place.

Whereas it is objected, that Delrio Sect. 5. Sess. 4. says, That Socii are not
to be admitted Witnesses ad condemnandum; especially considering, that the
Probation ought to be luce meridiana clarior.

It is Answered, That the place it self confutes this Inference in the present
Case: For it says, Ex his solis non est procedendum ad condemnationem, s^io
contrarium communius ^eneri and in praxi ^tinere, etc. So that it is evident,
First. That the common Opinion and Custom is in the contrary, even when there
is no other probation, but by the Partners of the Crime. Yet, Second^y, We are
not so strai^ned, but subsume in his very words, ex his solis, we do not desire
the Prisoners should be Condemned; but your Lordships see these Witnesses we
are to adduce, are not soli, or alone; for the Probation led these last Sixteen
hours, are so many Concomitants and Discoveries of Providence, which astruct
and make up any defect in their Credit that can be desiderat. Hence, Thirdly,
The meaning of that Maxim (which is Metaphorical, as appears by the words,
Clarior luce meridiana, an Equal Clearness being sufficient) is fully Answered,
and takes place in the present Case, For the Extraordinariness of the Corpora
delicti, Pregnancy of the Presumptions, and Punctualness of the positive
Probation, being conjoined; there is not a clearer Proof upon Record in any
Nation, than that to which, it is hoped, these will amount.

Whereas this Allegation is enforced, by pretending it were of dangerous
consequence to allow such Witnesses to prove Meeting with the Devil, since
Satan might have represented other^ by their False shapes.

It is Answered.

First. That we are not straightened in this; because there are many Articles
proven, which ^ould not have been falsified. But if we give some scope to
Reasoning, even in this Point, it is to be considered, that the Rules of
Judgment are established upon that, which, for the most part, does still
obtain; and Rules are to be followed, till an Exception be Proven in a
particular circumstantiat Case. But so it is, by the Experience and Observation
of the Wisest Divines, Lawyers, Philosophers, Physicians, Statesmen, Judges
and Historians, at Home and Abroad (that are too wise to be imposed upon, and
too Ingenuous to deceive us, when they all concur in the same matter of Fact)
beside the Testimony of Witches themselves every where; makes the Apparitions
of Withes to be commonly and mostly real; so Delrio tells us, lib. 5. Sect. 16.
Illusi rarissime contingit, ita Iaquerias, Comensis, Sprengirus Bien^dus, etc.
And therefore the Testimony of the Senses is always to be credited concerning
them, until it be disproved. For single or few Instances of False
Representations to the S^nses esteeming them to be true, or a possibility of
Appearances being false, can no ways Invalida^ the Rule established upon
Experience, which is common, and for the most part, whereby no Exception is to
be proven in a Special Case; since a Wonder does not subvert the Proof draw^
from the common course of Nature; Logic admits not to argue a (...), or from
Possibility to Existence* Law puts the burden of proving Simulation on the
Affirmer, and that which se^dom occurrs, is not considered by the Legislators.

For Illustrating of which, it is further to be considered, that for the most
part and ordinarily, the Witches are Personally existent in the places where
they appear; because it is more easy for the Prince of the Air to transport
them in his Hurricanes which he can raise, as is plain in the instance of Job
(who was put in his power, i. e. his natural Power without Delegation) forming
a Fence upon their Face, whereby the violence of the Air may be diverted from
choking them: Than to form the curious Miniature of such various Transactions
on their Brain: The Difficulty whereof is the ^eater, that all their (...) are
not disposed at all times the same way; and they have not the Seeds of this
Work, unless they had once acted it in reality. It is both the greater Crime
and Pleasure to act in reality, which therefore the Devil and Witches do rather
choose (unless the Place be far distant, or the Party indisposed) and this de
facto is attested to be so, by the Writers and Witches in all Nations and Ages.

Secondly. Notwithstanding that the Rule must hold, till an Exception of
Exculpation be evinced, as to a particular Person, by Evidencing, that the real
Appearance was in that special Case a true Mistake; yet this Exception is
sufficient for safety of the Misrepresented; since the same Providence which
permitted the Affliction, will order the Out-gate and Exculpation; either by
the Aerial Bodies not abiding the Touch, or some other distinction, as
Providence commonly allows the Devil to Personate only with Cloven Feet, or
that the Apparition was solely to one Single Witness, who cannot be a Proof; or
that the Innocent can prove alibi; or Finally, the known Character of a Samuel,
will purge and dispel the Aspersions of Satan, contrived on purpose to
discredit the Evidence of Sense, by which alone his Instruments can be
discovered. Especially this Character being joined to the other Circumstances
of the Providence; such as when Good Men are Disguised, they are mostly passive
in the Scene and Presumptions. Whereas Witches are Personally active in their
common Life by such Words and Deeds, as (in conjunction with these Appearances)
conspire to make us know, and distinguish them from the truly Good; since
these Witches open Profanity, Naughtiness, or Unvailed Hypocrisy, being cleared
by Fame, sealed by the Mark, and confirmed by the other discoveries of the
Presumptions that ly proven before you, do still make a Landmark betwixt the
Children of Darkness and Light. So Delrio, lib. 5. Sect. 16. N. 5. tells of
Athanasius and St. Germanus, against whom Probation was adduced for Sorcery,
but Providence did disprove it. It Is a famous instance of Susanna, represented
by the Elders; which, though not in the Case of Spectre, yet agrees in the
Rationale. The Representation by Pharo's Magicians had Concomitants, by which
they were discovered and confounded. But Lastly, suppose that GOD, in the Depth
of his Wisdom (to Convince the Error of too much Self Confidence) should permit
all necessary Probation to concur against an Innocent Person; yet the Judge,
following the Faith of Proofs, Established by Divine and Humane Laws, is
altogether Innocent: And since this Case is very Rare, the Evil is less than
the Establishing a Principle, by which most of all these Monsters could not be
cut off.

Upon the whole, It is certain, That though oft-times False Witnesses set on by
the Devil, have taken away an harmless Life, by accusing it of Crimes; yet the
Testimony of Witnesses must still be credited, till they be made Evident: so
these Appearances of Witches, with the other Specialties before expressed, being
Proven, ought to be esteemed Real, till the Fallacy be made Evident. Especially
seeing there are Examples in ancient and Modern History of Satan's Representing
the best of Men, as committing Murder, Buggrie, etc. in effigy; so Delrio,
lib. 5. Sect. 16. N. 5. relates, That St. Silvanus was represented by the
Devil, as committing a Common Capital Crime: And the like of a Monk: Whereof
there are several Modern Parallel Instances; yet this cannot enervate the Rule
and Faith of Public Judicatures, founded on no more but upon the sight of the
like Appearances; and any Argument against the Probation in Witchcraft, will
equally hold against the Probation of any other (...) (...). Wherefore the
Rules of them both must be common, as to believing the (...) (...), (...)
supra; till their Error be Individually discovered.

Finally, the Certainty is noways diminished by the Extraordinariness of the
Appearance to the Senses: For in Law and Nature Reality and not Simulation is
presumed, (...) the contrary be made appear by proving the thing not possible
in Nature, or though it be possible, that it is actually false. This is answer
enough to those who place a great part of their small Wit in a nonsensical
arguing against all Divine Authority: But writers further illustrate that the
extraordinariness of a Matter of Fact, does not exclude its Reality from being
the Subject of the Testimony of VVitnesses, in our Saviors Miracles,
Transfiguration, VValking on the Water, standing in the midst of the Disciples
while the Doors were shut, and arguing Assurance by their Senses, That a Spirit
had not Flesh and Bones, though indeed the surer VVo^d of prophe^e did put these
beyond doubt.

Nor could it be alleged for the Prisoners (tho they had the last word, as
perhaps they have not, in Objections against Witnesses, since therein re^unt
acto^es by atta^qing the presumed hability, or Legality of the VVitnesses) That
its not conceiveable, how the Girl or VVitnesses could see what the Bystanders
could not behold: Besides the impossibility of the real Bodies entering at
closs Doors and Windows, or not intercepting the sight o^ what is at its back.

For to this it would be answered.

1st. Proven facts must not be denied, though Philosophers have not yet certainy
reached the Invisible manner of their Existence: So in Nature, the Lodestone
draws the Iron, the Compass turns always to the Poles, etc. In Scripture the
Angel^ (and the Devil was once such, retaining as yet his Natural Powers) smote
the Sodomites, that they could not see the Poor; though they saw the House.
Balaam's Ass perceived the Angel that stood undiscovered to himself; and the
Rod thrown down by the Magicians of Egypt, was no doubt, seen by themselves,
though Invisible to the By standers. Which holding of their eyes, Interpreters
explain to have been done by Natural Means; and yet the Manner thereof is
certainly difficult.

However, it is also certain, that if a possible way can be proposed, the
Reality of a proved Fact is not to be Contradicted: And this can be done in the
present Case: For,

Secondly. Satan's Natural Knowledge, and Acquired Experience, makes him
perfect in the Optics and Limning: Besides that, as a Spirit, he excels in
Strength and Agility; whereby he may easily Bewitch the Eyes of others, to whom
he intends that his Instruments should not be seen, in this manner, as was
formerly hinted, viz. He constricts the Pores of the Witches Vehicle, which
intercepts a part of the Rays reflecting from her Body; he Condenses the
Interjacent Air, with grosser Meteors blown into it, or otherwise does
violently move it, which drowns another part of the Rays: And Lastly, He
obstructs the Optic Nerves with Humors stirred toward them: All which joined
together, may easily intercept the whole Rays reflecting from these Bodies, so
as to make no Impression upon the common Sense; and yet at the same time, by
Refraction of the Rays, glyding along the Fitted sides of the Volatile Couch,
wherein Satan transports them, and thereby meeting and coming to the Eye, as if
there were nothing interjacent, the Wall, or Chair, behind the same Bodies,
may be seen; as a piece of Money lying out of sight in a Cup, becomes visible,
so soon as the Medium is altered by pouring some Water on it. Several of your
number do know, that the Girl declared, That she saw and heard the Doors and
Windows open at the Witches entry, when, no doubt, the Devil had precondensed
a soft stoppage on the Eyes and Ears of others, to whom that was unperceived.

So Apolinus escaped Domitian's sight; and Giges became invisible by his
Magical Ring. John of Sali^bury tells us of a VVitch, that could make any thing
not to be seen: and Mejerus mentions another, that had the like power. Some
Italian Witches of greater then ordinary wit confessed to Grillandus, the
Devils opening Doors and Windows for them, tho the more Ignorant, by a
Fascination, think themselves actors of this. Whence it ought not to be
doubted, by any reasonable Man, what in all Times and Places is so
uncontestible Fact.

Finally, The Prisoners could not insist, that those Confessants are to Depone
only on their imagination. which can prove no more against themselves, or
others, than a Dream.

For still its to be minded, that there are other Proofs to which this is only
necessary, as a Consonant Circumstance. But further, Arg. causa, It is
answered, That the Allegation is a mistake; seeing they declare plain Matters
of Fact, obvious not only to one, but to several of their Senses, viz. Some of
them went the greatest part of the way to these Meetings on Foot: they there
Saw and Touched their Confederates; they heard their Combinations to Destroy
and Torture the Infants, the Girl and the Ministers: They returned on Foot
again: and even when they were carried thither, or back again, they knew, on
the next day that it was no Dream, by the same way as all other Mortals
discover the difference. But moreover, this is Confirmed by some real effects
of a Personal Presence, as you have seen in the Probation: And it is yet
further cleared by the Journal of Bargarrens Daughters Sufferings; which was
Attested before the former Commissioners, and is known in the Country;
particularly the Glas^ of Sack, and Orange Pi^e; the Pieces of the Clouted
Sleeves; the words expressed on the sudden Murder of the Child, by the Woman
that looked after it, which are constantly told by some of the Confessants; as
also the Houses being Strewed with Meal that Night. The Girl, the Hood-winked,
her falling in Fits at their approach, etc. And others, which shall be pointed
at to the Jury, conjoined together, can be ascribed to no other cause then the
Real ex^stence of the Witches Persons in the place: Unless it be said, That
Satan might possibly have foisted and suborned all those; and thence it be
concluded, that the Devil did actually so, in which case the Objecters are the
Persons that found their Opinion on Imagination, without any positive ground of
the reality of what they fancy; yea, against positive grounds, of belief in the
contrary; which arguing from Possibility to Existence, is already sufficient
exploded.

Whereas, for strengthening the Objection it is alleged, That the Confessants
having been in the Devils Service, and Renounced Christ, they are not capable
o^ the Religion of an Oath.

It is Answered,

First. In the Rules of Charity, etc. The Confessants, tho once Witches, have
now, at least the Majority of them, ceased to be such, having had the use of
Means, by the Ministers and Word, and actually declared their Repentance, and
the Devils ceasing to molest them; particularly Elizabeth Anderson was only
carried along violently by her Father, and stood out, to the last, Renouncing
of her Batism, or consenting to those Crimes which were contrived in their
Meetings. Ianet and Margaret Rodgers do testify a great Remorse, and Avowed
the same last Sabbath in the Face of the Congregation. So those three are
sufficient, whatever might be said against the other two, especially if we join
the Improbability, either of hazarding their own Lives, or the Devils sending
them out against these Prisoners, or their destroying their own Relations; as
was remarked before. But,

Secondly. Whether they remain Witches or not; It is certain, by Reason and
Experience, that the Devils Peculiar Influence cease when they are brought to
Judgment: by the common course of Providence: And therefore the Authors before
cited admit Witches whether Penitent or not.

Thirdly. All the supposed defects of their Evidence is supplied, and the
Intireness thereof completed, by their Testimonies being so wonderfully
Confirmed; particularly the Confessants are constant from the first discovery;
Uniform in such various Circumstances, not only with themselves, but with the
Girl: They declare nothing but what is probable, most of the Prisoners having
been reputed Witches, all of them having the Mark; and one or other of them,
(to whom their Associates who delighted in Mischief, never failed to join)
having had particular Provocations to take revenge by the Torture and Deaths
mentioned: Besides, the other Presumptions of Guilt already proven before you.
The Confessants were threatened to Retract by the Prisoners Themselves and their
Friends: Besides the bad Usage from others in the Country. They concur with
the Bewitched Girls Testimony, and amongst themselves, even when examined
singly: and upon new things: as several of your number have tried the
Experiment: on this head Delrio, lib. 5. Sect. 16. N. 5. wisely observes,
Quamvis tam facile foret demoni plures decipere quam unum tamen non est
censendus Deus hoc aeque p^rmi tere ne omnis ratio probandi talia delicta
occulta judicibus adimatur; hoc enim est dissentaneum provid^ntiae divinae. The
Reiteration of the Acts which they declare, as to some Persons that they never
saw, except in these Congresses, and yet whom they knew now on the first sight,
is unaccountable, if they were Cheats: And that they are not such is further
confirmed by some of the Prisoners being Accused, by a Confessing Witch in Anno
1687. And you know that others accused by these Confessants, were lately
brought in Guilty by the Verdict of a former Inquest, etc. which are so many
joint proofs of the Witnesses Integrity, and make a Chain of Evidence and Moral
Demonstration both against Error in themselves, and Delusion, in Relation to
others, etc.

There were some things objected from the Law of Scotland, of which also I
shall give you a touch.

Whereas it was alleged, That Irretiti Criminibus Capitalibus, those who are
Indicted for Capital Crimes, and so under the Pursuers Power, cannot be
admitted to be Witnesses; Conform to a Statute in Regiam Majestatem.

To this it was answered, That we need not say, that these statutes have not
the force of Law, except in so far as they are received by Custom; and are
conformable to Law. A Laick cannot Witness against a Clerk, or e contra, etc.
Nor need we make use of that which is Obvious, viz. That these Statutes are
only common Rules in ordinary Crimes; which have their Exception in all Occult
and excepted Crimes, such as Witchcraft, etc. Nam omnis regula subverti potest,
and particularly this Rule is actually so restricted in the Case of Witchcraft,
by the Opinion of Lawyers and the Customs beforementioned, which are the best
interpreters of Laws: For if this Application should hold, a socius criminis
could never be admitted: But we positively deny, that those Confessants are
under our Power or Influence; seeing Elizabeth Anderson is not Guilty of
Witchcraft, for any thing that does appear: The Lindsays were never indicted
for it; and the Indictment against Ianet and Margaret Rogers was dropped; as the
whole Commission is to Expire against the first of June, betwixt and which
time, they are to proceed no further then this particular Trial. So that this
Objection vanishes into smoke.

Whereas it is pretended, That the Rogers's cannot be received, because not
given out in the List of Witnesses; conform to the Regulation, whereby the
Prisoners might have proven their Objection by their Exculpation.

It was answered, 1st. This Objection ought to be rejected; because, besides
that the Act speaks only of Criminal Libells, and not Indictments, which with
the List of the Witnesses may be given in far shorter time than the Additional
List has been given to the Prisoners indicted, being Prisoners: This Act is
interpreted by the common Custom of the Justice Court; of giving additional
Lists after the first, upon shorter time then this has been given: As is
particularly attested by James Guthry Macer, who gave them, and being a Person
in Officio, his Testimony is to be Credited in what relates to his Office: so
that the old Custom confirmed by a Decision, August 3d. 1661* where Alexander
Forrester was cited apud acta against a VVitch, continues as to this point, as
is related by McKenzie, page 529. But 2dly. Any Objection that the Prisoners
pretend against these Witnesses, is in jure, or may instantly appear. 3dly. The
Case is altogether extraordinary and Circumstantiat: For these Witnesses had
not Confessed: And so were not existent under that Reduplication when the
principal List was given out: whereby the Act of Parliament can only be
understood of Witnesses, that were then existent. And finally the Prisoners got
a general warrant of Exculpation for citing of any Witnesses they pleased, and
they have had several Days since they got this additional List, so that they
might have cited Witnesses to prove their Objections, were it not the truth is,
they have none, besides these that are common and before Answered.

Thus I have given you hints that your own Reason (which I know to be refined)
may improve and apply, so as to dissolve the quibles which the petty wits, who
have not Soul enough of themselves to penetrate into the depth of that which is
abstruse may raise against it: It being their common Talent either to Skipp
over things Superficially, or else to Attaque some of the slightest outworks,
and then to Triumph as if they had obtained the Victory.

I must confess that none could be more skeptical as to the Truth of such odd
things as I had heard; nor inquisitive for canvassing the Reality, and
Explications of them, then I was before my attendance at Bargarrans House, and
the several dyets of Court; and my Conversation with some of those concerned in
the matter. But now, after all that I have seen, reasoned, and heard; I do
acknowledge may self entirely captivated by the dictats of Natural
understanding and common Sense, into a firm belief and persuasion, that, as
there is such a thing as Witchcraft, so it was eminent in its forementioned
Effects; and that the seven Prisoners were some of the Witches.

I have troubled you little with my own Observations; yet lest you should think
me too Lazy I shall make one, and that is, that I do not think the greater part
of the condemned Prisoners will ever fully Confess: For which Conjecture I have
two grounds, viz. That they are neither Ignorant nor Melancholic; but on the
contrary, some of them would seem to have been once enlightened before they fell
away, so that if this be a Sin unto Death, there is no appearance that they
will glorify God by Confession.

Several of them are persons of singular Knowledge and Acuteness beyond the
common level of their Station: Particularly Margaret Lang did make Harangues in
her own defense, which neither Divine nor Lawyer could well outdo: Yet I
thought that when they sp^ke in a matte^ of any concern, their Eyes stood
Squint and Fixed, as if they had been turning their Ears and attending to some
invisible Dictator. Their answers to the trying Questions put to them, were
Surprisingly subtle and Cautious: Tho indeed, by the Indu^ry of some of the
Judges and Lawyers, they were sometimes caught in Lies, Prevarications, and
Contradictions; which might have proceeded either from Natural or perternatural
Causes. Some of them were esteemed in the Country to be very Sagacious and
Exact in their Bussiness: Margaret Lang having been a noted Midwife, and one of
the Lindsays having acquired a considerable Fortune by his Tillage and Trade:
Yet it was observed, that there did commonly break out in their Hypocritical
way of Living, something Odd either of Iniquity or Affectation; and Lindsay did
cunningly enough get off from the Sheriff when he was formerly accused in 1687.

Melancholy persons are lovers of Solitude; Witches of Society, and Feasts:
Those are commonly Pale and Heavy; many of these Corpulent and ^oluptuous
Witches are Hard to Confess as knowing their Guilt; The Melancholy delight to
discover their horridest Damps, because they think them no Crime: The
Contessions of the One are every where Uniform; the others Phantasms are as
various as their Humors. Finally, Witches teach their Trade; whereas Conceits
would Dye with the Melancholy; and can no more be conveyed by them to others
then the Humor which is the Specific cause thereof. As these distinguishing
Characters do hold in the General, so in this particular Case there are several
others: Such as, most of the Prisoners were of Middle-age, one of them not much
above Twenty; and the first Confessants are known to be Young: So that Dotage
or Melancholy are the less to be suspected; yea was morally impossible in many
of their Cases. For the Facts which the Confessants had formerly declared
before the Commissioners for Enquiry, were sworn to by other unexceptionable
Witnesses before the Commissioners for the Trial; and their Circumstances were
such, that one of 'em could not know what was to be deponded by the other: As
it is already manifest, that the real Effects in several passages of Bargarrans
Daughter were not possibly producible by any Imagination or Humor; and it is
special in this Case, tha^ neither the Prisoners nor Confessants were
Distempered by being kept from Sleep, Tortured, or the like, which were too
usual in former times; but all the Measures were strictly observed, that are
requisits to a truly Impartial Judgment.

I needed not insert the Copies of the Depositions themselves: Because it is
not denied that they are such as represented in the Pleadings; the chief
question being about the Legality of the last Deponents. Nor is there any need
to insert the Defendants part of the Debate, seperately by it self; in respect
that it is faithfully repeated or implied in what you have here sent you.

Upon the whole I do believe; that there is scarcely a more remarkable
Providence of this Nature to be found in any true History; nor was there ever a
more exact Caution in any enquiry or Trial of this kind: A more clear
Probation, without Confession of the Prisoners themselves, or, a more just
Sentence, putting together all Circumstances, upon Record.

I am, what you have made me,

Yours, etc.

FINIS.

