A Curious COLLECTION OF PAINTINGS, By the best Masters, Extraordinary Fine. A
large Iron Cash Chest, and several other CVRIOSITIES. Will be Sold by AUCTION,
on Thursday, Friday and Saturday the 17th. 18th. and 19th. of this Instant
March, 1691/92.. at Four of the Clock Afternoon, in the OVTROPERS-OFFICE in the
West End of the Royal Exchange.

The Conditions of SALE.

THE highest Bidder is to be deemed the Buyer. But if two (or more) shall Claim
any Lot, than it shall be put up again.

The Buyer is to pay for and take away what Pictures, etc. He or She shall Buy
within Five days after Bought.

Every Person Buying is desired to give his Name and place of Abode, and if
desired, to pay down a fourth part of the value of what shall be bought, or
else to be put up again.

And for the Satisfaction of the Company present, it is engaged that no
proprietor of any Painting, etc. now exposed shall bid for his own Goods.

Catalogues whereof are to be had at the said Office.

CATALOGVE.
1 TWO pcs. of fruit in one lot 2 An orig. Landscape by Smith 3 The offering of
the three Kings 4 Three Obscene pcs. in one lot 5 a Landscape well painted 6 a
Moonshine finely painted 7 a Droll filling his pipe 8 a Partridge by Boncroy 9
a Droll with a Glass of Mum 10 Two small Sea pcs. in one lot 11 a Rock finely
painted 12 a Bachanalia well painted 13 a Landscape with Ruins 14 K. W. and Q.
M. in oval frames 15 Susannah and the two Elders after Rubens 16 a Turkish Sea
port by a durch Mr. 17 a large Landscape with figures finely painted by a dutch
Mr. fit for a Chimney pc. 18 Country people dancing, finely finished by
Haemskirk 19 a Sea port with Galleys finely finished by Vandeest 20 a
Conversation and Mary Magdalen in one lot 21 a Festoon of Fruit an orig. 22 an
orig. Fruit pc by English 23 a Sea port finely painted 24 a Landscape with
Figures finely painted by Henny 25 a Sea pc. curiously painted by Veteringa 26
an orig. Land kip by Vangoyen 27 a curious half length Landscape by Tyson of
Antwerp, full of figures, an orig. 28 Venus and Adonis by a dutch Mr. 29 a
large half length K. Charles II. 30 a Landscape and Sea-pc. finely painted in
one Lot 31 a large Sea calm incomparable well painted by Pomp 32 Confession
finely finished by Haemskirk 33 a Landscape with figures, orig. by Van Cole 34
an orig. Landscape with the 4 Elements by Franck 35 Uropa on the Bull, an orig.
36 Vandykes head 37 The late Lord Shaftsbury 38 The Nativity of our Savior an
orig. 39 a curious Landscape an orig. by Den Bost 40 a curious Sea-pc. an orig.
by Vandiest 41 a Landscape with Venus and Cupid an orig. fit for a Chimney-pc.
by Vanhayden 42 Jupiter deceiving Diana in a Golden shore, an orig. supposed by
Carrats 43 a large Hunting-pc. by a dutch Mr. 44 Oliver Cromwell well painted
45 Venus and Cupid finely painted 46 The three Graces an orig by an Italian Mr.
47 a Boy over loaded with Fruit 48 a Woman scowring an orig. ia an Ebony frame
49 a Gunner in a Landscape very fine 50 Princess Henrietta's whole length,
supposed by Vandike 51 a Sea-pc. by Vandervelden 52 a Woman selling Fowls 53 a
rich embroider*d Saddle and Bitt, with Holsters very fine 54 an orig.
Still-life by Vandermeer 55 Old Boon playing on a Violin 56 Cleopatra in an
oval frame by Verelst 57 a fine Italian Landscape by a great Mr. 58 a Camp with
Soldiers 59 a Sea-storm an orig. by the best Vandervelden 60 Fame half length
an orig. supposed by Vanball 61 a curious orig. of Haemskirk of the best sort
62 a Droll by Griffier and Haemskirk 63 a silver hilted Hanger of Indian work
and Damascus 64 an orig. of Snool with a Landscape and Beasts 65 Flora on copper
by Vanhaden 66 a fine Ship-pc. by Vandervelden 67 a very fine Still-life by W.
Gomber 68 Peace and Plenty on copper by Vanhaden 69 a Madona on copper by
Vanhaden 70 a Genesis with a Fowling. pc. and Birds, half length, orig. 71 an orig
Landscape by Aschelinch 72 a Landsk. with Ruins, by Abram Begein 73 Venus
whipping Cupid, on copper, by Vanhaden 74 a pc. by Sifier most fine with Cattle
75 a plate with Olives with a Rummer by Verelst 76 a curious Italian Landsk. by
a great Mr. 77 a French Garden an orig. 78 a Wood finely painted, an orig. by
Rusdale 79 a Madona in a gold frame an orig. by an Italian 80 a Conversation of
Drunkards by Perrin 81 The passion of our Savior in 22 copper cuts 82 a book
of prints and drawings 83 Prince Maurice his Art of War in 32 cuts 84 a Book of
44 Maps of England and Scotland 85 The old Testament in 192 copper cuts 86 The
new Testament in 144 copper cuts 87 King Ahashuerus 88 an orig. of Narcissus by
Lecasque an Italian 89 St. Paul by the same hand 90 a pc. with parrots by Adama
91 a pc. of Oysters by the sama hand 92 a Sea-pc. by Veteringa 93 a Landsk.
with figures well painted 94 a Fruit pc. finely painted 95 a Landsk by Lenard
96 a Landsk. by a great Mr. 97 a pc. of Fruit by Vandermeer 98 a Ship-pc.
Vandervelden most fine 99 a pc. by Haemskirk 100 Flora by Lecasque an Italian
101 St. Peter ditto 102 a Ruin of a Venetian palace 103 a Landsk. with ruins
finely painted 104 a landsk. with fig an orig. neatly painted, Knoninsberg 105
a ruin with figures finely painted by Rombouls 106 a Goldsmith and his men at
work, an incomparable pc. of painting by that great Mr. Ulierd 107 a flower pc.
by Montingo 108 an orig. landsk. by Vanderstraten 109 a Camp of Soldiers finely
painted on board 110 an orig. landsk by Manuel 111 a landsk. an orig by an
Italian 112 a Rummer and Oysters by Vandermeer 113 a merry Cuckold by
Stellingwerg 114 a Japan'd table and Stands, and Looking-glass frame 115 an
orig. landsk. by that great Mr. Houseman 116 a pc. of Fowls finely painted 117
a landsk an orig. by an Italian master 118 an orig. landsk. by Manuel 119 a pc.
of Still-life by Vandermeer 120 a Droll and Still-life well painted in one Lot
121 an orig. Landsk. by Manuel 122 a pc. of Fruit by Kelly 123 a prospect of
the Lord Delameers Country House 124 Jacobs Ladder by an Italian master 125 a
moonshine landsk. 126 a landsk. by a great master 127 a pc. of Still life
ditto 128 2 pcs. with fruit and parrots in one Lot 129 2 pcs. with beasts in
one lot 130 a Droll embracing a Woman by Pereen 131 2 landsk. by Adama in one
Lot 132 Mary Magdalen on copper by Vanheyden 133 The five wise Virgins by Frank
134 K. W. and Q. M. in small 135 Doctor Paracelsus by Lion 136 a pc. of Vanity
by a Dutch master 137 a Fruit pc. ditto 138 De Witt's Mother by Francis Gales
139 a pc. of Armor by Vousterman 140 a Lobster with Still-life, by Verelst 141
Jonas in the Whales belly 142 King Ahashuerus 143 a Collation an orig. 144 a
fine ruin by a Dutch Mr. 145 a squirril ditto 146 a still life most fine 147 a
fine landsk. with fig. by Moy 148 a landsk with cattle by Vanderhurst 149 2
drolls fine painted by Moy in 1 lot 150 a fruit pc by Perreen 151 a pheasant
well painted 152 a fruit pc by a Dutch Mr. 153 a large history pc of King Cyrus
154 a boy by a disciple of Laris 155 a winter pc by Brevill 156 an orig.
landsk. by a Dutch Mr. on board 157 a still life an orig. 158 an orig. Italian
pc of the prospect of Legorne by the life by G. B. in a gold frame 159 a
prospect of another part of Legorne an orig. 160 a fruit pc by a Dutch Mr. 161
the Lord Brunkerd by Lilly 162 a Calves pluck very fine 163 Pluto stealing
Proserpina by Franck 164 a large landsk. by old Collonii 165 a Girl with a
plate of fruit by Verelst 166 a fruit pc by Verelst very fine 167 a very fine
landsk. an orig. 168 a still life an orig. 169 a pc of fruit finely painted 170
a large pc of the holy family by an Italian Mr. 171 an orig. ship pc by
Salemaker 172 K. W. and Q. Mary in 3 qr. frames 173 a hunting of a Lion by
Snider 174 a prospect of one part of Ligorne an orig. 175 St. Sebastian very
fine 176 a landsk. by Edama 177 a landsk. by a disciple of Rusee 178 a fine
flower by Brugell on copper 179 a pc of still life most fine 180 an orig. sea
fight between Eng. and Dutch, de Rutter 181 the holy family an orig. by a great
Mr. on board 182 a landsk, with ruins by Abram Begein 183 a curious flower pc
by Hermon Verelst 184 a fine landsk. by Vanbergenan an orig. 185 a 3 qr. pc of
Grapes and other fruit 186 K. Chapter II. by a good hand 187 an old orig. pc 188 a
curious landsk. by Son Yea 189 a landsk. with ruins well painted 190 ditto with
small figures by a Dutch Mr 191 a pc of Summer, Autumn and harvest by
Winellhoud 192 a fine orig landsk. 193 a landsk. by Edama 194 ditto by Everding
195 an old orig. pc of Ja. beguiling Esau of his birthright 196 a pc of boors
by Campinio 197 a pc of marriage ditto 198 an orig. pc of flowers by Montingo
from France 199 another ditto 200 a pc of apricocks by Verelst on copper 201 a
winter pc by Brevill 202 a landsk. by Lenard 203 a curious landsk. by a Dutch
Mr. 204 Mary Magdalen on copper very fine 205 a fine landsk. by Son Yea 206
Venus and Cupid in the clouds 207 a conversation by old Hemskirk 208 a still
life by Vandermeer 209 a camp with soldiers and tents 210 a pc of monkeys
smoking and 2 prints 211 a monument with figures on a deas board 212 a landsk.
with fig. and horses by Hucktenburg 213 a battle pc by Wyke 214 Quakers meeting
on cop. finely finished by Hemskirk 215 a curious sea harbor by Castro very
fine 216 M. Magdalen on copper by Vanheyden 217 K. James after Kneller well
painted 218 a hunting very pleasant 219 a sea pc an orig. by Stoop 220 another
ditto 221 a fruit pc by Vandermeer 222 M. Magdalen on copper 223 old Hemskirks
head finely painted 224 an orig. landsk. by Vandeest 225 ditto by Smith 226 a
pc of fruit and flowers by Brugell in an Ebony frame most fine 227 K. W. and Q.
M. after the right orig. of Kneller 228 a pc of vanity by Deboyce 229 the
Virgin Mary and our Savior by Rikart 230 a Droll by a Dutch Mr. 231 Old Boon
laughing at an Owl 232 a Seaport by Salemaker 234 a head by old Hemskirk 235 a
landsk. by a Dutch Mr. 236 K. David by Rubens 237 a Horse by Vanboots 238 a
landsk. by a great Mr. 239 a landsk. with fine Figures by Deboyee 240 a pc of
Birds with a Cat by Vanstook 241 a Roman Monument fit for a Chimney 242 K. W.
and Q. M. very neat in gold burnisht frames 243 a curious pc of Vanderfrom 244
a Cobbler and his Wife by a Dutch Mr. 245 a pc of Brower in an Ebony frame 246 a
head an orig by Johannis Varose 247 an Apostle by Goltius 248 a landsk. by
Marcellus 249 2 pcs of Horses very fine on Copper 250 a pleasant with fine
Figures 251 2 fruit pcs very pleasant in 1 lot 252 a landsk. with figures and
cattle very fine 253 a sea storm an orig. by Salemaker 254 a sea port finely
painted by a Dutch Mr. 255 a fine pc of flowers by Father Legers 256 a pc of
still life by old Berkham 257 the prodigal son by Brugell 258 2 small landskips
in 1 lot 259 an obscene pc well painted 260 a winter pc ditto 261 a sea fight
between the French and English by Salemaker 262 a sea port finely painted 263 a
Table and Stands of princes wood 264 a large iron cash chest 265 a landsk. with
cattle by Deboyce 266 the Duchess of Mazareene and Diana in 1 lot 267 a cows
head finely done by Langpeirce 268 a curious pc of birds by Savory 269 an orig.
landsk. by Manuel 270 a man reading an orig. by old Hemskirk 271 an orig
landsk. in an oval frame 272 a fire pc by Evenbrond 273 ditto and a landsk. in
1 lot 274 a fine fruit pc by a Dutch Mr. 275 a curious sea fight by Vanderberg
276 the 4 elements finely done by Vandallen 278 a landsk. finely painted 279 a
sea pc by Salemaker 280 a hare and birds by Hermon verelst by the life 281 K.
W. and Q. M. by Lion 282 an orig. Fish pc by a great Mr. 283 a pleasant landsk.
finely painted 284 a neat landsk. by Griffier 285 K. W. and Q. M. finely
painted in 1 lot 286 Mars and Venus a fine old pc 287 a Table Stands and
looking glass frame Indian lacquered work 289 the Duke of Monmouth well painted
290 an orig. Flora on copper once the late Duke of Buckinghams of his best
collection 291 a landsk. with figures and cattle by Vanstooke 292 a robery
finely painted ditto 293 a battle between the Dutch and French an orig 294 a
landsk. painted by a Dutch Mr. 295 a landsk finely painted 296 a camp of
Soldiers rarely painted by a great Mr. 297 K. W. and Q. M. finely painted by
Van Summers 298 a battle between Count Teckly and the Emperalist 299 a table
and stands and looking glass frame Indian lacquered work 300 another ditto 301
another ditto 302 a prospect of St. Faiths Church finely painted 303 a Battle
between the Polanders and the Turks finely painted 304 a Droll by Brower 305 a
small landsk. with Figures finely painted 306 Squire Wickham making his Will an
orig. by old Hemskirk 307 a pc of Fruit with Cheese by a great Mr. 308 a
Quakers meeting an orig. by Hemskirk 309 a Flower pc by Verelst 310 a winter pc
by Molinos 311 a Sea storm by Backhuysen 312 K. W. and Q. M. finely painted by
Vansummers 313 a pair of pistols finely Chased 314 a Seaport by Wagener 315
Bacchus and Ariadne an orig. by an Italian Mr. 316 a small Sea pc finely
painted 317 a Conversation pc finely finished by Hemskirk 318 2 Fruit pcs in
one Lot very neat 319 Doctor Paracelsus on Board 320 a Battle between the
Sweeds and Danes finely painted 321 a pc of still life incomparable fine by Van
Sutton 322 a Seaport finely painted by Wagener 323 an orig. of Boors by
Hemskirk 324 a pc of Fruit finely painted by Smart 325 a landsk. with Figures
by Lenard 326 Sir Francis Walsingham finely painted an original 327 the Map of
London on Cloth finely colored 328 K. Chapter II. in Crayons 329 a Seaport by
Salemaker very neatly painted 330 a landsk. finely painted by a Dutch Mr. 331 a
landsk. with ruins by a good hand 332 an orig. head by old Hemskirk 333 the
Mapp of England on cloth colored 334 a small landsk. finely drawn in black and
white by Edama 335 a large landsk. with Fig. finely painted ditto 336 K. W. and
Q. M. in small very fine 337 a landsk. with a Water fall 338 3 small landsk. by
Vandiest in one Lot. 339 a landsk. with buildings finely painted 340 K. W. and
Q. M. in fine carved Frames 341 Vropa finely painted by Verelst 342 an original
landscape warranted to be of the best Brugell 343 a ruin supposed by Greffeir
344 a pheasant hanging on a Deal Board 345 a head supposed by Holbin 346 an old
Woman reading supposed by Jordane 347 O. Cromwell in Crayons 348 a Battle pc
well painted 349 The Tower of Babel full of fig. an orig. 350 a Droll by Mooy
351 a pc of Cattle by Verdoes 352 The Monarchs of England pasted on Cloth 353 a
landsk. with a thatcht House an orig. well painted 354. K. W. and Q. M. in
Crayons 355 a flower pc by a Dutch Mr. 356 2 small landsk. in one lot 357 a
Moonshine in black and white finely painted by Mooy 358 a Market pc by Berkhide
359 St. Peter a very fine pc by Sir P. Ruben 360 a Winter pc by a good hand 361
Dr. Paraclistus on board 362 K. W. and Q. Mary in small very fine 363 a landsk.
with Cattle by Bruynix 364 Mrs. Bridget Cotterel by Corn. Johnson 365 a large
pc of Gentlemen at Tables by an Italian Mr. 366 a Seaport finely painted 367
K. W. and Q Mary after Wissen 368 2 Fruit pcs in one Lot 369 a History by
Hundius 370 St. Ambross by Hemskirk 371 a landsk. with a Windmill by Waterson
372 a Conversation pc an orig. well painted 373 a pheasant by the life 374 a
landsk. finely painted 375 a Fire pc by Fisher 376 The hunting of a Hare by
Hondius 377 a man's Head by Rembrand 378 a Battle pc finely painted in a rich
carved frame 380 The Tower of Babylon 381 a Camp of Soldiers finely painted
382 a Winter pc well done 383 Table-players finely painted by Hemskirk 384 a
landsk. with Cattle by Crab 385 Sir Godfrey Kneller the Kings Painter well done
386 a fruit pc neatly painted 387 2 Fruit pcs in one Lot 388 a Jeweller with
his men at work by Deuven 389 a Droll pc after Brower 390 a Droll pc by
Vanderoast 391 Dutch Boors at Cards 392 a Hunting after Wyke

