A Curious COLLECTION OF PAINTINGS, Most whereof are ORIGINALS, by the best
Masters; and the rest very fine Copies. Will be Exposed to Sale by way of
Auction, on Thursday, the 4th of this instant September, at the Marine
Coffee-House, in Birching-lane, near the Royal Exchange.

By J. Bullord.

Catalogues are Distributed Gratis, at Mr. Hensmans in Westminster Hall: Mr.
Notts in the Pall Mall: Mr. Ropers, near the Devil-Tavern in Fleetstreet: Mr.
Hargraves, at the King-Head, in Holbourn: Mr. Bullords, in St. Paul's
Churchyard: Mr. Richard Parkers, at the Unicorn on the Piazza, at the
Royal Exchange; and at the Place of Sale.

Conditions of SALE.
I. THat he who bids most is the Buyer, and if any Difference arise which the
Company cannot Decide, then the Painting, etc. shall be Exposed to Sale again.
II. That the Money for the Paintings, etc. so bought, is to be paid at the
place of Sale within three Days after the Sale is ended, but for the
Convenience of such as desire them sooner, constant Attendance for delivery
will be given every Day at the said Place. III. That all Gentlemen, Ladies,
etc. after the buying any Painting, will be pleased to give in their Names and
Lodgings, at the Sale, otherwise to pay the third part of the Price, or the
whole Money presently for them, where upon payment of the remainder within the
time limited, the Paintings, Limnings, etc. shall be delivered to them or their
Order. IV. That no Person is to bid less than six pence a time, for any Lot
exposed to Sale. V. That the Paintings, etc. may be viewed every Morning,
before the Afternoon Sale, by any Persons that please to repair to the place of
Sale.
PAINTINGS.
1 A Flower-piece 2 a Fruit-piece 3 a small Landscape, in an Ebony Frame 4 a
Deer-hunting 5 Old Simon the King 6 A Landscape 7 A whole length Posture, well
painted 8 King Charles the Second, and his Queen 9 A Satyr and a Traveler 10 A
Lady and Child, curiously painted 11 Cain and Abel, by a Dutch master 12 A
Ruin with a Waterfall 13 Three Tobacco-smoakers 14 An Usurer and his Wife
weighing Gold 15 A pleasant Landscape 16 a Woman a Piping 17 a large piece of
Lot and his Daughters, by a good master 18 a large Landscape, by a Dutch master
19 a large piece of Moses, by a good hand 20 King Charles the Second after
Lilly 21 The Duke of York, by the same hand 22 a Sea-piece after Castro 23 a
Fruit-piece 24 a Landscape, by a Dutch master 25 a piece of Dogs well painted 26
a string of Fruit 27 Venus asleep, on copper 28 Love Conquering Nature, on
copper 29 a Flower-piece 30 K. William and Q. Mary on copper, with carved
frames 31 a Landscape, by Van Ulieghen 32 a Droll-piece on copper, by Haemskirk
33 -- another, Ditto 34 a Fruit-piece, on copper 35 K. William and Q. Mary, in
carved Oval frames 36 a Painting of a VVainscot Cupboard 37 a piece of Books,
curionsly painted by Van Hatton 38 King Charles the Second in Miniature 39 an
Amorous piece well painted, by a Dutch master 40 a neat Landscape, with a large
building 41 a head finely painted by Cornelius Johnson 42 King Charles the
First on Horseback, after Van Dyck 43 a piece of Mackerel and Sparagus 44 The
Queen of Bohemia's head, on board, by Johnson 45 a small Landscape, by a Dutch
master 46 a Droll-piece after Ostade 47 a laughing boys head, by Fran. Halls 48
a Droll-piece, and Original, finely painted 49 Venus and Adonis, finely painted
by Edema 50 an Original flower-piece, by Lazuliere 51 a piece of Fish, finely
painted by Robinson 52 a Thistle, curiously painted by De Keyzer 53 a
Sea-piece, in an Ebony Oval frame, by Antonius 54 a Landscape, curiously painted
by Knife 55 a Flower-pot in an Ebony frame, by Boulenger 56 Two Lions, after
Rubens 57 a Man smoking, by Old Haemskirk 58 Queen Mary in an Oval carved
frame 59 a Fruit-piece 60 a Bunch of Grapes, an Original, by Verelst 61 King
William on Horseback 62 a Landscape, by a Dutch master 63 a large Cleopatra, by
an Italian 64 a Winter-piece, curiously painted 65 King Charles the Second in
an Oval frnme 66 Queen Katherine by the same hand 67 a prospect of Plymouth,
finely painted by Sailmaker 68 a Sea-storm by the same hand 69 Jane Shore
neatly painted 70 a Landscape curiously painted by Ulieghen 71 an Orig. piece of
the life, with a book, etc. in a rich frame 72 a Droll-piece by a Dutch master
73 a Woman playing on a Violin, an Original, by Old Boon 74 K. Edward VI.
curiously painted by a great master 75 a Dead Child well painted 76 K. William
and Q Mary, in rich gilt frames 77 King William in an Oval frame, by a Dutch
master 78 a Card-playing, by Haemskirk 79 The Lord Devonshire, well painted by
a Dutch master 80 a House of Conversation, by Haemskirk 81 The Offering of the
three Kings, by an Italian master 82 Two Drunkards, by Haemskirk 83 Sampson and
Dalilah after Rubens 84 a neat Landscape with a Bridge 85 a large Landscape with
Venus and a Satyr, by a Dutch master 86 a naked Venus, finely painted 87 a neat
Landscape with a River 88 a Frost-piece with sliders, by a Dutch master 89 a
small Landscape well painted 90 a half length, supposed by Boemaert 91 David and
Abigal, by a Dutch master 92 a piece of Clowns, well painted by Ostade 93 a
large Flower-piece, by Montingo 94 a neat Landscape with Hunting the Ounce 95 a
small Landscape on copper, by Parelle 96 Venus kissing Cupid, on copper, by Van
Heyden 97 Venus Whipping Cupid, by Ditto 98 a Pomona 99 a large Droll by
Haemskirk 100 a Ballad-singer 101 a Sea-piece by Vande Velde 102 a little
Lanskip by a Dutch master 103 a Parteridge Hanging, by a Dutch master 104 a
Gunpowder Plot, after Haemekirk 105 a small Landscape, well painted 106 a
Sea-piece, by Vande Velde 107 Massianello after Haemskirk 108 Susanna well
painted 109 a Madona, in little 110 Dr. Saffold's Picture 111 a piece of
Horsemen 112 a Landscape by Ulieghen 113 Mr. Wards Head well painted 114 a
Partridge by a good master 115 a half length after the life, by a great master
116 a small piece after Haemskirk 117 a half length after Van Dyck 118 a large
Landscape by Lootten 119 Cleopatra neatly painted 120 a Fruit-piece curiously
done by Varelst 121 a Winter-piece, by Van Acha 122 a large piece of Venus and
a Satyr, by an Italian 123 a Festoon of Fruit, by Bougdan 124 a Festoon of
Flowers by Ditto 125 an Usurer weighing Gold, finely painted 126 an Original
Sea-piece, by Castro 127 Constantine the first Christian Emperor, after
Titian, in a carved frame 128 a curious Landscape with Beasts 129 a House of
Conversation, curiously painted, by a great master 130 a small Landscape with a
Building 131 an Original of Neptune 132 a Shepherd and Shepherdess, after
Titian 133 King William in a rich frame 134 Queen Mary by the same hand 135
King Charles the first after Van Dyck 136 a Droll after Ostade 137 a Palace
curiously painted 138 The Offering of the 3 Kings, in black and white, by
Blomaert 139 Abraham Sacrificing Isaac 140 Diana curiously painted 141 Venus
and Adonis, by an Italian 142 a Cupboard of Plate and Jewels, by Frank 143 a
piece of Ruins, curiously painted by Griffiere 144 a small piece after
Haemskirk 145 a half length of Mr. Rustic, after the life, by a good master
146 an Old man's head 147 Mary Magdalen, by an Italian master 148 a half length
after the life, by a good master 149 Old Boon the Painter, with a Roast Pullet
150 a Battel-piece, by a Dutch master 151 Venus and Cupid in the Clouds, on
copper, by Van Heyden 152 Judith and Holofernes, by Ditto 153 a large Hunting
piece, by an Italian 154 a large Ecce Homo, by a great master 155 a large Sea
Calm, an Original, by a very great master 156 a Sea-storm finely drawn, in a
rich carved frame 157 an imitation of a Deal-board, with a Calves-pluck 158 a
piece of Leopards and Peacocks, by Snyder 159 an Original piece of Cattle, by
Mummers 160 The last Supper, finely painted by a great master 161 a Bear
hunting, an Original, by Hondius 162 an Italian Landscape, curiously painted 163
a Sea-piece, by a Dutch master 164 a Hunting-piece, an Original, by Hondius 165
an Amorous piece, by Haemskirk 166 a small Landscape, nearly painted by a Dutch
master 167 A piece of Vanity after Walton 168 Sir Francis Drake 169 The
Prodigal Son, by a Italian 170 Porsias Head 171 Beasts after Van Berkham 172
King William and Queen Mary 173 The Virgin Mary at her Needle 174 The Lord
De-la-More 175 A head by the life 176 A Landscape after Van Berkham 177 A
Blackamoor with froth 178 A large Sea-piece 179 a small Landscape on Coper by
Parelle 180 Sports of Bacbhus on copper by Van Heyden 181 a Madona by an
Italian 182 Piramus and Thysbe by a good master 183 a large piece of the Angel
and Hagar 184 A large Kitchen piece 185 Paris and the 3 Goddesses with the
Golden Appel, by F. Flores 186 a large prospect of St. James's, with the Park,
by a great mast. 187 a large Italian Landscape with a Ruin the figures by
Griffiere 188 The Wise and Foolish Virgins by an Italian 189 a large Landscape
with a Shepherd and Shepherdess 190 a half length Landscape by Edema 191 King
William in an Oval Carved Frame 192 Queen Mary in an Oval Carved Frame 193 an
Amorous piece by Haemskirk 194 St. Anthonys Dream by old Haemskirk 195 a
curious Landscape, sit for a Chimney piece 196 Seghers the Painters Head, by Van
Dyke 197 an Ecce Homo after Van Dyke 198 a neat Landscape with a Ruin 199 a
Cobbler and his Wife 200 a Sea piece by a Dutch master 201 a small Landscape by
a Dutch master 202 a Landscape well painted 203 a Droll piece by a Dutch master
204 a curious drawing of a Sea Port in Holland 205 Cupid finely painted 206 The
Lady Newport 207 a Landscape by Uliegher 208 a VVinter piece by Breughel 209 a
Italian Surgeon dressing a Patient 210 a Boy and Fruit by a Disciple of
Clyne 211 a large Fire piece curiously painted 212 a large piece of Mars and
Venus after Titian 213 a small piece of Moses by De Ryck 214 a Fruit piece
finely painted 215 a small VVinter piece 216 Pandora's Head 217 a Flower piece
painted by Montingo 218 a Sea piece, an Original by Porcellus 219 a Fruit piece
finely painted 220 King William and Queen Mary 221 a Droll piece after Teniers
222 a VVinter piece finely painted 223 a Landscape finely painted by an Italian
224 The Spring by an Italian 225 Autumn by the same hand 226 a Landscape with a
waterfal by an Italian 227 Joseph and his Mistress by Van Aka 228 a
Mathematical study well painted 229 Lord Straffords Head after Van Dyck 230 St.
Katherine 231 a large Sea piece of Peter's 232 K. Charles the 1st on Horse back
after Van Dyck 233 an Orginal piece of Cattle by a great Master 234 a Ruin
after Griffier 235 Lot and his two Daughters on Copper by Lauder 236 Painting
Architecture and Astronomy by Ditto 237 a Landscape by a Dutch master 238 a
painting of Circe, an Original, by Van Aka 239 an Original piece of Colonie 240
an Original piece by old Haemskirk 241 a Flower piece by Montingo 242 a
VVater-fall by De Reyner 243 Cleopatra by an Italian 244 Pandora by an Italian
245 a piece of Smoakers, by Haemskirk 246 a piece of Drunkards, by the same
hand 247 a large Kitchen piece well painted 248 a piece of Bull-baiting by
Hondius in a rich carved frame 249 an Original Landscape by Christian 250 a
large Italian Landscape of Hunting 251 K. William on Horseback by Hondius 252
The Duke of Monmouth in a rich carved frame 253 Lucretia by La Mence 254 a
Droll piece by a Dutch master 355 a Flower piece by Bougdan 256 Venus and Cupid
by Varelst 257 a Landscape by a Dutch master 258 a Landscape finely painted, by a
good master 259 Alpheus and Arethusa, by Edema 260 a piece of Flowers by
Teniers 261 a large piece of Flora finely painted 262 Storming a Fort by the
Venetians 263 a Drawing piece by Vander Velder 264 a Man with an Oyster by old
Boon 265 The Tryumphs of Caesar by old Fuller 269 a piece of Boys by Cook 267 a
curious Italian Landscape in an Ebony frame 268 an Emblem of Truth and falsehood
on copper by Lauder 266 Jupiter and Pomona on copper 270 Cleopatra on copper
271 The Three Wise Sisters on copper by Van Heyden 272 Bacchus and Ariadne, by
Van Aka 273 Neptune and Coronis, Ditto 274 a Sea Piece by Porcellus 275 a small
Landscape by Van Die 276 another Ditto 277 a large Conversation piece well
painted 278 Cleopatra Dying on copper by Lauder 279 Venus and a Satyr on copper
by Van Heyden 280 a Silneus by Van Aka 281 Venus in the Cloud finely painted
282 A piece of Nymphs finely painted by a great master 283 Charity finely
painted by an Italian 284 a Flower-piece, by Montingo 285 Fortune on the Sea,
painted by Lemence 286 Neptune painted by the same hand 287 A Fruit-piece by
Varelst 288 a curious Landscape with a Water fall by an Italian 289 Lot and his
two Daughters 290 Apollo and Daphne by Van Aka 291 A Madona finely painted by a
great master 292 Pan and Cirinx by Van Acha 293 A night piece an original by
Vander Pool 294 A Mary Magdalen finely painted 295 a Piece of Beasts by Van
Berkham 296 a large Droll piece by a Dutch master 297 an Ox Head after Rubens
298 a piece of flowers
A Continuation of the Auction of Paintings, at the Marine Coffee-House in
Birchin Lane, will be sold on Thursday, the 11th of this Instant September, at
Three of the Clock in the Afternoon.
1 A Droll-piece, curiously painted by Meyer 2 A House of Conversation, by the
same master 3 A Gunpowder Plot, by Meyer 4 A Beggar, by Croyer 5 a Woman
Quaker, by Haemskirk 6 Lucretia in small, curiously painted 7 A Winter
Prospect, finely painted 8 King William, curiously painted 9 Queen Mary, by the
same hand 10 A Frost-piece, neatly painted 11 A piece of Sea Gods, by Van Oast
12 A Seaport in Zeland, finely drawn on board, in black and white 13 A large
Original Landscape, finely painted by Van Deist 14 General Monk, a half length,
well painted, by a great master 15 King Charles Il a half length, curiously
painted 16 A Original Landscape, painted by Rosse 17 A large Mary Magdalen,
curiously painted by an Italian 18 King William, in small 19 A Landscape fit for
a Chimney-piece 20 The History of Q. Elioner and Fair Rosamond, finely
sketch'd, by a great master 21 Prudence, finely painted by De Ryck 22 Sir
Arthur Haslerig (one of the Parliaments Colonels) a half length, by Dobson 23
A Soldier, an Original, curiously painted 24 A Dutchwoman, an Original, well
painted 25 A Moon, curiously painted by a great master 26 Three Greyhounds
finely painted 27 A Fruit-piece, by a Dutch master 28 A Bitch and Puppies,
after Hondius 29 An Original Landscape with Gypsies, in an Ebony frame 30 The
old Duke of Buckingham, a whole length, finely painted 31 A Landscape with a
Castle, well painted 32 A Mountebank 33 De Wits larg. and best Map of the
World, finely col. with gilded Ledg. and Rowlers 34 King Charles the Second in
little, finely painted 35 A small Landscape 36 a small Fruit-piece, finely
painted on copper 37 Death's Head and Hourglass 38 a Lion and Tiger, an
Original, by Hondius 39 a Stag drinking at a Fountain, by the same master 40 a
large Grace-piece, an Original, by Old Haemskirk 41 a Singing-piece, curiously
painted by the same hand 42 a Sea-piece of Van Deist, in a leather-work frame
43 Bacchus and Ariadne, an Original, by Madena 44 a VVinter-piece curiously
painted by Castro 45 a Fruit-piece, a 3 quarter cloth, finely painted by
Bogdan, in a rich carved frame 46 an Original Landscape, with the Figures by a
Disciple of Lawr sse 47 an Original piece of Still-life, with a Crab, by a
great master 48 Rotterdam in Holland, finely painted in black and white 49 an
Original piece of Beasts, by a great master, in an Ebony frame 50 an Original
piece of a Fleet of Ships at Sea, with their Tenders, finely painted by Zeeman,
the great Ship Painter of his time 51 a small piece, finely painted by Frank 52
a Quaker, by Haemskirk 53 Europe finely painted 54 Ariaedne asleep 55 Summer,
curiously painted by an Italian 56 a dead Dog, an Original, well painted 57 a
piece of Fowl, after Griffiere 58 a dead Stag, finely painted after Snyder 59 a
Swan and Dog, curiously painted by Hondius 60 a Parrot and a Mag pie, by the
same master 61 Two smoakers by Haemskirk 62 a Conversation, by the same hand 63
a Friar, by Haemskirk 64 King William in small, finely painted 65 A House of
Conversation, painted by a Dutch master 66 A curious orig. Draw. of our Lady's
Church at Antwerp by Neifs 67 A piece of Still-life by Bealing 68 A Landscape
with Cattle, an original by Van Did 69 A Landscape by Vanele, the Figures by
Wyck 70 A Fire-piece by the same hand, the figures by Haemskirk 71 A Landscape
after Edima 72 Queen Mary. in an oval frame 73 A Landscape finely painted by Mr.
Christian 74 an original piece of flowers by Montingo 75 an Amorous piece by
Haemskirk 76 a Stag-hunting, curiously painted by Hondius 77 a Sea Triumph, by
a Dutch master 78 a Mair-Maid well painted 79 a Bacchus sporting 80 Queen Mary
finely painted 81 a large Draught of New Foundland, on cloth, curiously
colored 82 a large Landscape with a Seaport, and Marshy Land about it, finely
painted 83 a Lady from the life, a half length, curiously painted by De Ryck,
in a rich carved frame 84 The City of Jerusalem, with descript. about it, on
cloth colored, in a black frame 85 King William, a whole length, in little,
finely painted 86 Queen Mary, a whole length, by the same hand 87 Pandora, on
copper, by Van Heyden 88 a half length Fruit-piece, an Original, by Varelst 89
a small Droll-piece, well painted 90 a Sea-piece by Vande Velde 91 Diana and
Calista, by a Dutch master 92 a Calm by Vande Velde 93 a large Original
Hunting-piece, by Castile 94 The Earl of Doncaster, the late Duke of Monmouth's
Eldest Son, a half length finely painted after Kneller 95 a large Landscape,
well painted, by a Dutch master 96 an Orig. piece of Abraham and Hager, on
board, curiously painted 97 The old Countess of Richmond, in Q. Elizabeth's
time, painted from the life, by Cornelius Johnson 98 The old Earl of Pembrook,
on copper, finely painted by the same master 99 Singers, by old Haemskirk 100
an Obscene-piece, by Haemskirk 101 The Element of Fire, by Hondius 102 a Deal
board, with Father Petres Testament, finely painted 103 a Hare with a Dogs
Head, well painted 104 a Smoaker, by Old Haemskirk 105 a Droll-piece, by the
same master 106 a Friar, by Haemskirk 107 Two Smoakers by Ditto 108 Neptune and
Coronis, by a Dutch master 109 a small piece of Fish 110 a small Fruit-piece,
an Original, by Bogdan 111 The Duke of Beauford, finely painted by a great
master 112 a Flower-piece well painted 113 Twelve of the principal Cities of
Europe, on cloth colored, in a black frame 114 a Flower-piece finely paint. by
that great master Bogdan, in a rich carved frame 115 a Lady, curiously painted
by an Italian master 116 an Orig. Family-piece, the Woman giving her Child
Suck, finely painted 117 a Roman Ruin Curiously painted 118 an Old Dog, by
Hondius 119 a large Landscape, curiously painted by a Dutch master 120 Hercules
between Good and Evil, finely painted 121 a Basket of Flowers curiously
painted, by Montingo, in a rich carved frame 122 an Italian Landscape, an
Original, by Pazero 123 King William, in an Oval frame 124 The Element of Fire,
by Hondius 125 Earth, by the same master 126 a Partridge hanging 127 a Fruit
piece with a Bottle 128 -- another Fruit piece with a Rummer 129 The late Duke
of Monmouth's head in Minature 130 a naked Cleopatra, finely painted by an
Italian master 131 Flora, curiously painted by De Ryck 132 The two
Philosophers, Democritus and Heraclitus, by Haemskirk 133 a curious Sea-piece,
an Orig. by Percellus, in a black oval frame 134 an Original Landscape, finely
painted by Ostade 135 Duke Lauderdales Head in Minature 136 The Duke of York in
his Robes, finely painted 137 a prospect of Shierness, with a Yatch, an Orig.
by Sailmaker 138 a Boy and Girl eating Milk, finely painted by an Italian 139 a
small piece of Still-life, with a Jugg, by a Dutch master 140 Mr. Stenier's
Picture on copper, curiously painted by De Ryck 141 Jupiter and Calista, by
Madena 142 a piece of Calves neatly painted 143 King William finely painted by
a Gentlewoman 144 Queen Mary by the same hand 145 a Landscape with Goats, on
copper, an Orig. in an Oval frame 146 a Sea-storm by Percellus 147 a Dutch
Family, where the Woman is Nursing the Child, by Haemskirk 148 a Shepherd and
Shepherdess, an Original, by Lamence 149 an Original Sketch of Paris, and the
three Goddesses, in a gold frame 150 Countess of Richmond in Q. Eliz days, a
whole length, from the life, by C. Johnson 151 Adam and Eve, an Original, by
Golizius 152 a Festoon of Fruit, well painted 153 a small fruit-piece, an
Original, by Bogdan 154 a large Original Landscape, finely painted, by Griffiere
155 K. James, a half Length, curiously painted by Dixon, in a rich carved frame
156 -- his Queen, a half length, by the same hand 157 a Gentlewoman, a whole
posture, painted from the life, by De Ryck 158 a curious Original Landscape, by
a great master, in an Oval frame 159 a curious Original Sea port in Holland,
with a Yatch and Shipping, in a rich frame 160 a Monky, and an Owl with her
young ones, curiously painted by Hondius 161 a Goose and Dog, by the same
master 162 a Stag-hunting, on a three quarter cloth, curiously painted by
Hondius 163 a Dutch Schoolmaster amongst his Scholars, finely painted by old
Haemskirk 164 a Droll-piece, finely painted by Meyer 165 an old man's head, an
Original, by Ostade 166 a piece of Dogs, an Original, by Van Bouge 167 a
Sea-storm curiously painted by Percellus 168 Flora curiously painted by an
Italian, in a Gold frame 169 a small Landscape, neatly painted, in a black Ivory
frame 170 -- another, by the same master 171 a large piece of Queen Dido 172 a
Hunting of the Heron, by Hondius 173 The Element of Water, by the same master
174 a Snick and Snee between Dutchmen, by old Haemskirk 175 a curious
Historical sketch* finely done by De Ryck 176 K. Henry VII. painted by a great
master, in a black ebony frame 177 an Original Droll piece, finely painted by
Teniers 178 King William finely painted 179 an Ecce Homo, painted by an Italian
180 King Henry the Eighth curiously painted by a great master 181 Two Sybils
heads; most curiously painted by a great master 182 Two more by the same hand
183 a half length Landscape, with a Confort of Birds, curiously painted by
Hondius 184 Esquire Nichols, Secretary to K. Charles l. a half length paint. from
the life, by Dobson 185 a large Original Sea port, finely painted by Vande
Velde 186 The City of Land. and Westminster. on cloth, curiously colored with Ledges
and Rowlers 187 a Man playing on a Violin, curiously painted 188 a Woman
playing on a Citern, by the same hand 189 a prospect of the great Frost from
Temple Bar to London Bridge, an Orig. by Hondius 190 a large Original piece of
Cookery, finely painted 191 The History of Queen Dido. and Aeneas, curiously
painted by a great master 192 Blomaert the Painters head, finely done in black
and white 193 a Dog well painted by a Dutch master 194 Wat Tyler* (the Arch
Rebel) an Orlginal, well painted 195 a Bawdy House, curiously painted by a
Dutch master 196 a large piece of a Woman ^a^hing her self, painted from the
life in a rich frame 197 a large Sea-piece, by Peter's
FINIS.

