AN ESSAY Toward the Recovery of the Jewish Measures and Weights,
Comprehending their Moneys; By help of Ancient Standards, compared with ours of
ENGLAND.

Useful also to state many of those of the Greeks and Romans, and the Eastern
Nations.

By Richard Cumberland, D.D.

IMPRIMATVR. Jo. Battely, R. Rmo. P. Domino Wilhelmo Archi^p. Cantuar. a Sacris
Domesticis. Ex aedibus Lambeth. October. 12. 1685.

LONDON: Printed by Richard Chiswell, Printer to the Royal Society, at the Rose
and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard. MDCLXXXVI.

To the Honorable SAMUEL PEPYS Esquire Secretary of the Admiralty of England, and
President of the Royal Society.
SIR,
BEcause the Improvement of Natural Knowledge, for which the Royal Society was
founded, may be attained in some degree, by recovering some parts thereof,
which the Ancients had, but are now unknown; I thought it not improper to
present to you, who deservedly preside in that Illustrious Society, this
Attempt, to restore those eldest Standards of Measures and Weights, which are
mentioned in the most ancient Records, the Sacred Scriptures, as commonly known
when they were written. But such has been the ignorance and carelessness in
these Matters, of many intervenient Ages, by whose care these things should
have been transmitted to us their Posterity, that most of our late diligent
Enquirers have declared their Opinion to be, that tho the retrieving of them be
highly desirable, yet that success in such an endeavor is scarce to be hoped.

Nevertheless, being desired by some Learned Divines of our Church, in
subserviency to some brief Annotations on the Bible by them intended, to do the
best I could in this Affair, I have by this Treatise attempted to rescue this
most ancient and useful Piece of Learning, from the Grave of Oblivion and
Neglect, into which many despairing Men were casting it, before it was quite
dead, or past recovery.

Learning I call this Knowledge of Weights and Measures, because the first
Constitution of them, and the Reason, and Proportions contained in their mutual
Correspondencies, do import, not only prudent Observation, which is Learning's
Foundation, but also some Elements of Geometry, Arithmetic, and Staticks,
(which are essential Parts of its Superstructure) thence peculiarly called
(...), or the Learning. And for this cause I have been forced, in the
prosecution of this Enquiry, to call in to my assistance some of the easiest
Mathematical Notions, which are as old almost as Mankind, associating thereunto
some Observations of Nature, whose constancy from the beginning gives reason to
believe that they were known early by Men, together with the eldest Works of
Art remaining in the Pyramids, Shekels, and other remains of Eastern and
Western Antiquity, that from the concurrent Evidence of these Aged Witnesses, I
might be enabled to give this my Verdict, which is now brought in before you.

Ancient I may well assert this kind of Learning to be, since it appears by
Moses's Description of the Ark by its Measures, that the Cubit was in use
before the Flood. And amongst the Kingdoms founded after the Deluge, Egypt will
claim very great Antiquity, being by Scripture called the Land of Ham, whose
Son Mizraim is found in the eldest Monuments of Time, in the Head of its Kings.
But here, Proclus assures us, the Art of Measuring was cultivated in the eldest
Times; whence we justly conclude this to have been part of that Wisdom of the
Egyptians, in which St. Stephen affirms Moses to have been universally skilled.

The great Difficulty of finding out the exact Truth in this Case, that is
perplexed between the despair of many; and the contrariety of Opinions of other
Authors, will plead sufficiently for the Pardon of such Defects, as after my
utmost Endeavor, to clear this matter by decisive Evidence, both a Priore, and
a Posteriore, may yet be discovered in this Discourse by your piercing Eyes, or
by the curious Examination of the Members of the Royal Society, to whose
Censure I willingly submit it.

Nevertheless I cannot but hope, that this Essay of mine will be kindly
received by you, even on account of your constant love to its Author. For that
good Affection being begun in your Youth, thirty Years ago, in Magdalen-Colledg
in Cambridg, you have continued to this day, while you have gradually risen
higher in the Favor of our two Great Monarchs successively. And I may justly
reckon, that nothing can break that Friendship, which so great Advantages of
Preferment, on your side, does not abate.

Besides, I believe this Book will be the more welcome into your choice
Library, because the Subject of it, is not any quarrelsome Interest, or
distinguishing Tenet of a Party of Men, but the peaceable Doctrine of Measures
and Weights, which in their General Nature, are the Common Concern of all
Mankind; as being the necessary Instruments of just Dealing, and fair Commerce
between all Nations; which the Admiralty of England (wherein you are so highly
trusted) does promote in Times of Peace, as it secures our Safety in Times of
War. For I may without any arrogance affirm, that not only the Principles and
Method of this Discourse, do give Light to that General Doctrine, but also that
the particular Measures and Weights therein stated, have an universal influence
thereupon. Because these being the most Ancient and Sacred Examples of that
kind, and the Rules of that Righteousness, whereof Noah, the Father of all Men
now living, was a Preacher, it is highly probable that all Nations did derive as
their Pedigree from him; so their Measures and Weights from the imitation of
his, (although length of Time, neglect and corrupt Customs, have made great
Alterations) which I have briefly proved by the Examples of those used by the
most Learned Nations, the Greeks and Romans.

But whatever the Success of my Labors may be as to the Subject or Matter of
this Tract, I am secure, that the calm manner of my writing it will be very
agreeable to the known Candor and Serenity of your Temper: For I have
industriously avoided all appearance of Contention against any Man that may
herein differ from me, so far as not to name the known Diversities of Opinions
of Men about this Matter, and have employed all my Diligence to prove mine own
Assertions, either by Arguments peculiar to them, or by showing the Approach of
Others of the best Reputation to agreement with me.

By this means, and by refusing to make special application of the Generals
here stated, to the many Texts of Scripture whereunto in the Annotations they
must be applied, I have contracted my Thoughts into so small a Book, that it
may seem incongruous to present it to a Man of such great Worth as you are: For
which I shall add no other Apology than this, That if in this little Room mine
Undertaking be not well performed, the shorter Follies are the better; if it
be, I know you will not think the worse of a Book, because in a few Sheets it
determines many and great Difficulties. However, if it were never so great, and
never so well written, I should think it insufficient to answer those great
Obligations under which I am to be,

Honored Sir, Your most humble Servant, Ric Cumberland.
October. 28. 1685.
Appears to be a two vertical page fold-out showing a rule with measurement
labels. The side of a Cubic Epha

Inc: 10.944 A Span or half Cubit

Inc: 3.648 A Palm 3 of them in the half Cubit

dec: Inc..912 A Digit 4 of which make a Palm



an illustration of two sides of a coin. A Shekell with Samaritan Characters.


OF Scripture-Weights and Measures.
CHAP. I. The Reasons, general Principles and Method of this Enquiry.
THE knowledge of Jewish Measures and Weights, has been so much neglected by
most Men; partly, as exceeding difficult, if not impossible to be attained;
partly, as not necessary: that I cannot hope to persuade the generality, even
of Scholars to study it; but find it needful rather to give an Apology for this
attempt to search them out.

I observed a considerable part of the old Testament to be employed in
describing carefully the Measures of Noah's Ark, of the Tabernacle; and the Ark
of the Covenant therein kept; of Salomon's and Ezekiel's Temples, with their
several parts, and sacred Utensils thereunto appertaining. I perceived therein
the most ancient, beautiful, and magnificent proportions of Architecture to be
recorded; and the usefulness of such Buildings to maintain God's public Honor
and Worship to be suggested. I could not but observe, that near a thousand
Years distance from Moses, Ezekiel requires the true old Cubit, Epha, Shekel,
and Gerah, to be used at the Restoration of the Church and State, by him
prophesied of.

These appearing in the Text to have been so long kept unaltered; I thought
they, or some of them, might be spread into other Places, and by the careful
methods of God's Providence, or the diligence, of the Learned, especially
Teachers of his Church, among the Jews or Christians: that the memory of them
might be preserved above 1000 Years more, in order to our more satisfactory
understanding of the old Testament, which was written for the use of the
Christian Church to the end of the World, Romans 15.4. 1 Cor. 10.11.

I was confirmed in these hopes, by considering that the Roman Foot Quadrantal
and Congius in Measures, and their Ounce and Pound (as Villalpandus proves) in
weight, have continued near 2000 Years. And I saw reason to believe, that the
Egyptian Cubit had been preserved there, from the utmost Antiquity of the
Pyramids unto this day.

Moreover, I considered, that this Enquiry was the fitter for a Minister of
God's Church; because the Priests were anciently appointed to be Keepers of the
Standards or Overseers of all Measure and Weight, 1 Chronicles. 23.29. Wherefore,
for exercise of my Arithmetic and Geometry; I resolved, in my younger days, to
try what service they could do me in this Search: and having made then some
progress in this Study, I have been persuaded now to add my riper Thoughts
thereunto, for the service of a Commentary on the Bible, designed by some
Learned Clergymen of our Church.

The Principles on which I proceed are,

I. Standards of Length and Capacity, that may still be seen, and compared with
ours: to which I join Ancient Shekels, which being both Weights and Coins, are
presumed to have been tried and found agreeable in the Balances with
Standdard-weight; and therefore are to our purpose equivalent to Standards: all
these attested by credible Persons, who have seen them, and compared them with
ours.

II. Arithmetical Principles of Reduction, which are demonstrable, and
acknowledged true by all competent Judges. The first Principle bears upon
Sense, assisted by Mechanical Geometry; the second upon Reason, used in the
most simple and abstract Objects thereof, viz. Number and Measure.

The Method I have taken is most natural.

1. To consider the Measure that relates to mere Length, the first or most
simple Dimension which determines Breadth; also if the length of two sides of a
Parallelogram be given.

2. Hence to procced to Measures of Capacity, which have three Dimensions.

3. Lastly, to consider Weight, which supposes a solid Body, but superadds the
notion of Gravitation in a Balance wherein two heavy Bodies are compared.

As to a standard of Length, I considered, that although the Ancients often
speak of the breadth of Barly-Corns to determine it by, and might probably use
them at first to determine a Digit by six of them, as the first perfect Number;
and then by Nature's four Fingers on a Hand, come to determine a hands-breadth,
and by six of these, a Cubit: yet they must necessarily find, in the first Age,
as now, variety, or inconstancy in these Productions of Nature, and therefore
must soon see a necessity of settling a Standard-digit, Hand-breadth, and Cubit,
either by mutual Agreement, or rather by the Authority of the Father of the
Family, the most natural Governor.

Accordingly we find a Cubit mentioned in the building of Noah's Ark, by which
all its Dimensions are determined, and a great number of equal Cubits must be
put into the hands of the multitude of Workmen, which must be employed in
building so great a floating Vessel or Ship; and their Cubits must be made to
agree to some Standard, or common Measure, else the parts of it would be unfit
to join to each other, and could not be made to serve the common End of them
all, the preservation of Noah's Family, and the other living Creatures therein
to be included.

This Agreement of the Oriental Measures in their Digits, and consequently in
their Palms, and Cubits of the same number of Palms, is expressly delivered by
Abulfeda, in words cited by Greaves, in the Preface to Abulfeda's Description
of Chorasmia, which he has set out: where although he acknowledges, that
Cubits of eight Palms were used by the Ancients, and of six by later Writers;
yet he affirms, that in their Digits they all agreed, and their Miles and
Parasangs determined by them, were just the same, although expressed in a less
number of Cubits, when they used a Cubit of eight Palms, and in a bigger number
of Cubits, when they used that of six Palms.

On these Grounds I judged, that if we could recover one old Eastern Standard
Cubit, of a known number of Hands-breadths, we should be able to determine all
their Measures of length by that Standard. Such I conceive and think I have
proved the Egyptian Derah, or Cubit, still kept at Cairo, to be, whose length
is evidently six Palms. And this Mr. John Greaves, Astronomy-Professor at
Oxford, in his Book of the Roman Foot, has given us accurately adjusted, to
the 1000 part of our English Standard-Foot. What use this very Learned Man
intended to make of this Egyptian Cubit, I find not, but heartily wish that he
had lived to finish the Work he intended, about the Measures and Weights of the
Ancients. The Jewish Cubit he has no where stated that I know of; only in his
Epistle Dedicatory to Mr. Seldom, he intimates it to be investigable by help of
the Roman Foot: how he thence could have deduced it, I know not. But since his
Death has deprived us of that great help, which we might have expected from
his great Reading, Travels, Diligence, and Judgment; I have thought fit to
single out this Cubit, from those many Foreign Measures which he has with
equal care adjusted to our Standards, and to try, by comparing it with the best
Notices of the Jewish Cubit, which my Reading has suggested, whether this may
not prove of the same length with the Cubit of the Sanctuary.

In the second place I have endeavored to state the Epha, and other Jewish
Measures of Capacity; deducing it from,

1. A fixed proportion to the Cube of the Cubit.

2. From the proportion of a known part thereof to the Standard Congius of
Vespasian, still at Rome: Besides other useful Methods from the Capacity of
Eggs, which the Rabbis much insist on; and from the Weight and known Number of
solid Inches of Water, that would fill either it, or its known aliquot parts.

Only I think fit here to advertise the Reader, that he is not to be offended,
if he find some difference in the issue of the several Methods of investigating
the Epha: because in all, I pretend not to Mathematical preciseness in
determining it; but in some have stated it as thereabouts. Yet observe that the
finding it by the soild Inches of 1000 Ounces of Water, which is the least,
does not differ a Pint from the biggest Content, deduced Mathematically from
the Cubits Cube. And this small difference might arise, either from the neglect
of Workmen, makers of Measures, who in making an Epha by Cubit-Measure,
considered not the Centesimal parts of an Inch in the Cubit, as my Account
does: or else I may affirm that the Rainwater of those hotter Countries is
lighter than our Fountain Water is; and therefore a thousand Ounces of such
Water would fill up more solid Inches of room, than so many Ounces of our Water
does: and by either of these ways, the difference of the Accounts may be fully
reconciled, or by the concurrence of them both.

Lastly; I descend to consider Shekel, and both to state its Weight exactly,
and thence to deduce other Weights, and their Value in our present Coin. To
which I shall say nothing here, having produced, I think abundant evidence in
that Chapter, which by help of the harmony in the last Chapter will prove all
the other.

By help of this method, I have endeavored to make this Doctrine, hitherto
very intricate and uncertain, more easy, exact, and uniform than I found it;
constantly reducing all our Measures of Length and Capacity to Inch-Measure,
with its Decimals, as more commonly understood than Foot-Measure: reducing also
Weights rather to our Averdupois, with its Decimals, than to the Troy Ounce;
because I have proved the Ounce Averdupois, to be exactly equal to the old
Roman Ounce, and to be just equal to two Jewish Shekels, the conjunction of two
Shekels, I believe, is the true original of it.

By this means, the several parts of this Enquiry, will help to illustarate and
prove the truth of the other; the Measures of length will clear those of
Capacity: and both of them may be proved or restored by help of the Weights.
Only its requisite that the Student hereof should be acquainted with Decimal
Arithmetic, and a little Geometry; otherwise the necessary Reductions, and some
reasonings here made use of, will not be fully understood: However such
Mathematical Reasons may safely be supposed true, because they have been
examined and found so, by the most competent Judges in these cases.

CHAP. II. Of the Ammah, or Jewish Cubit, with the Measures thence determined.
MY designed Method obliges me in this Chapter to do three things:

1. To show, that the present Egyptian Cubit, is their old one, continued to
this day.

2. That the Jews Cubit, or Ammah, was of the same length with the old one of
Egypt.

3. To deduce the length of other Jewish long Measures from hence.

1. This being now in possession, is favored by presumption that it was so
always, or in Moses his time; unless the contrary be showed, and the time of
the change can be sufficiently proved. But of such change, or introduction of a
new Cubit into Egypt, I cannot find the least intimation in History: on the
contrary, we find it asserted by the Arabians, Patricides, and Elmacinus, and
the Nubian Geographer, whose words may be seen in Hottinger's Smegma Orientale,
and other Proofs in Kircher, that the Nilometrion, or Column divided into
Egyptian Cubits, to measure the increase of the overflowings of Nile, are as
old as the time of Joseph's Regency there; yea, and that he first made them.
Now because the same height of its increase, viz. about 16 Cubits, is agreed in
all Ages (Herodotus, and the latest Writers consent herein) to have been
necessary to the fruitfulness of Egypt; it follows, that this Cubit must all
along be the same, sixteen lesser Cubits would be insufficient, bigger would be
prejudicial. Here we have a natural necessity to keep to the same measure from
the time of its first Constitution; and this natural Reason is a thing of so
great consequence to the welfare of a whole Kingdom, that none can be thought
of sufficient to move any Governor to alter it; nor can the inferior People
have any cause, or any ability to make such alteration; the Public Standards
being so religiously kept, first in the Temple of Serapis (besides on the
Nilometrion) and afterward in the Christian Churches.

Hereunto we may add that which Proclus has suggested concerning the Necessity
and Antiquity of Geometry among the Egyptians, that Nile, by its Annual
overflow, used to cover with Mud the common Boundaries of Men's Land, viz.
Stones, and Trenches, or Ditches; whence it became necessary to them, to
determine, preserve, and recover each Man's proper quantity thereof, by exact
measure of its Area or Surface, which must be found, by knowing the length of
the Sides, and of the Perpendiculars of Triangles; or of Rectangular
Parallellograms, into which any Plot of Ground may easily be cast, to which
purpose they must necessarily study the first Elements of Geometry. But I must
add, that they must also necessarily fix, and Reason would advise them to be
constant to some Standard-measure of length; by the Repetition and Parts
whereof, they might determine the lengths of the sides of those Figures that
contained their land. And we know also that their Cubit was their primary
Measure: By this they settled the length of their (...), which Herodotus
mentions as used in Survey, because consisting of a known number of Cubits, it
saved the repeating of a Cubit so often, and was easily resolved into the
number of which it did consist. Wherefore to make any change in their Cubit
would have been very unadviseable, and apt to endanger loss in all sorts of
Men's Estates, which had been settled by another Cubit before* And such change
could never be necessary, because the first settled Cubit, and its Parts, would
certainly attain all the Ends of exact measuring, as well as any other Cubit
that could be introduced, and might justly challenge to be preferred before any
later, by its being settled and in possession already.

The Strength of this Reason may be understood more clearly by help of an
Example, which I remember in Herodotus his Euterpe. There he tells us, that in
Egypt their settled Militia consisted of these two sorts of Soldiers, who were
esteemed above all Tradesmen, the Hermotybie, and the Calasiries. The full
number of the latter of these was 250000 Men, who in courses were their Kings
Guards, and every one of them had to maintain him and his Family, Land (free
from Taxes) whose Area, or Superficial Content, was 12 Arourae, each Aroura
being 100 Cubits on every side; which imports that it was the Square of an 100
Cubits. Wherefore to know how much Land this was in our Measure, I took the
Cairo Cubit an hundred times, which is 182.4 in our foot-measure, as may be
inferred from Mr. Greaves his Table: and by squaring this Number, I find an
Aroura to be 33269.76 Square Feet English; which is considerably less than one
English Acre, for that contains 43560 Square Feet. Hence it will follow that 12
Arourae will amount to 399237.12 Square Feet. And this divided by the Feet of
an English Acre, will quote 9.165: which demonstrates that the Land of each
Calasyry amounted to 9 English Acres, and.165 Millessimals of an Acre, or 1
tenth part of an Acre, 6 Cents, etc. above the 9 entire Acres: And it is clear
that so much good Land lying where he places it, might maintain any of them
with his Family very well. But if this Cubit were changed, whereby so many
thousand Estates were set out, it must needs make a great change in all these
Estates, consisting of so much Land set out by this first number of Cubits;
which are now supposed to be all altered, and great disorder must be expected
among these Men in whom the strength of the Kingdom chiefly lay. For if a
longer Cubit were taken, those of them that were first served, would have more
Land in each Aroura; but then there would be none left for those that should
come to be served last; or else they must trespass upon the Land that did not
belong to the Militia, which would beget Discontent and Sedition: if they took
a less Cubit, this would lessen all the Soldiers Estates, more than any Man
unskilled in Geometry can expect, and would beget a Mutiny, for want of a
sufficient Maintenance for the Soldiers and their Families, as may appear by
this Instance: Suppose that instead of the Cairo-Cubit the Arourae of the
Calasyries should be set out by the Roman-Cubit, which is not quite 4 Inches
shorter, amounting, in our English Foot-measure, to 1.45, as may be inferred
from Mr. Greaves his Table. An hundred such Cubits are 145 Feet, and the Square
thereof making an Aroura, would be 21025 square Feet, and 12 such Arourae would
be 252300 square Feet, which amount to little above 5 Acres, and three
quarters, or Roods. Whereby its evident that much above a third part of every
Soldier's Estate would be taken away; whence nothing less than great Distress
in all their Families, and Rebellion against their Governors must be expected.

Concerning the Antiquity of these Arourae, I cannot find when they were
introduced into Egypt; For though Herodotus do not mention them till he speaks
of Apries King of Egypt, whom Chronologers agree to be that Pharaoh who is
called Hophra in our Bibles; yet he supposes them settled on the Military Men
before his Time, and confines them to twelve of those Nomi, which are Shires or
Praefectures in Egypt, of which Sesostris, the most Martial King of Egypt, was
the Author or Founder; which makes me conjecture that he settled these Arourae
on the Soldiers, as well as that Division of the whole Land into 36 Nomi. If
this be admitted, they were much elder than Moses his Time, according to the
first Book of Eusebius his Canon Chronicus in Graec. where he from Africanus,
and he out of Manetho the Egyptian Priest, places Sesostris in the twelfth
Dynasti, and afterward places Moses in the eighteenth. Yet they will be of
Antiquity sufficient to my Concern, if Sesostris settled them about Moses's
Time; to which the Learned Bishop Usher makes Sesostris contemporary. But
however this be stated, when I compare 100 Cubits, the side of an Egyptian
Arourae, with 1000 Cubits, the side of the Side of the Levites Glebe-land in
their Suburbs, and observe the decuple proportion exactly kept between them, I
cannot but think both these Measures were used in the same Age; and that the
way of setting out Land in the Jewish and Egyptian Countries, was near of Kin
to each other, which serves my main End; although it be more than I was obliged
to prove in this Paragraph, where I undertake only to evince that the Cubit in
Egypt could not easily be altered, without making great disturbance, or making
new Measures to all their Estates hereby determined, which I suppose I have
proved.

Besides, if it had been altered, it is reasonable to presume it must be by some
of the great Empires who conquered Egypt, who would have introduced their own
Cubit: but that was not done, for the Babylonian Cubit of five Palms is
shorter, that of six Palms the same with this (as we shall hereafter show) and
so needed make no alteration. The Greek and Roman Cubits are known to be
shorter also than this: and the Turks, under whom they now are, have not
introduced their Pike, corrupted of (...) or Cubit; for whereas there are two
Standard-Pikes at Constantinople, they are both much longer than this now at
Cairo, as may be seen in Mr. Greaves Table of Measures, compared with the Roman
and English Foot.

I shall add, as over-weight, to conclude this first Assertion, a probable
Argument founded upon this probable Principle; that the Ancient Architects,
being left to their liberty of designing the outmost Lines of a stately
Building, would choose to determine them by some round even Number of the most
known Measure whereby they wrought. So God himself designed the Ark's
Dimensions in such numbers of Cubits; its length 300, its breadth 50, its
height 20; all round even numbers: the like even numbers we find chosen in the
measures of the Temple, 2 Chronicles. 3.3 length 60, breadth 20 Cubits; and the
Oracle a perfect Cube of 20 Cubits in length, breadth, and height, 1 Kings
6.20. So the Learned Greaves found the Marble Stones of the Pavement of the
most accurately built Pantheon at Rome, the larger of them precisely three
Roman Feet, the less of them just half so much: which shows they took care to
determine them precisely by their most known Measure, the Foot, or its most
obvious part, the half Foot; and though the Number be not even, yet constant
respect is had to even Feet, or equal division into Halves. Such respect
therefore I hoped to find the old Egyptians to have had to their Measure the
Cubit, in building the greatest Pyramid, and in determining the outward
Measures of the Tomb contained in it.

Wherefore, remembering that Mr. Greaves had given us exactly in our English
Foot-Measure, the sides of the Base of the greatest Pyramid; and the length of
the Tombstone contained in it, both which fall into odd Numbers and Fractions
of our Measure, by which they were not designed; I resolved to try the
Reduction of this Foot-measure (which he had taken) into Cairo-Cubits, and I
found them both to fall into round very convenient Numbers of Cairo-Cubits,
making very reasonable allowance for such small error, as may justly, or rather
necessarily be supposed to have fallen out, either in the first measuring of
the Pyramid's Base, or in the late measuring which Mr. Greaves performed, and I
least suspect.

Particularly, First, the sides of the square Base of the greatest Pyramid are
delivered, p. 68, of his Pyramidographia, to be 693 English Feet. For reduction
these must be divided by 1.824, which is his length of the Cairo-Cubit in our
foot-measure, the quote is, 379.934, which is so very little short of 380
Cairo-Cubits, that I think it reasonable to believe, that the old Architects
designed just this even number of Egyptian Cubits. For if we suppose Mr.
Greaves to have missed but.12 of a Foot, which is not one Inch and an half in
taking this long Measure of near 700 Feet, then the side must be put 693.12:
this Number divided by 1.824, will give precisely, 380.

Or rather, if we suppose the old Architects Cubit to have been but one
thousanth part of a Foot shorter than the present Standard (and such error is
scarce perceptible by Men's Eyes* and there is greater difference in allowed
Measures tried by the Standard, and ordinarily used) its demonstrable that such
a Cubit being repeated 380 times, would make the side of the Base shorter than
now it is found; for 380 multiplied into 1.823, produces but 692.74, which is
shorter than Mr. Greaves has found it. Wherefore since such small difference
from Mathematical Exactness of Computation must necessarily fall out, in
designing such vast Foundations, either* from imperceptible difference in the
Measure applied, or from inequality of Ground, or oversight of Workmen: I
conclude, that the Measure at first intended, was just 380 Egyptian Cubits. And
I incline to it the rather, because the Square of this Number, which is the
Area of the Pyramid's Base, is as remarkable a Square as can be pitched upon in
the whole Table of Powers of Number, viz. 144400, and might therefore more
easily please the mind of the Designer.

2. In like manner I remembered, that Greaves, p. 96, 97, gives the length of
the Exterior Surface of the Tomb, contained in the midst of the greatest
Pyramid, to be in our Foot-measure 7.296. This reduced into Cairo-Cubits, by
dividing by 1.824, gives just four such Cubits: and if there be found a
difference in the Millesimal Parts of the Foot-measure, (which I cannot now
correct, having not the Book by me, but my own Notes taken out of it) I am sure
it is less than a Barly-corns breadth.

Wherefore that Tomb, or Stone-Coffins length, may reasonably be judged to have
been designed just four of their ancient Cubits. And this designment could not
agree so exactly with the same number of their present Cubits, unless the old
Measure had been continued unto this day. Thus this Tomb will preserve to us
the old Egyptian Cubit, four times repeated, as the Monument of Cossutius at
Rome preserves the old Roman Foot: but with more significancy concerning the
usual proportion observed of old in humane Bodies; that in most comely shaped
Bodies, the length, from the Elbow to the Fingers end (called a Cubit) being
four times repeated, gives the Stature or Tallness of a Man. And the differnce
between the length of the hollow part of this Coffin, fitted to his Body that
should lie therein; and the length of its exterior Surface might instruct the
beholders how much shorter he was than those elder and taller Men, from whose
Arms, it is credible that the Egyptian Cubit was taken at the first; this
difference was very near an English Foot.

Upon review of both these Instances, I cannot believe that the old Egyptian
Builders of this Pyramid and Tomb, could make them by chance to agree with such
well-chosen even Numbers of the Cairo-Cubit, if the same Measure had not then
been in use, and had not guided them in their Work; it being scarce possible
that they should design and work by some other Measure, and pitch upon other
fitting Numbers of such Measure, and yet that the Work remaining should so
justly agree with both other well-chosen Numbers and Measures, and with these
also.

For proof of the second Proposition, viz. That the Jews Cubit was of the
length or measure with the old (or new) Egyptian, I offer some general Evidence
from Historical Observation of these and older Times, useful to this and other
Measures.

2 dly, Particular Evidence.

1. The Mosaical History assures us, that the Jews Progenitors went into Egypt,
a then flourishing Kingdom, in the condition of a Family of about 70 Men, and
were there Subjects at the best, who must use in all Commerce, the legal
Measures of the Kingdom in which they dwell, and not long after were made
Bondmen, who cannot be supposed to be allowed to make Laws to keep distinct
Measures and Weights from the Nation which they serve. This little and low
Estate they were in about 200 Years before their deliverance, and therefore
must needs know the Egyptians Measures, but cannot be presumed (and proof there
is none) to have any distinct peculiar to themselves.

Wherefore Moses often mentioning in his Laws, Weights and Measures, must needs
mean, and by the Israelites be understood to speak of such as they know before
in Egypt: for he never constitutes in his Law a new Cbit or Epha; and therefore
presumes them to know what Measures those words signify, by former use of them.
Now it is evident that they and their Forefathers for above 200 Years must
needs use the Measures of that Kingdom in which they were Subjects, and in
whose Markets they must buy and sell for so long a time.

And certainly it was neither unlawful nor dishonorable, in any comparison
with Slavery, to use the public Measures of a Kingdom, famous for greatest
skill in the Art thereof: on the contrary, Moses is celebrated for being
skilful in all Egyptian Learning, of which Geometry and Arithmetic, both used
in measuring, are the best parts.

Nor were the Jews so shy of imitating Egyptians, but that they did many of
them receive a strong tincture of their Idolatry, their greatest degeneracy;
and therefore would more easily comply with them in so lawful a practice as the
use of their Measures was.

Besides, to take away all stumbling at this, I consider that it is highly
probable that the Egyptians received their Measures from their first King's
(Mizraim) Authority, and he received them from his Ancestors, Ham and Noah: and
so, I believe, did both Abraham's Family receive the same Measure from Noah, by
the hands of Sem; and the Canaanites, with whom they dwelt before they came
into Egypt, by the hands of Ham.

That the Philistines also in Canaan, before and after Moses his Time, used the
same Cubit with the Egyptians, may be probably argued, partly from their
descent from Mizraim, Genesis 10.6, 14. Partly from Herodotus in Euterpe his
Affirmation, that the Cubit in Samos (which Bochartus has proved peopled from
Palestine, i.e. the old Philistines) was the same with that in Egypt. For it is
certain, that Men's Children, and the Colonies they send abroad, use to retain
the Measures of their Ancestors.

Thus although the Jews Cubit be the same with that of Egypt; yet the
Israelites might use it before as well as after their descent thither, both
receiving it from Noah and his Sons.

To which purpose I observe;

1. That there is no evidence that different Measures or Weights were yet
introduced into those parts of the World.

2. It Is evident by the Bishop of Armagh's Annals, that the Kingdom of Egypt
was founded in the Year of the World 1816, which was 190 Years before the Death
of Noah.

Now, Civil Government cannot be supposed to be without determinate Measures
and Weights: nor is there any reason to believe, that Ham or Mizraim, in the
lifetime of Noah, could be unacquainted with those which he used, or could see
any cause to alter them in his Lifetime. They may justly be supposed to have
had occassion in that time of 190 Years, to have frequent commerce with him,
and his Descendents, dwelling in other Lands: and such Commerce would be
facilitated by keeping the same Measures and Weights, but would be made more
troublesome by changing them.

3. It appears by the same Chronology, that from the death of Noah, to Joseph's
Promotion and Authority in Egypt, there were but 283 Years, in which interval
no change of Measures, from what Noah's Family used, is read of. And that his
Regency continued 80 Years; so that from his Death to their departure out of
Egypt, were but 144 Years, to Moses his Birth but 64 Years.
And several Arabian Writers affirm, that Joseph, during his Regency there, set
up the Nilometrion, or Column, for measuring the Increases of Nile; which
Column is now divided by this Egyptian Cubit, and must reasonably be judged
from the first to have been divided by the same; because, in all Ages the same
number of Cubits, in the overflow, have been esteemed necessary for the judging
of Plenty or Scarcity like to follow in that Country. And there is reason to
believe, that the Column when divided by him into Cubits, was divided according
to a Cubit that had been used and known before his Time, above 283 Years,
constancy in these things being usual in all settled Dominions, is to be
presumed rather than change, of which there can no proof be offered. And there
are many Instances of Measures being preserved unaltered for a longer time than
that, as we shall hereafter show.

Now I only suggest, that the Numeration by Decads, has been kept among all
Nations, that I know of, from the eldest times of History; and yet it is as
alterable by humane Authority, or Agreement, as the Measure by Cubits and
Epha's etc. or as the Cize of such Measures. Now that these Measures and
Weights were of elder use than Jacob's descent into Egypt, may be argued;

1. From the Measure whereby Noah's Ark was designed, viz. round even Numbers
of Cubits, and such Cubits as were used and known in Moses his Time, else it
would have been in vain to have described its Measures by a word whose sense
was unknown. And if Noah's Cubit had been a different Measure from the Mosaical
Cubit, Moses must have reduced that into the then known Measure, before he
wrote the History, which we have reason to believe he did not; because it
cannot be expected that such different Measure would, upon reduction, have
fallen into such even round Numbers as Moses sets down; its length just 300
Cubits, breadth 50, height 20. The same reason holds in 16 Cubits height of the
Flood above the Hills. So also we read of Sarah's preparing three Seahs of
Meal, which are an Epha (the chief Measure of Capacity, and the sixth part of
the Cube of a Cubit, as hereafter I shall show) long before the Egyptian
Bondage.

We have also Shekels, the Original Weight mentioned in Abraham's Time, both in
Abimelecb's Gift to Sarah, as the Septuagint and Targum Onkelos express it,
Genesis 20.16: and in his purchase from Ephron the Hittite, in the Hebrew Bible,
Genesis 23.15, 16. And just before Jacob's going into Egypt, his Money out of
Canaan passing by its Weight (which therefore must be agreed on) in Egypt, Genesis
43.21. And there being no Mark to distinguish these Weights and Measures before
the descent into Egypt, from those of the same name mentioned by the same
Writer after it; it is to be presumed, they signify the same quantities
exactly, else the Word must be equivocal, which ought not to be presumed
without full proof.

2. For special evidence of the equality of the Jewish and Egyptian Cubit, it
will be requisite to reduce this Cubit to our Inch-measure, and Decimals
thereof. Whereas Mr. Greaves has given us it from Cairo-Standard, in English
Foot-measure, thus, 1.824, that is, 1 Foot, 8 Tenths of a Foot, 2 Centesimals,
and 4 Millesimals of the same Foot; most Englishmen will more clearly apprehend
its length, when reduced thus, 21.888, that is 21 Inches, 8 Tenths of an Inch,
and as many hundredth and thousanth parts of an Inch.

A Geometric Method to exhibit to the Eye, those small parts of an Inch, as in
the Scheme hereunto annexed.

The whole Line is an English Foot divided into 12 Inches; each Inch also is
divided into Parts called Decimals. Only I have annexed to this Foot, a very
short Line, that is but the twentieth part of an Inch, or, 05, five Centesimals;
because our Foot, with this small addition, is (proxime) the side of a Cube,
containing the true Epha, or Bath, as I have endeavored to demonstrate in its
proper place.

The first ten Inches thereof, numbered from the right hand toward the left,
are contrived so as to be the Base of a Right-angled Triangle, whose Cathetus
is but one tenth part of an Inch high, and its Hypotenuse is drawn sloping from
the top of the Cathetus to the beginning of the Base. The use of this Triangle
is this; Parallel Lines to the Cathetus, taken between this Base and this
Hypotenuse, with Compasses, or observed by our Eyes, are true Centesimal or
Millesimal Parts of our Inch, often mentioned in this Treatise: they are
Centesimals, when taken from the just Inches of the Base; Millesimals, when
from the Decimals of an Inch. So a Perpendicular from 4 in the Base up to the
Hypotenuse, is just 4 Centesimals: and if it be taken from 8 tenths of an Inch,
further toward the left hand, the Perpendicular will be 4 Centesimals, and 8
Millesimal Parts of an Inch; which being added to 3 Inches, and 6 Tenths,
already actually divided on the Line* will give us a precise Jewish Palm*
So.912 the Digit, and (Inches) 10.944 is the Jewish Span, or half a Cubit; and
therefore being doubled, gives the whole Cubit. Wherefore these Lengths are
marked in a distinct Line near the Base of our Triangle, that the reductions to
Inch-measure made in this Discourse, may be more fully understood by beginners
in this Skill.

Arg. 1. From the Number and determinate measure of 6 such Palms agreed
generally by Christians, Jews* Persian and Arabian Mahumedans to constitute the
Jewish Cubit: The Sum or Result of which, agrees exactly with the Egyptian
Cubit now specified. Among Christians, I will only mention Jerome on Ezekiel,
and elsewhere generally. The Jews may be seen cited in Arias Montanus his Tubal
Cain; in Waser, and Hottinger's Preface to his Book de Cippis. Persians and
Arabians own this in generaller terms concerning the Eastern Cubits, elder and
later, as Greaves has produced them in his Tract of the Roman Foot, and his
Preface to the Description of Chorasmia, by Abulfeda.

I avoid the dispute about different Cubits; it seems to me all founded in the
more indefinite signification of Ammah; which it is certain from the Arabic,
signifies often generally any Measure, whereby the Dimensions of Bodies are
adjusted. Now because this may be done by any known length divided into known
parts, or repeated as need requires; it is no wonder if it were done sometimes
by a Rule divided into five handbreadths, sometimes by one of six, other times
by one of eight hands breadth, as convenience might prompt. But the legal
settled or sacred Standard, most properly or peculiarly called Ammah, or Cubitus
Verissimus, as the Vulgar Latin translates it, in Ezekiel. 43.13. this all agree
to be of six Palms.

This proper Standard-Cubit only I took as the rule of other Measures; and I
believe the Scripture always means this, when it uses Ammah without any mark
of distinction or limitation in the Context: for words of different
significations being set alone, are to be understood in their most famous or
noted sense; else there will be so much place for equivocation, that the use of
all Speech and Writings, even of the Bible, will be destroyed. And the
Scripture marking out a distinction in a few places, shows it was carefully
written; and that that distinction is not to be understood, where not
expressed. Non est distinguendum, ubi lex non distinguit. Exceptio sirmat
regulam i^ non exceptis.

Particularly; I observe non intimating a difference of Cubits, but one in
Moses his Books, Deuteronomy. 3.11* where speaking of the Dimensions of the Bed of Og,
a Foreigner from Israel, who therefore had not respect to the Jewish Standard,
he says, his Bed was measured by the Cubit of a Man, i. e. an ordinary Man,
not like him; and a more precise Measure in this case was not at all needful.
The other two places that intimate some difference of Cubits, are in Ezekiel. 40
5. and 43.13. Now he writing while he was Captive in Babylonia, must be thought
to have observed that Measure differing from the Jewish Standard, was there
often used, even by the Jews also, who must use the Measures allowed in the
Kingdom where they live; and therefore being to give them the Measures of the
future Temple, he was obliged to intimate that the Cubits whereby they were
expressed, were not such as in this Foreign Kingdom they often used, but longer
by one hands breadth.

This being premised, I pursue my Argument, by showing, that the Eastern People
determined their Digit, and consequently this handbreadth, by the breadth of
six Barly-Corns making a Digit, 24 a handbreadth, as appears, not only by the
Jews, but by the Nubian-Geography, Ali Kushgi, Abulfeda, etc. taking ordinary
Barley; yet the better and plumper, rather than the worse: Optimum in suo genere
mensura reliquorum. Now six such Grains (any Man's Eyes may satisfy him) will
make above 9 Tenths of an Inch English; and although there be some inconstancy
in different Grains, it may rationally be fixed in order to a settling a
Standard, at.912 of an Inch, as a middle rate, which is sometimes exceeded by
Nature, but oftener she falls short of it; that is, the Eastern Digit may be
exactly stated at 9 Tenths of our Inch, 1 Centesimal, 2 Millesimal parts
thereof.

Wherefore since there be 4 Digits in a Palm, it shall be by Multiplication
of.912 into 4, 3.648; that is, 3 Inches, 6 Tenths, etc. And the Digit.912,
multiplied by 24, produces 21.888, which is just the Cairo-Cubit, as was to be
demonstrated.

Here observe, that this Hands-breadth, and Digit, agree well enough with
middle-siz'd Men among us; and these may well be kept constant in this Sandard,
as so agreeable, both to the nature of the Vegetable Barley, and the animated
useful part of Man, which were before Standards, and these derived from them:
whereas in Measures more lately constituted, as the Greek and Roman Cubit and
Foot, it is manifest that they make their different Palms, and Fingers-breadth,
by first fixing the Cubit or Foot, then dividing the Foot into 12 parts, and
calling them, though different in the several Notions, by the Names of Fingers
and Palms, to which they are somewhat near, but with great uncertainty.

My first Argument bore upon Natures usual bigness of Barley, compared with the
agreed number of Fingers-breadths and Palms in the Jews Cubit, adjusted with
the Egyptian: My Second shall be from Divine Authority, of Ezekiel. 43.13.
parallel to 40.5. describing the Cubit the Altar should be built by, to be a
Cubit and a Hands-breadth. The most natural Exposition of which place, I
conceive to be this, that they should determine the Altar's Measure by a Cubit,
which should contain one Hands-breadth more, than that Cubit which they now
ordinarily saw and used in the Babylonians Country, where now they were
Captives.

Hence I infer two things useful to my purpose.

1. That the Hands-breadth was a Measure fully known and agreed of in
Babyloniae, the same that in Judaea: For if they had differed in this, as they
did in the usual Cubit, it had been in vain for the Prophet to describe the
Sacred Cubit by an additional Hands-breadth, whose true quantity was as unknown
to them, as the true quantity of the Sacred Cubit is intimated to be: he ought
first to have stated a Sacred or true Jewish Hands-breadth; but he not doing
so, and yet purposing to lead them to an exact Jewish Cubit, by these words
implies the Hands-breadth used in Babylon and Judaea to be the same. Other
Hands-breadths, as the Roman and Greek, differ considerably, as their Feet do.

2. Because it is agreed that the Jewish Cubit was just six Hands-breadths, and
affirmed here to be one more than the Babylonian; it follows that the
Babylonian now used, was but of five Hands-breadths in length: wherefore in our
Inch-measure, if we substract the Hands-breadth 3.648, from 21.888 the Cubit,
the Remainder is the Babylonian Cubit 18.240, which is not a quarter of an Inch
longer than ours. And the addition of this Palm to 18.24, makes the Egyptian
Cubit as before: Or rather thus, 6 multiplied into the Hands-breadth 3.648,
produces 21.888.

I am confirmed in belief of such a Babylonian Cubit often used, as differed in
number of Hands-breadths, but agreed in the quantity of every single one, by
these things;

1. By a Testimony out of the Misne Chilaim, cap. 17. cited by Arias Montanus;
that there were two Standard-Cubits kept in Susan, which he referrs to, one of
five Palms, the other of six. And Dr. Castle in his Lexicon in Ammah, proves
from Jophe Toar, that there were even in the Sanctuary, Cubits (or Measures) of
5, 6, and 10 Palms; which might all be of convenient use, for the measure of
little and greater Lengths, if they agreed in the quantity of the Palms whereof
they were made; because all Sums of Length measured by them, might easily be
divided by 6, and so reduced to the settled Standard of six Hands-breadths; but
otherwise such diversity of Measures must breed infinite confusion and
uncertainty.

So we can find the number of our Yards in any length, as a Mile, although we
measure it either with a two-foot Rule, that is shorter, or with a Pole of 16
Foot and an half, that is so much longer; but still the Standard-foot must be
supposed in both of them to be fixed; only we find it convenient, both for
dispatch and truth, in measuring greater Lengths, to use such longer Measures,
as have in them the shorter, often exactly repeated.

2. By a Testimony of Abulfedas, who in the Preface to his Description of
Chorasmia, informs us, that the Ancients used another Cubit, consisting of 32
Digits (that is, eight Palms) besides that of 24 Digits, or 6 Palms: yet this
made no real difference in their Measures, because they all agreed in the
Quantity of the Digits, and in the Sum of them, and consequently in the
Quantity and Sum of the Palms.

3. By a passage in Herodotus, (who flourished not much above 100 Years after
Ezekiel) in his Clio, describing the height of the Wall of Babylon to be 200
Cubits, adds for greater exactness, that they were Royal Cubits, which are
three Fingers-breath longer than the (...), moderatesiz'd Cubit.

Hereby he seems to intimate these two things to my purpose.

1. That the Babylonians had, and might most obviously have been conceived by
his Reader, to have used a middle-sized Cubit, meaning, one like the Greek
Cubit; for to such Readers use he wrote: but he informs them, that in
determining the Wall's Height, they used a longer, called the Royal Cubit.

2. He informs us, that that Royal Cubit, was 3 Fingers-breadth longer than the
other. Here by Herodotus his Fingers-breadth, I think we must understand, Greek
Inches, which they called (...), because he wrote for the use of the Greeks,
who must not be supposed generally to understand the Babylonian Fingers-breadth.

This sense of Herodotus being admitted, we have here intimated all that I
designed in this Argument to prove; viz. That the Babylonians had two Cubits;
one of a cize near agreeing with the Greeks, which differs very little from our
English Cubit; and which being shorter, might be oftener used: another, a
Hands-breadth longer: for three Greek Inches are somewhat more than three of
ours, and the Eastern Hands-breadth we have showed to be but three of our
Inches with a Fraction annexed, which was too nice a Matter for the Historian
to take notice of.

And agreeably hereto I find, that Almamon the Learned Calif of Babylon, about
900 Years ago, did make use of such a Royal Cubit, consisting of six Palms, in
the measuring of a Degree of a great Circle of the Earth on the Plain Sinaar.

The Issue of these Observations, in relation to the Text of Ezekiel, is this;
that whereas there was a less Cubit of five Palms, often used in Babylonia, the
Prophet informs them, that they should not determine the Altar's Measure by his
numbers of Cubits in that short one; but in the larger Cubit, called the Great
Cubit, Ezekiel. 41.8. which had a Palm added thereunto; and was the fitter, as
agreeing with both the ancient Measure of the Sacred Buildings; and also with
the Royal Standard of the Prince under whom now they were. Which Royal Cubit, I
suppose to have been kept there from the Ages nearest to Noah; as the Egyptian,
with which it agrees, we have suggested to have been settled by Mizraim, and
derived from Noah.

In passing through this Argument, we have observed a near agreement between
the Babylonian lesser Cubit of five Palms, and the Greek Cubit, which Herodotus
supposes known by his Readers. I will now express it precisely, that of
Babylon in our Inch-measure, I said, was 18.24; that of the old Greeks was,
18.13; the difference is not a Barly-corns breadth. And our Cubit is no more
less than the Greeks.

This makes me conjecture, that the first Planters of Greece coming from Asia,
brought thence that Measure: a little neglect, in process of time, might easily
make those small Alterations. Agreeably hereunto I find in these Western and
Northern Parts, very near approaches to the Eastern Cubit of six Palms: for
such is the Ell at Frankford on the Main, at Florence, and at Dantzick; and
such is the Standard Foot at Riga; as may be seen in the Table of Foreign
Measures, given us by Sir Samuel Moreland.

Third Proof taken from the Measure of the outward Wall of the Temple, which is
given by Josephus and the Talmudists, in very different Measure; whereof
Josephus his Measure seems to be the Jewish Stadium, or Furlong, composed of
400 Jewish Cubits; and the Talmudist's Measure is 500 Roman Cubits; which they
may reasonably be presumed to measure by, because when they wrote, the Jewish
Polity had been dissolved some Centuries of Years; but the Roman Monarchy, and
consequently the knowledge of their Measures, flourished. By comparing these,
Jacobus Capellus has stated the Jewish Cubit to be to the Roman, as five is to
four; which is the only way to reconcile Josephus with the Talmudists, in a
Matter wherein they may both be presumed to have been good Witnesses,
sufficiently skilful, careful and faithful. For proof of this Proposition of
Jewish and Roman Cubits, Jacobus Capell. de Men's. etc. may be consulted. An
Epitome of his Argument is delivered by his Kinsman Ludovicus Capellus, in his
Discourses about the Temple, printed in our Polyglot. Page 23. Col. 1. about
the middle.

That which I have to supperadd to him, is;

1. To reduce the Roman, and thence his Jewish Cubit, to our English
Inch-measure.

2. To show that his Jewish Cubit, so found, comes within a Barly-corns breadth
of the Egyptian Standard; which yet I suppose he knew nothing of, but which is
my main Concern to prove. These I shall soon dispatch together.

For Reduction, observe, that the Roman Foot, on the Monument of Cossutius, now
by most thought the truest, in English Inches and Decimals thereof, is 11.604;
to which if we add half thereof, we have the Roman Cubit in our Inches, 17.406.
Then by Capellus his Proportion, as 4 is to 5, so is the Roman Cubit 17.406, to
the Jewish 21.757. Thus his Argument, from the measure of the Temple's outward
Wall, finds such a Jewish Cubit; as wants little above one tenth part of an
Inch of the Cairo-Cubit. And it is no wonder, if in such a length as a Furlong,
such a little quantity be mist (from the Cubit) which is less than a
Barly-corns breadth: therefore I may even hence conclude, that these Cubits
agreed.

Nevertheless I will suggest, that there is another Roman Foot a little
different from the forementioned, that on the Monument of Statilius, which in
our Inches is 11.664: if this be rather chosen, (as it has some great
Approvers) the Roman Cubit will be 17.496; and by the former proportion, the
Jewish will be 21.87; which is nearer our aim, the Difference being only one
Centesimal part of an Inch* But the former Approach satisfies me.

The fourth Argument, shall be from the consent of some Learned of the East, if
not to the Word, or particular Standard that I point at, yet to a Measure
agreeing therewith, which is the thing I seek. Here I shall first mention
Abulfeda, whom Kircher in his Oedipus cites, expressly affirming, that the Jew's
legal Cubit, was equal to the Egyptian Cubit of 24 Digits, which he calls their
less Cubit, in comparison with a longer Measure sometime used by the Egyptians,
consisting of 32 Digits, or eight Palms. Now Abulfeda being King of Hamath, a
City and Territory very near Judea, and not far from Egypt, and exceeding
curious and diligent in the Doctrine of Measures in the East, I confide very
much in his Testimony, agreeing with such Reason as I have before produced. But
Kircher appears not to have known the Egyptian Standard, and therefore could
not improve this Testimony of Abulfeda, to the determining of
Scripture-Measures; and Abulfeda being a Mahumedan Prince, although not
unacquainted with the Bible, yet took no care to explain the peculiar Measures
thereof, which is my Business.

Another Testimony I shall offer from a Learned Jew, Rabbi Gedaliah, who
deduceth his Assertions from the Doctrine of Maimonides, who so thoroughly
understood the Talmudists, that his Judgment may well represent the sense of
all the Jews. But I take it rather from Gedaliah than the rest; because he,
under the conduct of Maimonides, and other Jews, has adjusted their Notion of
their Cubit to a known Standard among us, viz. to the Standard of the Cubit or
Ell of Bononia, where he resided. This Testimony of his may be seen cited at
large, and translated by Hottinger, in the Preface to his Tract, de Cippis
Hebraicis: And the Bononian Ell is given us reduced to English Inch-measure, by
my Honored Friend Sir Samuel Moreland, and by Sir Jonas More, to be 25.76
Inches and Decimals.

Now, Gedaliah affirms two things in his Adjustment:

1. That 14 Jewish Digits are equal to half the Bononian Cubit: Whence I infer,
that 28 such Digits are equal to the whole Bononian Cubit; and consequently
that the Bononian Cubit, 25.76, being divided by 28, the Quote will be a Jewish
Digit. This Quote is in Decimals of our Inch.92, a little bigger than the
Jewish Digit by me formerly assigned, viz., 912; and therefore 24 such Digits
will give a Jewish Cubit somewhat longer than mine, viz. his will be 22.08,
which exceeds mine a little above the breadth of a Barly-corn, viz. 2 Tenths of
an Inch.

But then in the second place he affirms, that the Jewish Cubit is equal to of
the Bononian, wanting one Digit.

To examine this, and to compare it with his former Assertion, I found it
necessary to divide the Bononian by 8:8) 25.76 (3.22; and this Quote so found,
must be multiplied by 7, the Product is 22.54. Hence substract 1 Digit (by his
Account).92; the Remainder is affirmed by him to be the Jews Cubit 21.62. Now,
this is less than his former Account by.46, very near half an Inch; and is also
less than the Cubit I assign 21.88, by above a quarter of an Inch, viz. by.26.

Thus it is plain that my Length assigned to their Cubit, lies between his two
Mistakes, which contradict each other; Nevertheless, I think he has done us
very good Service by the approaches to Truth, which are in both his Mistakes:
and I see reason to believe, that in both these Attempts to express the Jewish
by proportion to the Bononion-Cubit, he slipped only, through want of skill or
accuracy in the Doctrine of Fractions, which if he had understood, he might
have made his Accounts to agree better. However, the worst of his Accounts
differs but a quarter of an Inch from me, and his other is nearer agreement; so
that he differs more from himself than from me, or is nearer agreement with me
than with himself. And by his so near approach to me on each side, he confirms
me in my Opinion, that I have assigned a Standard sufficiently agreeing with
the Doctrine of the Jews concerning their own Nation's ancient Cubit, which is
all I undertook in this Argument.

After I had finished this Discourse, it was suggested to me, by a Learned
Friend, that Rabbi Gedaliah's words, wherein he affirms the Jewish Cubit equal
to of the Bononian Cubit, wanting one Digit, are capable of another sense than
that wherein I took them, viz. he may mean, That a Digit --.92 Decimals of our
Inch, being taken out of the Bononian Cubit -- 25.76: the Remainder, which is
24.84, must be considered, and of that will be the Jewish Cubit. Wherefore
divide 24.84 by 8, it quotes 3.105: multiply this Quote by 7, the Product will
be 21.735 for the Jewish Cubit, which differs from mine not much above 1 Tenth
of an Inch; and therefore still the more confirms mine Assertion, and brings
him nearer to agreement with himself, which makes his Testimony the more
valuable.

My last Argument for this Cubit, should be taken from its greater fitness to
all the uses, to which a Cubit-measure is assigned in the Scripture. As to give
more convenient grandeur to the Tabernacle, to the Temple, and to those other
sacred Things that belonged to God's Service in them both. But all these things
will require larger Discourse than can be allowed in this Work. Wherefore I
shall only instance in two things.

1. In the Height of the Table of Shewbread, because the account of that will
be very short, and yet seems clearly to favor this Measure which I have
proposed. Moses expresses its Height to be one Cubit and an half, Exodus 25.23.
This, in my Account, arises to above 32 Inches and three quarters, viz. in
Decimals 32.83, which is a convenient height for a Table. But if we take a
shorter Cubit, suppose the old Roman Cubit, its height will be, in English
Measure, but two Foot and two Inches above the Floor, which seems very
inconvenient for a Table.

2. In the Capacity of Noah's Ark, of which because the most Learned Dr.
Wilkins has written very particularly, I will only add this general Remark;
That if instead of a Cubit of 18 Inches, our Cubit which is 21.888 be admitted,
the Capacity of the Ark, built according to Moses his Numbers of Cubits, will
be very near twice as great, which will make it much more convenient for all
the Ends to which it was designed. For such an Ark made by this longer Cubit,
will be to its like made by a shorter Cubit, as the Cubes of these different
Cubits are to each other; but the Cube of my Cubit is very near double to the
Cube of 18 Inches, therefore so will the Capacity be: The Major all
Geometricians know to be true, and the Minor any Arithmetician may find;
therefore the Conclusion is true.

Our third Proposal, was hence to determine other Scripture and Eastern
Measures of Length: Now this is easy, because it is agreed of lesser.

Inches. 1. That the Span, or Zereth, was half a Cubit 10.944 A Palm, or
Hands-breadth 3.648 A Digit, Fingers-breadth 1/24,912

So also, 2. of their biger Measures, (...), a Fathom, 4 Cubits, Ezekiel's Reed
6; Canna, or a Pole, was 8 such Cubits, in English Feet 14.592.

Schenus, or their Line or Chain, 80 Cubits -- 145.92 Iter Sabbaticum, Sabbaths
Journey, 2000 Cubits 3648 Their Mile, its name from Romans 4000 Cubits, Mil.
Eng. 7296 --.3816 Their Parasang 12000 Cub. 21888 -- 4.1454 The 30 th part
thereof is a Stadium, as Herod. and Hesychius witness -- 400 Cubits. Their days
Journey not always equal, but at a middle rate, set by Abulfeda, is 8 Parasangs
-- Cubits 96000-33.1632.

It will not be necessary for me to give the Proofs of the Proportion of these
Measures to the Cubit, or to each other: this is generally agre'd on, and the
common Writers on this Subject have produced them: Wherefore I have thought my
self only obliged to reduce them to our Standard-measure, supposing the Cubit
to have been already rightly stated. And the like Method I have used about the
Measures of Capacity, deduced from known Proportions to the Epha, and the other
Weights deduced from Shekel.

I shall only add this Observation, That because so many Measures were
determined by relation to the Cubit, the Egyptians and Jews were obliged to be
constant in the Standard thereof, else the proportion to all their other
Measures would be altered, and the ancient Measures of all their Lands, and
best Buildings, would be greatly disturbed: as we might show by instancing in
the Levites Suburbs, set out by 1000 Cubits on each side of their Cities, and
the Egyptian (...), mentioned by Herodotus, which were determined by 100 Cubits
on every side.

CHAP. III Of the Epha, and other Measures of Capacity thereby determined.
MY next endeavor shall be, to find the true Capacity or Content of the Jewish
Epha; which I think will be most exactly expressed, both by the number of solid
Inches (English) of Water, which is contained, and by the number of Gallons and
Pints, or known parts thereof, taken in Measures agreeing with our Standards.
But both these must be found by help of the ancient Roman Standards yet
remaining, to which both the Greek and Jewish Measures have been reduced by the
Ancients.

For the clearing of my way of expressing the Capacity of this Measure, I must
premise two things.

I.That the most exact and Geometrical way of expressing the Capacity of any
Vessel, or Measure, is by expressing, in known terms, the solidity of a Body
which will precisely fill it; the fittest will be Water, such as drops from the
Clouds, which we suppose not to differ so considerably in the several Regions
of the World, as Spring-waters do. Now, the Solidity of all Bodies is best
expressed by help of a Cube, whose equal sides and height we know by a
Standard-Measure of length; such is a cubic or solid Inch, whose side is the
twelfth part of a Foot, and a Foot the third part of the Iron Yard, kept at
Guild Hall for the Standard of England.

And it appears, that this way of determining Measures of Capacity, is not only
most Geometrical, but also exceeding Ancient; because the Egyptians made their
Ardob to be the Cube of their known Standard, the Cubit; and the old Romans
made their Quadrantal, the Cube of their Standard, the Foot, as both Festus,
and the ancient Verses of Rhemnius Fannius witness; which I need not
transcribe, being obvious in diverse Writers; my design being only to show, that
the Ancients aimed at this Correspendence between Measures of Length, and those
of Capacity.

And indeed, a Cube is the only regular Solid which I have observed to be
described in the Scripture, by all its Dimensions of Length, Breadth, and
Height; and there such cubical Dimensions are assigned (what ever is the
Mystery of it) to the most Sacred Type, the Holy of Holies, 1 Kings 6.20 and to
the most holy Antitype, the New Jerusalem, Rev. 21.16.

Perhaps (because the simplest Soild has all possible Dimensions in it) it may
intimate;

1. The solid or complete felicity of the Heavenly State, respecting the
Length, Breadth, and Height of Divine Love, Ephesians. 3.18. which is the Fountain
thereof.

2. The perfect rest and constancy thereof, because the Hedra, or Resting-Bases
of the Cube, are six, which Euclid has showed to be a perfect Number: and they
are all Squares, whence the Cube is less subject to be shaken, than the other
regular Bodies. Something to this purpose is intimated in the old Maxim, (...).

II. I premise, that amongst us English, it is agreed, that our Wine-Gallon,
now most frequently used, contains precisely 231 Solid or Cubical Inches of our
Standard-Measure; and our Corn-Gallon, which is the Statute-measure of Capcity
in England, contains 272 such Inches: for although Mr. Oughtred affirm it to
contain of a solid Inch more (which is very little difference) diverse others
since, upon exact trial, see no cause to add that Fraction to its Capacity.

For these Reasons, and to show the dependence of the Epha on the Cubit already
stated, I shall express my opinion concerning the Content of Epha, etc. in a
number of our solid Inches, and in Decimal Fractions thereof, rather than any
other sort of Fractions, which are more troublesome or difficult to be
understood and reduced.

I conceive that Epha was about 1747 solid Inches of English Measure, not much
distant from the English Foot Solid, which is 1728; and is near the Inches
Solid of 1000 Ounces of Water. Or in Wine Measure it was 7 Gallons, 2 Quarts,
and about half a Pint. In Corn Measure, 6 Gallons 3 Pints, and 3 Solid Inches.

This Capacity of Epha, or at least For approach thereunto, I shall endeavor
to prove by four Arguments.

1. From its proportion to the Cube of the Cubit of Israel, formerly stated. 2.
From its proportion to the Corus, or Chomer. 3. From its proportion to the
Seah. 4. From the agreement of this Capacity with the content or solidity of
432 Eggs, whereby the Rabbis ordinarily determine it.
But I confide more in the two former Arguments, because taken from bigger
Measures, than in the two latter, which arise from less. And therefore have
altogether omitted the investigation from Number and Weight of Grains of Wheat,
which I find elsewhere used: because every little Error (which is unavoidable
in small Measures) grows greater in the progress by multiplication; whereas
little Errors in bigger Measures, when we pass from them to lesser by
division, grow still less than the former, which tends to exactness.

Arg. 1. Epha is the sixth part of the Cube of the Egyptian Cubit, which Cube
is called an Ardub: but the sixth part of that Cube, or an Ardub, is 1747.7
solid Inches: therefore so is Epha. The proof of the Major is from the express
affirmation of the Arabian Accountants and Mathematicians, Alsephadi and Ebn.
Chalecan, printed in Dr. Wallis his Arithmetic; cap. 31, and received from Dr.
Pocock. Only there the Epha is by an usual commutation of the quiescent
Letters, and of the Labial p into b, called Oeba, or as Dr. Wallis expresses
it, Waibah. But Salmasius, and Dr. Castle, and all the Learned in the Eastern
Languages, that I have met with, acknowledge that Arabic Word to express the
same Measure, that the Jews call Epha. And the matter seems clear, by comparing
the Hebrew Exodus 16.36. with the Arabic Translation, in which Waibah is put to
express the Hebrew Epha.

Add hereunto, that it may be deduced from what Golius affirms, treating of
Corus as a Bablylonish Measure; that at Babylon also the Ardub was equal to six
Ephas: for he asserts 40 Ardubs, equal to 720 Seahs, which are known equal to
240 Ephas. Wherefore divide the number of Ephas by the number of Ardubs, the
Quote will be 6; which shows that one Ardub i^ equal to six Ephas.

Thus this Proportion appears acknowledged wide in the East; although I do
acknowledge that severa^ Ardubs of different Capacity from this are mentioned by
Kircher, as used among the Egyptians; and other (...), stated by the Greeks.
Ye^ this sense of the word being as full attested, and this being determine^ by
a sure Standard, I shall consider only in this sense, having no use of it other
various significations.

Thus the Major is proved by Authorities; the Minor is demonstrab^^ thus. The
Egyptian Cubit reduced to English Inches, has been proved to be 21.888. This
number multiplied by it self, produces its Square; that multiplied by the
Side, or first Number, produces the Cube, which is the Content of the Ardub in
solid Inches.

Lastly; This being divided by 6, the number of Ephas in Ardub, the Quote is
1747.7. The Arithmetical Operations need not be set down at large in this
Paper, but may be tried by any Arithmetician at his leisure.

But because it is not easily credible that the Ancients, in making their
Ardub, did consider the thousandth, or the hundredth part of an Inch (which yet
I have expressed by Reduction from Greaves his Measure of the Egyptian
Standard, that I might not willingly depart from his exactness) and because the
Abatement of the Centesimals of an Inch, in the side of the Cube, will err less
from preciseness, than the addition of a like quantity, and will reduce the
Epha to a Measure so well known among us; I have expressed it also by an
English Foot Solid; which will be found to come from the sixth part of the Cube
of 21.8; for the Cube thereof is, 10360.232: and that divided by s^^ Quotes
1726.7, differing less than two solid Inches from the Foot solid* 1728.

From this approach to Agreement we may not only help our Memory* but also
probably conjecture, that a^ our Foot is two thirds of our Cubit so the Eastern
People had a Measure which we may call their Foot, which also was two thirds of
a Cubit, sometimes used among them, viz. a Cubi^ of five Palms: Which differed
no^ much from our Cubit, as I formerly showed. And the Cube of that Foo^ of
theirs, was probably the Origina^ of this ancient Measure, the Eph^ which a
little exceeds our Foot Solid as also such their Foot and Cubit, i^ length, a
little exceeded ours.

However it is certain, that the excess of the Cubic-Root of an Eph^ above our
English Foot, is not quit five Centesimals of an Inch, or no^ the twentieth
part of an Inch.

I have also observed, that the Epha, or Bath, contains just 1000 Ounces
Averdupoise, or 2000 Shekels weight of pure Rainwater; which being lighter
than our Fountain Water, and of a more constant equality in its Weight than
Spring-waters are (which differ a little in weight from each other) takes up a
little more room than so many Ounces of our Water will do: so that though we
reckon 1726 Cubic-Inches to 1000 Ounces of our Fountain Water, we may well
allow about 1747 such Inches to 1000 Ounces of their lighter Rainwater.

And it is evident that the Ancients determined their Vessels of Capacity by
weight of Water. So the Roman Congius held just 10 pounds of Water, and that of
Rain, as Dioscorides has noted: their Amphora 80 such Pounds, their Sextary 20
Ounces. And it is certain, that the reckoning of Weights by round Numbers of
Shekels, or their double, which are Ounces, is most ancient. And universally,
that most ancient expression of Job 28.25. He weighs the Waters by Measure,
intimates, that their ancient Measures of Water were of a known weight, else it
were impossible to weigh them by measure, or thereby to estimate and adjust
their Weight. But this will be clear when we handle Shekel.

Here I thought fit to remark, that the concurrence of the Measure of this
Solid Foot, and of the Weight of 1000 Ounces of Water, might recommend this
Measure called Epha, or Bath to the first Founders or Authors thereof: and this
happy concurrence is the true cause, that all their Measures and Weights may be
investigated and proved, both a priore, by beginning with the simplest Measure
of Length, and thence proceeding till we end in the Weights; and a posteriore,
or peregressum, by beginning with the weight of a Shekel, and passing through
all the Measures of Capacity, until we come to the Cubit, their Root; as I
shall show in their Harmony at the end of this Discourse.

The Reduction of this Measure to our usual Measure by Gallons, etc. i^ thus
performed: divide 1747.7 by 231, the Inches Solid in a Wine-Gallon the Quote
will be 7.566: which signifies seven Gallons; half a Gallon, or two Quarts, and
about half a Pint. The like Method may be used for the Corn-Gallon. This may
suffice for the first Argment, which may pretend to accuracy, because its Major
is the affirmation of Mathematicians, referring the Ardub, and its sixth part,
the Epha, to a known Standard, the Egyptian Cubit; and the Minor is certain by
true Calculation. Those that follow pretend not so high, yet are of good
moment, because they make some approach of agreement herewith; and many
Witnesses agreeing in the Main, do corroborate each others Testimony.

Arg. 2. Is taken from the Chomer or Corus, which all agree to be the same, and
to contain 10 Ephas, and is made the Rule of Epha, by Ezekiel 45.11. regulating
prudently the less by the greater. Now Josephus, lib. 15. cap. 11. says
expressly, That (...): Wherefore he hereby intimates, that Epha, the tenth part
of Corus, was equal to the Medimnus Atticus. The Content hereof we must first
find in Roman Measure, to which the ancient Greeks and Romans have reduced it;
and then we must reduce the Roman Measure, by help of Vespasian's Standard
Congius, still remaining at Rome, to our English Standards: and so we shall see
how far Josephus his Estimate of the Epha, agrees with, or differs from that
which I have proposed.

But I must premise, even to the first Reduction, that two things are agreed
among the ancient Greek Writers:

1. That Medimnus Atticus was equal to 48 Chaenices. So say Pollux,
Aarpocration, Galen, etc.

2. That one Chaenix was equal to three Cotylae. So Pollux in two places, in
words at length, not subject to so much corruption, through mistake, as
Characters are; and Cleopatra, and others.

Hence the first Reduction to Roman Measures is thus made; every Cotyla is
equal to half the Roman Sextarius, and consequently 12 Cotylae to the Roman
Congius. So Galen, and the Author of the Hippiatric Weights and Measures,
Dioscorides, and others, to be seen in the Treatises set at the beginning of
Stephanus his Appendix to his Thesaurus. Herewith agrees what the same Authors
and Cleopatra affirm, that 4 Chaenices are equal to the Congius, or to 12
Cotylae. Hence it follows, Medimnus Atticus being equal to 48 Chaenices, must
be equal to 12 Congii Romani; for 48 divided by 4, which is the number of
Chaenices in a Congius, quotes 12.

For the second Reduction, whereby the Roman Congius, and the Greek Medimnus,
Chaenix, and Cotyla, may be brought into solid Inches of English Measure, and
so compared with our Measures of Capacity, I offer this Expedient. It is
agreed, and the Inscription on the Congius of Vespasian, witnesses it, that
Measure contained just 10 Roman Pounds of Water, or Wine. Each Roman Pound was
12 Roman Ounces; each Roman Ounce has been found, by Greaves and others, to
answer exactly to 438 Grains of our Troy Weight: Wherefore it wants 42 Grains
of our Troy Ounce. And just so many Grains as Dr. Chamberlain in the State of
England affirms, does our Averdupoise Ounce fall short of the Troy Ounce, which
is 480 Grains. Hence I conclude, that our Averdupoise Ounce, is the same Weight
with the old Roman Ounce, which has continued to be used, both in Rome, and
here in England to this day, from the eldest Times. And we must consider, that
the name Averdupoise, which signifies Weighty, was not at first given to this
Ounce, but to the Pound, consisting of sixteen of eighteen such Ounces; which
therefore was much more weighty than the usual Roman Pound, which had but
twelve such Ounces: which Pound is not used among us, although the Ounce, as
part of a weightier Pound, be still retained.

Sir Jonas More has calculated a Table (founded in Experiments, concerning the
Weight of any known Number of solid Inches of Water, made by Dr. Wibberd and
others, whereby we may turn any given Ounces Averdupoise of Water, into solid
Measure, expressed in Inches and Decimals thereof; which because it is short
and useful for my purpose, I will transcribe.

Ounces. Inches Solid and Decimals. 1 1.72556 2 3.45112 3 5.17668 4 6.90224 5
8.62780 6 10.35336 7 12.07892 8 13.80448 9 15.53004

For an Example to show the use of this Table; Let us take the 10 Pounds of
Water that fill the Roman Congius; and because each Pound is 12 Ounces
Averdupoise, call them 120 Ounces; the highest Figure signifies 100 Ounces.
Wherefore take out of the Table the Number answering 1; and because of the two
Ciphers which make it an hundred, remove the Separatrix two places further;
thus writing 172.556. So also for the 20, remove the Separatrix one place thus,
^ This Sum gives the solid Inches of Water that fill the Capacity of Congius
Romanus; and show it to be less than our Wine-Gallon of 231 Inches, by almost
24 solid Inches. So Cotyla containing 10 Ounces of Water, is found in solid
Inches, 17.25; and Chaenix containing 30 Ounces, must be in solid Inches 51.76.
So, lastly, to determine the Medimnus by the solid Inches of Water that it
contains, multiply the Content of Congius by 12, the Product is Medimnus, ^

The Medimnus thus found, when compared with our proposed Epha, proves bigger
than it by 737 Inches, or above three Gallons Wine-measure. This shows that
although I have exceeded the common estimate of Epha, which makes it the Cube
of the Roman Foot, on very weak grounds, yet I have not gone so far as Josephus.

Nor can I recede from the Reason I have alleged for Josephus his affirmation,
but shall answer his Authority, by saying;

1. That I conceive he did not intend to assert a precise Mathematical Equality
between Epha and Medimnus; but to express the content of a Jewish Measure, as
an Historian, somewhat near the truth, by comparing it to this most famous
approaching Measure, known among the Greeks, in whose language he wrote.

2. That an Epha heaped up, will answer very well to a Medimnus not heaped:
this seems a sufficient conciliation, that he respected an Epha cumulated; my
number respects only an Epha strickled (as the Countrymen speak) which is most
certain and constant; because the Breadth or narrowness of the Measure, will
alter the heaping very much.

To this head I shall adjoin another approach to Epha, by help of the Greek
Chaenix, which is founded on a probable emendation of Hesychius, which I crave
leave to propose, because the place is certainly corrupted, and I have not met
with any attempt to mend it. Thus it is now printed; (...). That it is an
Egyptian Measure, is truly and judiciously affirmed; but that it contained but
four Chaenices, is far from credible, for that would make it all one with the
(...), or Congius, which it far exceeded by the acknowledgment of all.

Therefore I have thought it probable, that Hosychius did write it, either in
Characters thus, DDDIIII (...), as Herodian informs us the Greeks anciently
wrote 34, putting three (...)'s for 30, because each D stood for (...), or Ten,
being the first Letter of that word, and each I for single Units. And some
Transcribers afterward being ignorant hereof, did take D to signify 4, as in
later Times it does, and the I's the same; and to avoid Tautology, wrote (...).
Certain it is, that there should be, and probably was, either a Word or
Character signifying 30 (either DDD or l) placed before (...), to make it fit
to signify the number of (...) in an Epha; which word, or Character, is now
lost. And that no Number is so fit (as thirty) to be added, will appear by the
coincidence of 34 Chaenices with the former Calculation from the Cubit. Thus
Chaenix -- 51.7 multiplied into 34, produces 1757.8, and this differs from my
assertion but the third part of a Pint, which is as little as can be expected
in so big a Measure.

However, I trust not this Emendation alone; but if a better can be offered,
shall thankfully admit it: Wherefore I will offer another approach to the
finding a Corus, and Epha, by help of a Roman Measure taken out of an ancient
Anonymus Latin Author, cited by Salmasius, in his Epistle to Walaeus, called by
him, Auctor vetus adjectus Scriptoribus Rei Agrimensoriae. He affirms, that
dou Cori Culloum reddunt. Hence I would draw an Argument (which it appears not
that the Authors from whom I take this Testimony, did think of) to determine an
approach to the Capacity of Epha.

For if the Roman Culaeus (as it is oftener written with single l) be equal or
near to two Cori, it must be so to 20 Ephas. Now the Capacity of Culaeus is
intimated, both by Pliny, lib. 14. cap. 4. and by Columella, lib. 3. cap. 3. to
be twenty Amphoreae, or Quadrantals, each of which is known from Sextus
Pompeius his Plebiscitum Siliorum, to contain 80 Roman Pounds of Water, or 8
Congil. So by this Argument the Roman Amphora, and Jewish Epha, will be made
equal, or near each other; for Mathematical Exactness is not to be hoped for in
such Authors.

The Roman Amphora did contain 1656 solid Inches, and near half an Inch more;
as appears by multiplying the Content of Congius 207.06 by 8. And this is
indeed bigger than the Cube of the Roman Foot on Cossutius his Monument, by
above three Pints of our Wine-measure, as Greaves attests he experimented, page
35. of his Learned Treatise on the Roman Foot. But still this 1656, is less
than our Number 1747, deduced from the Egyptian Standard; and more below the
Content of Medimnus 2484, which Josephus thought near enough. Wherefore since
our number falls above the Amphora, which this Author must make equal to
Epha, and below the Medimnus, which Josephus points at, as equal thereto; I
hope, that being in a mean, and keeping to a public Standard, I may have
determined more exactly than either of them. And both their Testimonies will
agree to assert, that I am not very far from the Truth, each of them coming
nearer to me, than they come to each other. This is the sum of my second
Argument.

My third Argument shall be, an attempt to prove my determination of Epha to be
true, from Evidence, that the best Determinations which the Ancients have given
us of the Capacity of Seah, comes near to the third part of the measuring
Number which I have assigned; this being agreed by all, that Seah was the third
of Epha.

And here I shall first consider, what Suida affirms, referring to a Number of
Roman Sextarii, which we know by the Standard yet remaining: and then supply
what is confestly deficient in him, by the elder Testimonies of Josephus,
Epiphanius, and Hierom.

Suidas, in (...), which is the Hebrew Seah, altered after the Greek fashion,
affirms it to be the Roman Modius, filled so as to run over its brinks; and
that it holds in Liquids 15 Sextaries, or 25 Pounds. The weight in Water
annexed, secures us he speaks of the Roman, not the Attick Sextary. Now fifteen
Roman Sextaries are equal to two Congii and an half; which in solid
Inch-Measure of Water, 517.66, being 300 Ounces in Weight. But this is less
than the third part of our Epha, that being 582: So there wants above a Quart
of our Wine-Measure. And Suidas implicitly confesses his Measure too little,
by saying it must be (...), heaped up so as to run over. This Heap might easily
supply the Quart wanting in the Account in Water, which will not be heaped, and
which indeed is less than commonly is allowed to the Modius, it being usually
reckoned sixteen Sextaries, and that would bring the Capacity of Seah to agree
with mine within a Pint.

However, to inform us that the Modius was less than Seah, Epiphanius tells us,
that it was equal to Modius, and. And Josephus, lib. 9. c. 2. and Hierom, on
Matthew. 13.33. say, it was an Italian Modius and an half. I know that the Modius
is a disputed Measure; therefore to avoid that dispute, I counted by Sextaries,
which being of Congius, are indisputable. And if the least Capacity of Modius
be taken, yet 1 and an half will somewhat exceed the Capacity I have assigned.
Therefore the Seah which my Number requires, falls between a confessed Defect in
Suidas, and an Excess in Hierom and Josephus, yet not far from either of them,
and therefore is probable, being nearer to both Extremes in those Authors, than
they are to each other.

My fourth Argument is from the agreement of this number of solid Inches, with
the content of 432 Hens Eggs, whereby the Jewish Doctors frequently determine
the Capacity of Epha; as may be seen in Buxtorf's Lexicon, in (...) in Arias
Montanus, Tubal-Cain, etc. Now if we divide my Number 1747, by 432, it will
quote 4.04: which shows, that little above four solid Inches must be in an Egg,
that 432 of them may make this quantity. And Experience attests, that the
larger sort of Hen Eggs, which yet are common, will contain four solid Inches
of Water, or two Ounces and a third: and Measures when taken from Nature, are
rather taken from the bigger Instances, than the less, as the Greek Foot from
Hercules his Foot, and the Cubit from the Elbow to the Fingers end of a tall
Man.

This experimental way I choose as more easy, than the Geometrical reduction of
an Egg to a Sphaeroid, or two Conoides, which few would understand. I might
also show, that as some, both Jews and Christians, have assigned less Capacity
to the measuring-Egg than I; so others, particularly Capellus, have given more:
And that this Capacity may therefore be called a Mean Capacity, although it
come near to the largest sort of Hen Eggs; but it is sufficient to have pointed
at these things.

The Fruits of this long, because difficult investigation of the Epha, will be
gathered in the easy determination of the other Measures of Capacity, whose
Proportions thereunto are generally agreed on. For besides a Bath, which is
equal to it, it will follow, that

Sol. Inches. Wine Gal. P. Inch. Corus, or Chomer, viz. 10 Epha's 17477 75 5 7
Seah the third of Epha 582.5 2 4 3 Hin the sixth 291.25 1 2 15 Homer the tenth
174.77 0 6 05 Cab the eighteenth 97.08 0 3 10 Log the seventy-second 24.27 0 0
24.2

In this Reduction to our Measures, I have used the Wine-Gallon, because more
generally known and used among us, notwithstanding the Corn-Gallon is the
Statute-Measure. And because the Epha and Homer after this Reduction fall out
to answer very near known Meafures; Homer to three Quarts; Epha seven Gallons,
a Pottle and half a Pint. Also in the Corus I have expressed the last seven
solid Inches, although in Epha, its tenth part. I often omit the seven Tenths
of a solid Inch as inconsiderable, because it grows considerable when it is
multiplied by Ten.

To remove the Objection which lies open against these Measures, that thereby
an Homer becomes too great a quantity of Manna, to be allowed, as it was by God
to every Man, for his sustenance in the Wilderness; let these things be
considered.

1. That Divine Bounty is concerned to proportion to each Man, now traveling,
so much, that he may rather leave somewhat, than lack.

2. That Manna being like Coriander-seed, of a globular figure, when it was in
the Homer, must necessarily leave many empty Spaces, between every three or
four Sphaeres, which had no Food in them; and these Vacuities added together,
may reasonably be estimated about a third part of the Vessel's Capacity. For
the solidity of a Cube, many of which will fill up a space without any empty
Interstices, is almost as big again, as a Sphere, whose Diameter is equal to
the Cube's side: the Geometricians say, as 1 to.523

3. It being light food, must needs be inwardly porous, and of a spongy
contexture of Parts.

4. It would probably waste somewhat in dressing by the Fire, as it melted and
wasted when the Sun grew hot. By these Reasons the three Quarts at first
measuring will be reduced to to about three Pints of an oily liquid substance,
which will not be too much for a Traveller, that needs eat thrice a day.

The Homer being thus freed from an obvious Objection, before I leave it, I
think fit not only so observe the Antiquity of the Numeration by Tens in these
Measures, Corus holding 10 Ephas, Epha 10 Homers: but also to add, that I have
observed, that the Athenian Measure, Cotyla, (which, as I have intimated, held
10 Ounces of Water, and so was half a Roman Sextarius) must needs therefore be
the tenth part of an Homer, as I before showed it to be the twelfth part of the
Roman Congius. And we shall less wonder that Athens carried on this Subdecuple
Proportion in one of their Measures; if we consider that Athens was a Colony
both from Sais in Egypt, and from the Phaenicians, as the best Antiquaries and
Geographers agree.

By help of this Observation, we may note, that this Cotyla is a common
Measure, to most (if not all) the Measures of Capacity, used among the Jews,
with other Eastern People, and these Western famous Nations, the Greeks and
Romans: and so may serve to show the Harmony between them, and their Reduction
to such an ancient Standard as the Congius of Vespasian, which is yet kept at
Rome; and may suggest a probability that the common Original of them (as also
the rise of Mankind, and of the most necessary Learning) was from the East. Ten
Cotylas make an Homer, hence the Jewish Measures may all be determined: two of
them made a Sextary; hence the Congius, and other Roman Measures, three of them
made a Chaenix; hence the Medimnus, and other Greek Measures. The word also is
received at Rome, as well as at Athens; and I find, by Dr. Castle's Lexicon,
that it is used by the Syriac and Arabic Writers of the East, although not found
in the Hebrew Bible, wherein I meet not with any less measure than the Log.
However, because its Root, and other words akin to it, are found in the Hebrew,
and other Eastern Languages, but no Root nor Kindred in the Western: I rather
believe that its Original was in the East, and the Greeks received it thence,
than that the Eastern Nations received it from the Greeks.

By this Analogy between Eastern and Greek Measures, I am induced here to
mention the Metretes, which St. John mentions, chap. 2.6. which we translate a
Firkin, which is eight or nine Gallons Ale-measure: at which rate the Water
which Christ made Wine, will rise to about 100 Gallons; which may well seem too
much for our Savior, the great Teacher and Pattern of Temperance, miraculously
to provide for the Guests at a Wedding, after they had well drank before.

To remove this Difficulty, our Critics have said many things, which I need
not repeat. But I will add one Notion about this Metretes, which I have not
found amongst our Commentators, which if it be admitted, will altogether
prevent the Objection. I find in Cleopatra's Discourse about Weights and
Measures, which with others of that Subject, is in the Appendix to Steven's
Thesaurus, that Metretes, among the Syrians, consists of six Sextaries. Now
it is known that the Greeks and Romans too, did often so extend the Name of
Syrians, as to comprehend the Jews, especially those of Galilee, that just
touched Syria, strictly called.

Wherefore I conceive St. John, speaking of this Miracle done in Galilee on the
Syrian Coast, calls that (...), which the Syrians called so, and that is the
Roman Congius, consisting of six Sextaries. Now I have showed already, that
this is near a Pint less than our Wine Gallon. And so the Miracle will produce
about ten Gallons and an half of our English Measure; which if the Guests were
of any considerable number, might easily be drank without danger of
Intemperance, especially since Marriage-Entertainments did use to last for many
days, Judges 14.12.

I shall conclude this Discourse with the consideration of Solomon's Brazen
Sea, that capacious Vessel for Water required in the Temple-Service. Its Height
is five Cubits; its Diameter, called Breadth, ten; its Figure affirmed to be
round: but it is not determined in the Scripture, whether this round Figure were
an Hemisphere or a Cylinder, equally wide at the bottom and the top, or a
decurted Cone that was wider at the bottom than the top, where its wideness is
expressed; or whether some other irregular Figure of a protuberant Belly. Yet
it is ordinarily represented to us in Cuts as an Hemisphere.

But the main Difficulty arises from the Capacity of it, which in 1 Kings
7.26. is expressed 2000 Baths; and yet in 2 Chronicles. 4.5. it is affirmed to hold
3000 Baths. The Hebrew Copies, and the ancientest Translations, constantly
delivering this different Account; it is not prudent to affirm either place to
have been corrupted by Error of Transcribers.

Therefore I think Grotius has well suggested, that in the first place
ordinarily, when it was not filled up, it had 2000 Baths of Water in it; but,
secondly, upon extardinary Occasions, when more was requisite, as at the great
Festivals, it could, and did hold that greater number of Baths. This answer
gives a good general Reason of a different Content ascribed to this Vessel.

But when we come to express the Cubits of its Dimensions in determinate
Numbers of Inches, and after Multiplications suited to the Figure, divide the
Product by the solid Inches of the Bath, or Epha, we shall find Difficulties to
arise, which this Answer will not remove.

For instance; Let us suppose the Figure of this Sea to be Cylindrical, because
I shall soon show this to be more likely than that of an Hemisphere. The
Diameter of the Base of this Cylinder being ten Cubits, must, according to our
determination of the Cubit, be in Inch-measure 218.88; and its Height five
Cubits, is in Inches 109.44. To find the Solidity or Content of this Cylinder,
we must, first, find the Area of its Base, by this Analogy taught by
Archimedes. As 14 is to 11; so is the Square of its Diameter, viz. 47908.4544,
to the Area of its Base 37642.1357. Then we must multiply the Area by the
Height; the Product of which Multiplication is the Cylinder's Content, viz.
4119579.44. Lastly, This divided by the solid Inches of Epha, 1747, will quote
2358.08; the number of Ephas contained in that Cylinder. Hence it appears, that
it will contain above 2000 Ephas, or Baths, which is the Number expressed in
the Kings; yet not 3000 as the Chronicles faith, but there want 642 Baths
almost.

Hence we may learn, that since a Cylinder of these Dimensions is somewhat too
little to hold the 3000 Baths; therefore an Hemisphere, which is commonly
offered to us of such Height and Diameter, will be much more too little. For
Archimedes assures us, that it is but two thirds of such a Cylinder, and
therefore will hold but two thirds of its number of Ephas, viz. 1572, and so
will want 428 Baths of the 2000, or lesser Number.

Wherefore we must conclude, that either our Cubits, and Ephas, one or both,
are too big; or that this Figure is to be rejected as too little. But because
we have given much proof of the truth of our Cubit and Epha, and no Proof is
given of this Hemispherical Figure, let that rather be rejected: but because
our Cylinder does not only answer the less number of Baths, but gives us above
a third part of the superadded thousand, which is in the Chronicles, I dare not
reject it. For I acknowledge that it is possible, that the Author of the
Chronicles adding 1000 to those in the Kings, might only by that round Number
intimate, that it held many hundreds of Baths, upon extraordinary Occasions,
above those 2000 which the Author of the Kings had expressed, as ordinarily
contained in it.

And indeed it is certain, that he does not in this matter of the Sea, speak
according to Geometrical accurateness: for when he had said that 10 Cubits were
its Breadth or Diameter; he adds, that 30 Cubits would compass it round:
whereas Geometry assures us, that above 31 Cubits are requisite to make the
Perimeter to a Diameter of 10. And yet it is ordinarily allowed in Discourse,
that pretends not to Mathematical Rigor, to say, that thrice the Diameter is
the Circumference; so may this Sacred Historian say, in a round Number, that
the Sea held 3000 Baths, when in strictness its Content was not quite so much,
but yet considerably above 2000.

Those that are not satisfied herewith, may safely assert, that this Sea was
either so much wider at the Bottom, or so much swelled in the Belly, that it
would contain 642 Baths more than the Cylindric Figure will yield; because
there is nothing contrary hereunto in the History. And it will be more
reasonable to adjust the Figure which the History determines not, to the
Capacity which it does express, than to reject the Measures asserted by so much
proof, because they do not perfectly agree with a Figure which is pitched upon
only by conjecture.

Since I came to this resolution of the Difficulty now before us, I have been
confirmed in my Opinion, by reading in Dr. Lightfoot's prospect of the Temple,
Cap. 27. Sect. 3. that both the Talmudists, and the Rabbis, have acknowledged
that 3000 Baths cannot be contained within the Dimensions of ten Cubits
wideness, and five height assigned by Scripture, unless the Figure of this
Molten Sea be affirmed to be wider than that of a Cylinder below the Brims.
Thus far their Assertion agrees with my Accounts, and assures me, that their
Notions, both of the Cubit's Length, and of the Ephas Capacity, were not
greatly different from mine, because they own with me, that this number of
Ephas is indeed somewhat too great for the Capacity of a Cylinder, the Diameter
of whose Base is ten, and its Height five Cubits; but that what is wanting in
this Figure, may be well supplied, by widening it toward the bottom, which I
also have owned; We differ only in the manner of widening it sufficiently below
the Brim. For the Talmudists assign this way, That it was made square at the
bottom, each side ten Cubits, and rose in this Figure of a Parallellipedon (as
the Geometricians call it) up three Cubits high, but the other two Cubits of
its height were a Cylinder, whose Base had ten Cubits in its Diameter. But
surely they did only conjecture that this Figure would enlarge it sufficiently,
and never calculated its Capacity carefully. For upon a strict calculation of
the Content of this their compounded Figure, I find that it will be too little
by above 250 Baths. And yet the Cubit which I have assigned and calculated by,
is longer than Dr. Lightfoot's Cubit, and therefore will make the Sea
sufficient to hold more than his: and the Bath I have assigned, is less than
his, and therefore more of them will be contained within the given Dimensions;
and so both my Measures are fitted to remove the Difficulty; whereas by his
Measures, bound to the Talmudist's Figure, it is made insuperable, and involves
an impossibility. But adhering to my Measures, I find that a Parallellipedon,
the side of whose Square at bottom is ten Cubits, and its Height full five
Cubits, will contain 3001 Baths, and a little more: whence it is plain, that if
two Cubits of its Height had been Cylindrical, it must needs hold less by a
considerable quantity, the Angles being taken away, which held much. Yet
because in this Parallellipedon we have above a Bath more than we need, we may
take off a little of the Corners near the top, and there make it Cylindric,
that so it may both answer the Scripture's Historical Dimensions of about
thirty Cubits, compassing it round at the top, and in some Measure agree with
the Talmudist's Tradition of a little Cylinder uppermost, though it must be
much less in its Height than they affirm. For it is certain, by the Principles
of Geometry and Arithmetic, that if 3000 Baths of the Measure which I have
assigned, be comprehended in a Figure, compounded of Parallellipedon and
Cylinder, whose Diameter is but ten Cubits, and their Height taken together but
five.

That, first, the Parallellipedon must have its side in Inch-measure 218.88:
The Square whereof we have shown to be, 47908.4544; and the Height of it must
be, in Inch-measure, 109.24, which is five Cubits wanting less than a quarter
of an Inch. So the Content of this part of the Molten Sea, will be 5233519.558.

Then, secondly; the Cylinder's Base having its Diameter 218.88, the Area
thereof will be 37642.1357, and its Height must be but.2, two Tenths of an
Inch; so will the Content of that short Cylinder be, 7528.427: Wherefore the
Contents of both parts of this Figure being added together, will be
5241047.985. This Sum being divided by the solid Inches of the Bath 1747, will
give in the Quote 3000, with an inconsiderable Fraction overplus, which I
allowed, because I would not affect overmuch preciseness, neither would I take
too little. By this Process I have both demonstrated the Defect of the
Talmudists Figure, and also showed how it may be mended, so as to serve the End
for which it was intended; Rectum enim est index sui and obliqui. And now I
shall leave it to the Reader's choice, either to take the Figure with a
protuberant Belly, which I before proposed, which seems more Ornamental, being
like that of the Cisterns used in Noble-mens Dining-rooms; or to take the
Talmudical Figure with this Emendation which I have offered. And I have thought
fit to examine this Talmudical Notion the more diligently, both because the
learned Dr. Lightfoot in the place fore-quoted does (according to his usual
modesty) desire it might be considered; and because it seemed to me proper to
oppose this Doctrine of the Talmudists, concerning the Figure of this Molten
Sea, to the Conjecture of Josephus, who intimates it to have been
Hemispherical, (which Geometry demonstrates to be insufficient for the
reception of so many Batlis; and it is certain he had never seen it, for it was
broken and carried away at the Captivity, Jer. 52.17, etc.) and their Authority
concerning things Sacred, weigh much more among the Jews, than any Opinion of
his.

CHAP. IV. Of Shekel, and other Weights and Coins thence determined.
I Shall not distinguish between Shekel considered as a Weight, and the same as
a Coin, having no concern to enquire about the Letters and Impress that it
bears, but only to express its Weight, in Weight known among us, whence its
Value in our Coin will easily be deduced. I conceive that it was just of the
Weight of half an ounce Averdupoise, now and anciently used here in England; or
it weiged 219 Grains used in our Troy-Weight, and so wanted 21 Grains of the
half Ounce Troy.

This is proved;

1. By many Shekels still remaining that differ not sensibly from this Weight,
which may reasonably be thought to have been tried by the Jewish Standards,
when they were coined. Of these Villalpandus reckons up many; and Greaves two;
one in the Library of King Charles the First, of Blessed Memory, weighed by
Archbishop Usher; and another in Mr. Selden's, weighed by himself, as he
witnesses, in his learned Treatise of the Roman Denarius, p. 76, etc.

I have also seen and weighed two Shekels with Samaritan inscriptions on them
(which although I had not opportunity to weigh them to a Grain) yet I do
testify they weighed within a very few Grains, as is above expressed. Nor can
I find any sufficient reason to reject these as counterfeit; and if any will
believe them to be such, yet it must be acknowledged, that they are made so as
to agree in Weight with the Testimonies of the Ancients, which is sufficient to
our purpose, because their value in our Coin may certainly be deduced thence.
For since it is known that now, by the Laws of our Mint, 62 pence are coined out
of every Troy Ounce; it will follow that 2 s. 4 d. and a farthings worth of
Silver, with 3 Centesimals of a Penny over, must be contained in 219 Grains,
which is the Shekel's weight. By this Analogy; as 480 s. are to 62 d. so 219 s.
are to d. 28.28 Decimals of a Penny, which make 1 Farthing, and near the 8 th
part of a Farthing.

My second Argument is taken from Testimony of Antiquity, thus: The Shekel was
equal to the Roman half Ounce, but that was 219 Grains of our Troy Weight:
therefore so was the Shekel. The Major is affirmed by Jerome on the 4 th Chap.
of Ezechiel, to contain four Drachms of the Latin Ounce. The Greek Author of
Farrier-Weights says, (...), ^-: which is the Mark for (...), or Semissis:
where (...) plainly signifies the Shekel, and is falsely rendered in Stephanus
by Siciliquus, which is agreed to be but a quarter of an Ounce, whereas this is
affirmed to be half, by the Author.

So also Stater, which is known to be the same with the Shekel, is twice
affirmed by Cleopatra, to be four Drachms, which is half an Ounce.

To these may be added the clear Testimony of Moses Nehemanni Gerundensis,
related in Arias Montanus; wherein he owns himself to have formerly doubted of
this which was Solomon Jarchi's Judgment, but to have been convinced and
satisfied by weighing a Shekel with Samaritan Inscription, which was just half
an Ounce. Many more Testimonies of Rabbis might be added, but I think them not
necessary.

Only I will add a Testimony of Anton* Augustinus, concerning two fair
Carthaginian Coins, weighd by him, which each of them answered to four Drachms,
or rather little more. Now it is known the Carthaginians were a Tyrian-Colony,
and that the Jewish Coins agreed in Weight with those of Tire the Talmudists
affirm. Hence the Major seems abundantly evident. The Minor is vouched by
Greaves, who diligently compared and tried the Roman Standard Ounce, with the
Ounce and Grains of our Standard. And Villalpandus, with others, have from the
Weight of Water in the Congius yet remaining, proved, that the Ancient and
Modern Roman Ounce, is exactly the same unaltered by Time.

From hence I collect, or conclude also, that our English Averdupoise Ounce
also, being (as I before showed) the same with the Roman Ounce, when they are
both reduced to Grains of Troy-Weight, was probably introduced into our Kingdom
by the Romans, when they gave Laws, and planted Colonies here, and has thence
continued unchanged to this day; which is not commonly observed, because we use
the Averdupoise Weight only about heavier Commodities, not in weighing Silver
and Gold, and therefore do not divide that Ounce into Grains, as we do the
Troy-Ounce, which I suppose was introduced by the Normans, because it take its
name from a French Town Troyes in Campaigne. I may add also, that it is probable
hence, that both the Roman Ounce, and our Averdupoise Ounce, had their more
remote Original from the Eastern Shekel doubled: and evidence may be given,
that such Weights and Coins, consisting of two Shekels, were sometimes used in
the East by the name of Selahs; but I must not digress farther.

A third Argument may be taken from the constant Tradition of the Jews, that
their Shekel weighed 320 common Barly-Corns, in Schalsheleth: but these Corns
ordinarily answer 219 Grains of our Weight; therefore, etc. Nevertheless it
must be acknowledged, that there is no perfect constancy in this matter of
Experiment, which I have made with success; yet variety of a few Grains will
frequently fall out. But because Nature alters not much in the Weight of
ordinary Barley, this may be accepted as a Proof, that we have assigned Shekels
Weight, at least very near to exactness: but perfect accuracy is rather to be
sought in the former Arguments, which bear upon the Jewish and Roman Standards,
than on this which resolves it self into Nature's Constancy, to produce Grain
near alike in different Times and Places; but yet does reserve to her self a
liberty of making some variety.

Such was the Shekel of the Sanctuary, or agreeable to the Standards of Weights
and Measures there kept. Another Shekel half so heavy, is contended for by some
Modern Jews and Christians: I confess I am not satisfied that there was any
such Shekel. A piece of that Weight I acknowledge, but constantly it bears the
Inscription of half a Shekel, called a Bekah, Exodus 38.26. However, it is
sufficient that my care to determine the Sanctuary Shekel, does fully determine
also the Weight of its half, which must be 109 Grains and a half. They who are
willing to see Arguments on both sides, may find them in Hottinger de Cippis,
p. 110, etc. to whose Judgment I have nothing material to add. Also the near
approach of the Roman Denarius, and of the Attic Dram, to the fourth part of
the Shekel, together with their difference from each other, and from the
precise quarter of a Shekel, is well stated by Greaves, distinguishing the
intrinsic Value rising from mere Weight, and the extrinsick rising from the
Stamp, and Laws peculiar to several Kingdoms, in his Treatise fore-quoted, to
which I therefore refer the Reader; my Business being only to give the true
Weight and Value of Shekel in our English Coin, and not to compare it with
those Foreign Coins for which it was sometimes exchanged by the Trapezites, who
made considerable advantage by the Trade.

The Consequents of our thus stating the Shekel, are these.

1. Hereby all its Parts, and the lesser Weights or Coins, in known proportion
to it, are determined: particularly hence it follows, that the Bekah, or half
Shekel, is in Grains Troy 109.5. The quarter thereof, called Zuza by the
Talmudists, is Gr. 54.75. Its twentieth part, which is called Gerah, Exodus
30.13. and is understood to be the same with Agurah, 1 Samuel 2.36. by Rab.
Solomon and David, though we translate it indefinitely a piece of Silver, must
be Gr. 10.95: which wanting but the twentieth part of a Grain of eleven Grains,
may pass for just so many. And accordingly is well translated in the
Septuagint, by the Greek (...): for there are Attic Oboli still remaining of
this Weight mentioned by Greaves, which give another Argument to evince, that
the Shekel's Weight has been rightly stated by us, because its twentieth part,
the Gerah, or (...), is found by the remaining Coins to be right.

And it is highly probable, that the Athenians being a Colony, partly from Egypt
under Cecrops, partly from Phaenicia under Cadmus, brought this Egyptian and
Phaenician little Weight or Money with them. I find also in Cleopatra, that the
Obolus Atticus is called the Dram Aegyptiaca, and is there affirmed to be
the sixth part of the Attic Dram; and consequently hence we may learn to
reduce to ours most other Greek Weights, whose proportion to the Dram is
given us in Galen, Dioscorides, and several other Greek Writers.

The Attic Dram by this reckoning, must be in our Troy Weight 66 Grains; the
Learned Greaves has stated it 67. The difference of one Grain in so many, is
so small, as not to be worth contending about; but I count my Reckoning
sufficiently confirmed by its near approach to his.

But to return to our Gerah, or Obolus. The determination thereof is useful,
because it is proved by Arias Montanus, Waser and Hottinger, out of the Rabbis
and Talmudists, that this is of the same Weight and Value with the ancient Coin
called Keshitah, sometimes translated a Lamb, probably because either of its
Impress, or its old Value, being when Money was rare, sufficient to buy a Lamb.
This is mentioned Genesis 33.19 Jos. 24.32. Job 42.11 but is expressed by St.
Stephen, Acts 7.16. to be a piece of Money.

To this Head also belongs the Investigation of the Darchmon or Adarcon, both
which words, by the Septuagint, are translated (...), as both signifying the
same Coin. They are mentioned 1 Chronicles. 29.7. Ezra 2.69 Nehem. 7.69, 70. Our
Learned Brerewood has suggested, that the Septuagint understands by (...), not
that of Athens, but of Alexandria, which was double thereunto, and therefore is
known by its help: but he adds also, that both these names of Coin, relate to
those Golden Pieces coined by Darius, and thence named by the Greeks (...).

But our best help to understand these Pieces, is from the Scholiast on
Aristophanes, and Harpocration, who both affirm, that they weighed as much as
the Attick (...), which Pollux and Hesychius assure us weighed two Attick
Drachms; that is, by our Account 132, or by Greaves's 134 Grains Troy. The
forenamed Scholiast says, that the Darius who coined these Pieces, was elder
than that Darius who was Xerxes his Father. Now I find no Darius elder than him
but Darius the Mede, whom Daniel mentions twice; but I find him not mentioned
by this Name among the Ancients any where else, save in this Passage of the
Scholiast, and consequently in these Coins, which he explains. And besides,
this evinceth it possible and probable, that the chief Fathers of the Jews
returning under Cyrus, might bring with them much of that Money, which had been
coined by Cyrus his immediate Predecessor, to make an Offering to Sacred Uses,
as is mentioned Ezra 2.69. where we translate it Drachms; but are to
understand, such as Brer^wood calls Alexandrian Drachms, or double Attick
Drachms. For each Daric contained more than two of our Drachms Troy, which are
but 120 Grains; whereas we have showed these to be about 132, or more.

Now the Weight being stated, the Reduction to the present Value of our Money,
is not difficult: but it must be remembered, that this is not so constant as
Weight, but is altered for Reasons of State, more frequently, both in our
Kingdom, and in others. However, it is fit to be known, that now, out of every
Ounce Troy of Gold, taken with its appointed Alloy, there is coined in Gold
Coins, the Value of 3 Pounds Sterling, 14 Shillings, and 2 Pence: which is
expressed in Shillings, and Decimals thereof, thus, sh. 74.1664. Wherefore
supposing the Daric Gold, and ours of the same goodness, we may find its Value
in our Money by this Analogism: As the Ounce Troy, which is 480 Grains, is to
the Doric, which is 132 Grains. So is sh. 74.166, to sh. 20.395. The fourth
term shows, that the Daric amounts to 20 Shillings, and about 4 Pence, which is
about a third part of a Shilling. And by the same method, the whole Sum of
Darics, which we translate Drachms in Ezra may be computed.

Hottinger has suggested, that Darchemon, is derived from an ancient Persian
word Dram, signifying both a Coin, and a Weight of twelve Cherats: what those
were he informs us not; but I find, in Arias Montanus de Siclo, the Arabian
Cherat, to be derived from the Hebrew Gerah, by a usual change of G into Ch,
and that it signifies a Siliqua, or the Fruit of the Carob Tree; and that he
weighed twenty such against his Shekel, and found them equal thereunto. Hence I
gather that each Cherat weighed 11 Grains Troy, and therefore twelve of them
amounted to 132 Grains; which agrees with our former Investigation of the
Daric, and shows the Persian Dram to be just double to the Attick. Now,
though I know such a Cherat differs much from the Greek (...), in Dioscorides
and Cleopatra; yet in this estimate of an Eastern Coin, I prefer Arias Montanus
his Eyes, and his Scales, attesting the Weight of a Siliqua, or Cherat, before
the Testimony of those Fragments, which in many Instances are corrupted.

Because the Roman Coins mentioned in the New Testament, had some relation to
the Shekel, being several of them often exchanged for it, and all of them parts
of the Roman Ounce, which we have showed to be two Shekels. I shall briefly on
this occasion state their Weight and Value reduced to ours. The only Silver
Coin of the Romans, there spoken of, is the Denarius, which under the Caesar's,
in whose time Christ and the Apostles lived, was a little less than the
Consular Denarius, of which Greaves has writ very learnedly. By help of some
of them which have fallen under my examination, and by taking half the Weight
of the Aurei of such Caesar's, which Greaves has given us, and proved that
their Denarii were subduple thereunto; I estimate their Weight to be about 60
Grains of our Troy Ounce. Hence their Value in proportion to our Money (which
now has 62 Pence in an Ounce Troy) is 7 Pence 3 Farthings.

The other Roman Coins mentioned in Scripture, were Copper, and are all known
parts of the Roman, As, or Assis, which before, and long after Christ's Time,
was just half a Roman Ounce, and so equal in weight to the Shekel: but its
Value was but the tenth part of the Denarius, which is in our Money but three
Farthings, and a tenth of a Farthing, thus written f 3* 1. Hence it follows,
that the Assarium, mentioned Matthew. 10.29. which is determined by Cleopatra to
be of the Ounce, must in value of our Coin be f. 1.55 a Farthing and an half.
Hence also Quadrans, mentioned Matthew. 5.26. which is of As: or 1/^^ of their
Ounce, is little above three quarters of our Farthing, exactly.77 Centesimals
of it. And half this (...), which we translate a Mite, is.38 Centesimals of a
Farthing, or about a third part of a Farthing; yet was in weight half a Dram
of their Ounce, mentioned Mark. 12.42.

The Weights less than Shekel being thus stated, thereby we shall, secondly,
pass to the determination of those which are greater, and may be called Sums of
Shekels.

I. The Talent. II.The Maneh.
I. A Talent was 3000 Shekels, as may be collected by halving the Number of the
Israelites (because each one brought half a Shekel) which half of their Number
is 301775, and is the Sum of the Shekels which they all contributed. Now Moses
assures us, Exodus 38.25, 26. that these amounted to 100 Talents, with 1775
Shekels more: wherefore that Number which dividing 301775, will quote 100, and
leave 1775 in remainder, is the number of Shekels in a Talent: but only 3000
will do this; therefore 3000 Shekels are a Talent.

Hence we may easily reduce the Talent to Ounces, or Pounds Averdupoise, used
in Weight among us; for we have showed two Shekels to be our Ounce Averdupoise;
therefore 1500 Ounces are in a Talent; which Number divided by 16, the Ounces
of a Pound Averdupoise, gives the Pounds Averdupoise in a Talent, thus 16) 1500
( 93.75. The Quote shows that 93 Pounds and three quarters of a Pound
Averdupoise, are in a Talent. This Weight is the same now, and in former Ages:
but the Value of this Weight of Silver or Gold, alters in several Ages
considerably, as Coins do every where.

However, the Value of a Talent; 1. Of Silver. 2. Of Gold.
In Money now used, may be thus stated.

1. Every Shekel is in Pence of our present Silver Money 28.2875, for I now
complete the Decimals of a Penny, formerly omitted in estimate of a single
Shekel, as inconsiderable; but now, being to be multiplied by 3000, they will
grow considerable, and give the Pence of a Talent to be 84862.5: These divided
by 12, give the Shillings thereof 7071.875: The Shillings and Decimals thereof
divided by 20, give the Pounds Sterling, and parts thereof, l. 353.59375; the
Decimals are equal to 11 Shillings 10 Pence halfpenny.

2. A Talent of Gold may hence be valued compendiously thus. Gold is now to
Silver of the same Weight, As 14.356 to 1: Wherefore multiply the Silver Talent
l. 353.59375 By 14.356 The Product will be 5076.191875 Which is 5067 l. 3 s. 10
d. The Value of Gold above Silver has grown, since the Roman Consuls Time,
from 10 to above 14 and a third; and I guess it will grow still higher.

Secondly, and lastly; By help of the Shekel, we come to understand the Jewish
Maneh, which was a round Number of Shekels; but with some variety in the
Numbers thereof.

The best result of my search into this is, in these two Propositions.

1. That Maneh being set for a mere Weight, without respect to Coinage,
contained just 100 Shekels. This seems clear, by comparing 1 Kings 10.17.
(where it is said, that in each of Solomon's Shields, were three Manehs, or, as
we translate it, Pounds of Gold) with 2 Chronicles. 9.16. where our Translation
affirms, that 3000 Shekels of Gold, went to one of those Shields. And indeed,
although the word Shekel be not in the Original expressed, yet it must be
understood; because Ezekiel assures us, Ezekiel. 45.12* that by the Shekel, the
Maneh was adjusted. And Pollux, lib* 9* c. 6. affirms, that when we say a
Golden One, we understand a (...); as when we say a Silver piece, we mean a
Shekel, although we express it not.

2. When the Maneh is set for a sum of Money, or Coin, it contains but 60
Shekels* To this number the parts of a Maneh, in Ezekiel. 45.12. added together,
do amount. And Josephus, lib. 14.12. affirms, the Jews (...) (which is derived
from Maneh) to be two Pounds and an half, which reckoning 12 Ounces to the
pounds, as the Greeks and Romans in his time did, is just 30 Ounces, which we
have showed to be just 60 Shekels: and Rabbi Gedaliah, in Schalsh agrees with
him. Neither is it unusual to take the same word in one sense, when it relates
to mere Weight, as we do a Pound (meaning thereby the Pound Troy, used in
weighing Silver) for 12 Ounces; and in another sense, the same word Pound, when
it relates to Money, meaning thereby the Pound Sterling, which of Silver Coin
contains not quite four Ounces; and of Gold contains not quite the third part
of an Ounce.

I will not digress to consider the great variety of Minae, used among the
Greeks and Romans, but only suggest that the various import of the word in
these Nations, seems to have proceeded from the inconstancy of its
signification in the Oriental Tongues, from whence it its derived.

I will conclude with an observation of the Harmony or good Correspondence of
the Measures and Weights thus stated. The Cubit will lead to all the Measures,
and to the Shekel, with the other Weights thence derived: and reciprocally the
Shekel will lead, not only to the Weights, but to all the other Measures. Thus
take the Cubit from the Egyptian Standard; its Cube is Ardob: the sixth of that
is Epha, whose tenth is Homer, its tenth Cotyla, its tenth gives an Ounce
Averd. of Water, half that gives the Shekel's weight precisely. So reciprocally
take a true Shekel (as diverse still remain) that doubled gives an Ounce of
Water, this ten times is Cotyla, this ten times Homer, ten such are Epha, six
Ephas an Ardub. Its Cube Root will agree with the Standard-Cubit of Egypt.

I will conclude this Discourse with the Proposal of a Method, whereby this
Doctrine may be made useful to all Nations, most of which are unacquainted with
our English Standards of Measure, or Weight, to which only I have made my
Principal Reduction in this Book.

This I shall do, by showing, that either the Jewish Cubit, or our English
Foot, may be expressed and understood by a known Proportion to an universal
measure, which is either already known, or may easily be found by the diligent
enquirer in any Nation: such is a Thread with a Bullet annexed, adjusted by
careful trials to that length, that every single vibration of it, will spend
just a second Minute; so that it will vibrate 60 times in a first minute. This
length will be the same in all Nations and Ages, and may easily enough be
found, either by help of a true Pendulum-Clock, or otherwise exactly enough for
humane uses. And as its Motion will serve to measure all Time, so its Length,
by the help of Arithmetical Operations, and application, may be employed to
measure all other continued Quantities. Its whole length may be called the
Horary Yard, as a third part of it is denominated the Horary Foot, by the
Learned Proposer of it, Hugenius, in his Treatise de Horologio Oscillatorio.

This Length being found in any Nation, may be applied to their usual Measures,
whereby it will appear to the Eyes, how it must be expressed in that Nation, as
in ours it is expressed by 1 Yard, 3 Inches, 25 Centesimals of an Inch; or by
39 Inches, 25 Centesimals, whereas the Jewish Cubit was found by us to be
shorter, viz. 21.888.

Wherefore to find what Proportion, or Rate the Universal Measure has to the
Jewish Cubit, it will be conveniet to suppose this Measure divided into Decimal
Parts, 10000; and then we may find how many such parts of that Length are in
their Cubit, by this Analogy.

As the Pendulum Length in our known Measure, 39.25, is to the Jews Cubit in
the same Measure, 21.888, so is the Pendulum's Length in Decimal Parts, 10000,
to the Jews Cubit in such Parts, 5576: 5. This fourth Proportion gives the Jews
Cubit in its Rate to 10000, which are Terms most fit for general use; which was
the thing sought for. Now, the Cubit being so determined, the Proportion of the
side of an Epha answering thereunto, may be found by the Method intimated in
the Harmony of Measures lately delivered. And the Epha being made 1000 part
thereof, will give the Ounce, whose half is the Shekel.

Wherefore by this Method, my labor in reducing these to our English Standard,
may become useful to those that know not our Standard, and consequently to all
that understand the Language in which it is now written, or into which it may be
translated, if it find acceptance.

Corollaries showing the Uses of this Discourse of Measures and Weights.
1. THese are sensible Instances of God's care of Justice among Men. These
determine every Man's Property, the Bounds of his Land, the Quantity of the
Fruits thereof, and the Value of his Money. Wherefore they are used, both in the
first setting out of all Estates, and in all Traffic succeeding thereunto.

2. The fit Measures of the Tabernacle and Temple, to the uses of the whole
Nation of the Jews, demonstrate God's early care to settle his People Israel,
in the form of one entire National Church, under Moses, Aaron, and the other
Priests, who were general officers for all Israel. The Church in the
Wilderness, mentioned by St. Stephen, Acts 7.38. was thus National, and is the
first collective Body of Men, called a Church in the Scripture Language, by a
Man full of the Evangelical Spirit.

Synagogues for particular Neighbourhoods convenience, in the public Exercise
of Religion, were introduced long after, by the pious prudence of the National
Governors of the Jewish Church and State, and accordingly were all subordinate
to them. It Is to be observed also, that this Limited Place for public National
Worship, was within their own Nation, in the midst of their Camp in the
Wilderness, in their own Land in Canaan. No recourse from it to a Foreign
Church by Appeals, but all Differences finally decided within their own Nation,
and therein all, even Aaron, although the High Priest, and elder Brother to
Moses, yet was subject to Moses, who was King in Jesurun. By these means all
Schismatical setting up of one Altar against another was prevented; National
Communion in solemn and decent Piety, with perfect Charity, was promoted, which
being no Shadows, but the most substantial Concerns of Religion, are to be
preserved in the Gospel Times.

3. Hereby is more evidently proved the Magnificence, Symmetry, and Beauty that
was in the Structure of the Temple; and the liberal Maintenance which God
provided for the Levites his Ministers. For if the Cubit by me proposed,
determine the Area, both of the Temple, and of the Priests Suburbs (as the
Scripture sets them both out by Cubits) they must be much longer, than if they
were set out by so many shorter Cubits (suppose Cubits of 18 inches) in such
proportion as the Squares of these different Cubits bear to each other: by the
19 and 20 Prop. of Euclid's 6 th Book. But the Squares of these different
Cubits are in foot-measure, which is here more convenient, as 3.82 to 2.25: the
bigger of which, is near half as much more as the less. Therefore the Areas of
the Temple, and of the Priests Suburbs, are according to my Measure, near half
as big again, as they would be if determined by that shorter Cubit.

Such greatness of the Temple Solomon intimates to the King of Tire to be
requisite, as best suiting with the Greatness of God, 2 Chronicles. 2.5. This Reason
alleged by Solomon to a Heathen, must be of moral or natural, and therefore
perpetual Force, continuing to Evangelical Times; and therefore intimating to
us, that even now magnificent and stately Buildings are useful means to
signify what great and honorable Thoughts we have of God, and design to
promote in those that come to the Places of his Public Worship. And from God's
liberal provision of Land in the Levites Suburbs, besides other Advantages, we
are taught, by St. Paul, that even so those that preach the Gospel, should live
of the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.14.

4. The Fitness, Safety, and Honor, of keeping constantly to the use of such
indifferent Things, as have been determined by Law or Custom, is clearly proved
by the constancy of Israel's using those Measures (although others might be
assigned, as the Greek or Roman Measures, to serve the same Ends) from the Time
of Moses, and probably before, to the Captivity and after. And this
notwithstanding they were used by the Egyptians and Canaanites, which altered
not their Nature in the least. And this Instance proves undeniably, that such
indifferent practices, as the use of these Measures, may be highly useful to
the greatest Moral Duties, the Public Honor of God, and the Preservation of
Justice among men.

These Corollaries hold useful (excepting the Third, which bears upon the
largeness which I have assigned) notwithstanding there may be supposed some
mistake in my Determination of the Bigness of these Measures. But I hope my
Reasons will justify that also.

Besides these Uses, it seems to me considerable, that the knowledge of Weights,
Measures, and Coins, together with that of Numbers of all their Parts and
Proportions to each other, is the prime and most obvious Instance of something
peculiar to Mankind above all other living Creatures, enabling Men more than
them, to civil Society, mutual Commerce and Aid to each other thereby, above
all that is found in the low Correspondencies of Brutes. And agreeably to this
peculiar Skill of Mankind in Numbers and Measures, we may remark, that the best
Sciences which we have, viz. Arithmetic and Geometry, and our most perfect
Arts, I mean, the Geometrical Doctrines of Mechanics and Staticks, are all
employed in this Matter, founded in the Principles of Numeration, and
Mensuration, and built up by a close order and coherence of Demonstrations,
such as no where else are to be found. This was, I confess, the first Motive
that made me take so much pains to retrieve these Scripture-Numbers, Measures,
and Weights, which are the most ancient of all whereof we have any Memoires.

Lastly; The Harmony of these Measures and Weights, so stated, will evince the
Wisdom of the Ancients (probably Noah, or the Antediluvian Men) in the first
constitution of them, confirms the Truth of our investigation of them, and will
ease all our Memories in retaining them, and shows that some degree of
Mathematical Learning was requisite, or highly commendable in the Mosaical
Priests, who were to be Overseers of their Measures and Weights.

A Table of the Principal Measures, etc. herein contained.
I. Of Length.
1. The Jews Cubit in English Inches; -- Inch Decim. 21.888
Hence are deduced;
1. Its Parts, or less Measures. Zereth, the Span, a Cubit 10.944 A Palm,
Hands-breadth, 3.648 A Digit, Fingers-breadth, 1/24.912
The East used also a Span of a Cubit, -- 7.296 2. Aggregate Numbers of Cubits.
Eng. Feet and Dec. (...), a Fathom, 4 Cubits 7.296 Ezekiel's Reed, 6 Cubits
10.944 The Arabian Canna, or Pole, 8 Cubits -- 14.592 Schaenus, the ancient
Measuring Line or Chain, 80 C. 145.92 Sabbath days Journ. 2000 Cub. 3648
Feet. Mil. Engl. The Eastern Mile 4000 Cubits 7296 1.3816 The Parasang, --
12000 Cubits 21888 4.1454 The 30 th part thereof is a Stadium, as Herod. and
Hesychius witness, -- 400 Cubits, the 11 th part of an Eastern Mile,13816 The
30 th part thereof is a Stadium, as Herod. and Hesychius witness, -- 400
Cubits, the 11 th part of an Eastern Mile 729.6 feet Eng. Their days Journey
not always equal, but set by Abulfeda at a middle rate, eight Parasangs, or
96000 Cubits 33.1632

II. Table of Measures of Capacity.
Sol. Inches. Wine Gal. P. Sol. Inch. Epha, or Bath, 1747.7 7 4 15.2 Corus, or
Chomer, viz. 10 Epha's 17477 75 5 7 Seah the third of Epha 582.5 2 4 3 Hin the
sixth 291.25 1 2 1.5 Homer the tenth 174.77 0 6 0.5 Cab the eighteenth 97.03 0
3 10 Log the seventy-second 24.25 0 0 24.2

Add the Syrian (...) -- Congio Romano -- in solid Inches -- 207.06 -- 7 Pints
English Wine-measure, and about half a quarter of a Pint.

III. A Table of Weights and Coins.
The Shekel of Silver just half a Roman Ounce -- to half our Averdupoise Ounce
in Troy Grains -- 219, in value of our Money, pence 28.28, that is, 2 Shillings,
4 Pence Farthing, with three Centesimals of a Penny above it, which are near th
part of a Farthing.

Hence the half and quarter of Shekel are known.

Half a Shekel is called Bekah.

Its twentieth part, called Gerah and Agurah (well translated by Obolus
Atticus) and Keshitah.

Hence a Talent of Silver -- 3000 Shekels, is in our Silver Coin, l. 353.59375,
or 353 l. 11 s. 10 d. ob.

Talent of Gold, 5076 l. 3 s. 10 d.

Hence Maneh in mere Weight, 100 Shekels, in Coin 60.

The Golden Darics, or Persian Darchemons, 12 Gerahs, value 1 l. 0.4 d.

The Roman Silver Denarii -- 7 d. 3 far. Gold Coins double in Weight.

Their Brazen or Copper Asses, ounce Weight, in value 3 Farthings, and 1 tenth
of a Farthing.

Half this was Assarium, 1 Farthing, and 55 Centesimals of a Farthing.

Hence Quadrans is little above 3 quarters of our Farthing in value: And half
this, called (...), translated a Mite, is about 1 third of our Farthing in
value.

POSTSCRIPT.
BEcause my exactest determination of the Epha is founded in the proportion of
which it bore to the Egyptian Ardub, the Cube of their Cubit; I entreated my
Learned Friend, Dr. John Moore, to enquire of Dr. Pocock, the great Oracle in
Eastern Learning, whether or no he had met with any other Authority, besides
what I have before mentioned, whereby that proportion may be proved. In his
obliging Answer, which came after my Book was finished, I find that he has
confirmed it, from the chief Arabian Lexicographer, the Author of the
Dictionary called Kamus; who expressly affirms Ardob to be a great Egyptian
Measure, containing six Waibahs. And he has also confirmed my Judgment, that
Waibah, or Oeba, is the same with Epha, by the Authority of Abu Walid the great
Grammarian.

THE END.
BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by RICHARD CHISWELL.
FOLIO.
SPeed's Maps and Geography of Great Britain and Ireland, and of Foreign Parts.

Dr. Cave's Lives of the Primitive Fathers, in 2 Vol.

Dr. Cary's Chronological Account of Ancient Time.

Bp Wilkins real Character, or Philosophical Language.

Hooker's Ecclesiastical Policy.

Guillim's Display of Heraldry, with large Additions.

Dr. Burnet's History of the Reformation of the Church of England, in 2 Vol.

-- Account of the Confessions and Prayers of the Murderers of Esquire Thynn.

Burlace's History of the Irish Rebellion.

Herodoti Historia, Gr. Lat. cum variis Lect.

The Laws of this Realm concerning Jesuits, Seminary Priests, Recusants, the
Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance explained by diverse Judgments and Resolutions
of the Judges; with other Observations thereupon. By William Cawley Esquire.

Sanford's Genealogical Hist. of the Kings of England.

Modern Reports of select Cases, in the reign of King Charles the 2 d.

Sir Tho. Murray's Collection of the Laws of Scotland.

Dr. Towerson's Explication on the Creed, the Commandments, and Lord's Prayer,
in 3 Vol.

The History of the Island of CEYLON in the East Indies: Illustrated with
Copper Figures; and an exact Map of the Island. By Capt. Robert Knox, a Captive
there near 20 Years.

QVARTO.
DR. Littleton's Dictionary, Latin and English.

Bp Nicholson on the Church-Catechism.

History of the late Wars of New England.

Atwell's Faithful Surveyor.

Mr. John Cave's seven occasional Sermons.

Dr. Crawford's Serious Expostulation with the Whigs in Scotland.

Dr. Parker's Demonstration of the Divine Authothority of the Law of Nature,
and the Christian Religion.

Mr. Hook's new Philosophical Collections.

Bibliotheca Norsolciana.

OCTAVO.
BIshop Wilkin's Natural Religion.

-- His Fifteen Sermons.

Mr. Tanner's Primordia: Or, the Rise and Growth of the first Church of God
described.

Lord Hollis's Vindication of the Judicature os the House of Peers, in the Case
of Skinner.

-- Jurisdiction of the House of Peers in case of Appeals.

-- Jurisdiction of the House of Peers in case of Impositions.

-- Letter about the Bishops Votes in Capital Cases.

Spaniards Conspiracy against the State os Venice.

Dr. Cave's Primitive Christianity, in three parts.

Ignatius Fuller's Sermons of Peace and Holiness.

The Trials of the Regicides, in 1660.

Certain genuine Remains of the Lord Bacon, in Arguments Civil, Moral, Natural,
etc. with a large account of all his Works. By Dr. Tho. Tennison.

Dr. Puller of the Moderation of the Church of England.

Sir John Mounson of Supreme Power and Common Right.

Dr. Henry Bagshaw Discourse on select Texts.

Mr. Seiler's State of the Church in the three first Centuries.

The Country-mans Physician.

Dr. Burnet's Account of the Life and Death of the Earl of Rochester.

-- Vindication of the Ordination of the Church of England.

-- History of the Rights of Princes in the Disposing of Ecclesiastical
benefices and Church Lands.

-- Relation of the present state of the difference between the French King and
the Court of Rome; to which is added, the Pope's Brief to the Assembly of the
Clergy, and their Protestation, published by Dr. Burnet.

-- Abridgment of the History of the Reformation.

Ogleby's Aesops Fables paraphrased in Verse, and adorned with Sculptures and
Annotations, in 2 Vol.

Dr. Cumber's Companion to the Altar.

Galliard's two Discourses of private Settlement at Home after Travel, and of
Him who is in Public Employments.

Markham's Perfect Horseman.

Dr. Sherlock's Practical Discourse of Religious Assemblies.

-- Defense of Dr. Stillingfleet's Unreasonableness of Separation.

-- A Vindication of the Defense of Dr. Stillingfleet, in answer to Mr. Baxter
and Mr. Lob about Catholic Communion.

The History of the House of Estee, the Family of the Duchess of York, now
Queen of England.

Sir Rob. Filmer's Patriarcha, or natural Power of Kings.

Mr. John Cave's Gospel to the Romans.

Lawrence's Interest of Ireland, in its Trade and Wealth, stated.

DVODECIMO.
HOdder's Arithmetic.

An Apology for a Treatise of Humane Reason. Written by M. Cliford Esquire.

Queen-like-Closet, both Parts.

Bishop Wettenhalls Method and Order for Private Devotion.

VICESSIMO QVARTO.
VAlentine's Private Devotions.

Crumbs of Comfort.

Books lately printed for Ri. Chiswell.
FOLIO.
DR. Spencer de Legibus Hebraeorum Ritualibus and earum Rationibus.

Sir James Turner's Pallas Armata, or Military Essays of the Ancient Grecian,
Roman, and Modern Art of War.

Dr. John Lightsoot's Works in English, in 2 Vol.

Mr. Selden's Janus Anglorum Englished, with Notes: To which is added his
Epinomis, concerning the ancient Government and Laws of this Kingdom, never
before extant.

Sir Tho. Brown's Vulgar Errors, with all the rest of his Works.

QVARTO.
PAtris Simonii Disquisitiones Criticae de Varils per diversa Loca and Tempora
Bibliorum Editionibus. Accedunt Castigat. Opusc. Is Vossii de Sibyllinis
Oraculis.

Dr. Falkner's two Treatises of Reproaching and Censure: with his Answer to
Serjeant's Suresooting: Also several occasional Sermons.

The Case of: Lay-Communion with the Church of England considered.

A Discourse concerning the Celebration of Divine Service in an Unknown Tongue.

A Discourse of the Necessity of Reformation, with respect to the Errors and
Corruptions of the Church of Rome.

OCTAVO
DR. William Cave's Dissertation concerning the Government of the Ancient
Church by Bishops, Metropolitans and Patriarchs.

Two Letters betwixt Mr. R. Smith, and Dr. Hen. Hammond, about Christ's Descent
into Hell.

Dean Stratford's Disswasive from Revenge.

The Life of Bishop B^del.

Dr. Harris his rational Discourse of Remedies.

Sir George Mackenzy's Just Right of Monarchy.

-- His Defense of the Antiquity of the Royal Line of Scotland.

Dr. Hez. Burton's first Volume of Discourses, of Purity and Charity; of
Repentaace, and of seeking the Kingdom of God. Published by Dean Tillotson.

-- His second Vol. of Discourses upon diverse other Practical Subjects.

Sir Thomas More's Vtopia, newly made English.

Bishop Jewel's Apology for the Church of England; with his Life. By a Person
of Quality.

Dr. Towerson on the Sacraments. 80.

Mr. Seller's Devout Communicant; assisted with Rules, Meditations, Prayers,
and Anthems. 125.


