SEVERAL OBJECTIONS Against the Reducement of INTEREST Propounded in a LETTER,
with the Answer thereunto.

LONDON, Printed in the year, MDCLXXI.

Several Objections against the Reducement of Interest; propounded in a Letter,
with the Answer thereunto.
SIR,
BY diverse persons whom I have spoken with upon your late Argument* I find,
that the main of your discourse is either granted or faintly controverted, very
few directly denying the Rise of Land by the Fall of Interest, but rather, as
it were, confessing and avoiding it: They say, It holds in the notion, but
fayles in the Practice; Being clogged with diverse appendant inconveniences,
which either wholly frustrate its good success, or overballance it with other
and worse effects, The grand Objections are these; Some affirm, It will have no
influence at all; whatsoever is defalked from Interest will be more then
supplied in gratuities; Brokage, new devices for security, etc. according to
the old saying, Necessity has no Law: Some allege, that since it is now so
hard to borrow at six per Cent. It will be almost impossible at four, because
men will rather keep their moneys in their Ch^sts, then run so great a hazard,
(as Lenders they say now do,) for so small a profit, By others, it is offered
by way of grave and friendly advice to Borrowers, that they take heed what they
do, For most will be driven upon purchasing and other dealings, and so their
debts generally and ruinously called in, I desire to be clear in this Argument,
that so I may be able to maintain it, And therefore your Resolution herein will
much Oblige

SIR, Your most humble Servant, I S.

SIR,
I Am glad to find, That the maintainers of our present Rate of Interest, being
driven from their main defenses, betake themselves to such Shifts and Colors;
It shows. They would only seem to say somewhat, which in Popular Causes, they
think may p^ss for Reason: In the first place, they tell us the Legal Restraint
of Interest at this time will prove abortive, Law being subordinate to
necessity; But if not now, say I, when may it take effect? surely never, since
when borrowers are few it needs not, when many, belike it boots not. Might not
this Exception be equally taken against most of our Coercive Laws? And were it
not reasonably answered by demanding the Experiment? Especially since the
benefits promised by its success are so many and great, And the Evils threatened
from its miscarriage so few and flender. Yet in regard of the stress it bears,
I shall further examine its strength and substance: First, methinks these
Objectours do a little prevaricate, For if they believed themselves, they might
spare their Opposition, and as persons unconcerned, ^eely give it their
Passport. Secondly, Let them reflect, whether the same Argument, having been as
confidently urged against Eight per Cent. be not sufficiently soyled; And
whether though some Necessitous Borrowers have been shrewdly bitten by
Extortion, (as some ever were and will be) yet thousands, who otherwise had
certainly paid higher rates, have not borrowed at Six per Cent. and reaped such
benefit by those reducements, as without other unequal payments, would alone
have enriched, or at least fairly relieved them. Thirdly, My Error, if such,
is however charitable, in judging better of Creditours, then it seems they do
of themselves; For whereas they are h^reby represented as contemners of
Authority, I rather admit them to be persons of strict Obedience and great
Caution, Presuming they will now, (as formerly most of them have done) observe
that Law, from which they challenge their only Protection and Warrant Fourthly,
Paenal Laws are like large Nets; chiefly designed to catch the great Fish; some
Fry will escape, And it matters not greatly here though they do, For Single
Extortions weigh little in this Balance, It is the Steady Rate of Interest,
which coming clear into the lenders own Purse, and in ease and certainty far
surpassing other courses, quite turns the scale on that side, so as the
Abatement thereof must even naturally buoy up our Lands. Lastly, It seems more
then morally certain, That the same Land which is now accepted for the Loan of
a Thousand Pounds at Six pawnes ipso facto for fifteen hundred at four per
Cent. (there being no other imaginable standard for Mortgages and consequently
for sales) then the computing of Rent with Interest) whereby Security will be
restored; and vastly enlarged, And the Land (acquiring as it were a new fund)
will lightly carry that burden, which it now hardly bears, soon shake of its
fetters, and in time turn Extortion quite out of Doors.

The second Objection, Namely, That if Interest be abated, Men will hoard up
their Moneys, Seems only considerable from the Quality of those that urge it;
who are some of them wise men, and too wise I doubt, too mean as they speak: I
might again refer them to former Experience, since this likewise within our
Memory has been once disproved; Not one that ever I heard of having kept any
considerable stock dead for the Smallness of that Revenue, but too many being
even charmed with the Sweetness of it Insomuch as I have lately known diverse,
who upon the Overture of a convenient purchase, consulting their Pillows, and
perceiving, (as needs they must if they do no^ wink) the present disparity
betwixt Interest and Rent, have parted abruptly; Neither indeed have I observed
any such treaty which this estimate did not govern, sometime^ to the utter
disappointment, always to the notable pre^^dice of the Seller. Surel^ the
greater danger is. That too many will still continue t^ lend at four per Cent.
with improved security, rather then otherwise get less with trouble and hazard:
But tha^ any should ruinously keep in their Stock^ to no Account, seems too
Panick a fear, if either we consider the reason of the thing, or temper of the
Persons: The Owner of Land in this fall and casualty of Rents, being generally
a looser Accomptant of his Advantage, were likelier to incur this Prejudice;
And better he might in prudence justify his preferring some present want of
Revenue before the disparagement of his Land: He might with good Color
pretend, it has been overtilled and wants resting; That a Low Rent will scarce
countervail the spoil commonly committed by Tenants at will, and short
termours: However he knows the worst, and that he cannot be robbed of his Land:
Yet how few Farms do we see Vacant, where the Owner is not either by
misfortunes distant of abode, or other more pressing occasions disabled or
diverted from the best managery? Might we not judge him worthier of a Guardian
then a Freehold, who having Land, and not wanting other requisites, should for
any considerable time, both perversely refuse to Let, and carelessly neglect to
Stock it? Much more absurd were it for monied men (no way obstructed) neither
to lend nor employ their Stocks; And therefore to be presumed, that persons so
wise in their generation, will not starve for lack of a Feast, and ruin
themselves to incommode some body. Nothing is so like to interrupt the Free
course of Lending (or at least dealing) as the unsoundness of Credit, and
Scarceness of Security, which are evidently improved by Law, but undermined by
high Interest: For that which we call Money lent being upon the matter nothing
else, but Credit from the Lender to the Borrower, and security from the
Borrower to the Lender, (as I have occasion often to repeat, and as appears not
only by that e^cellent Law and Practice of transferring debts in Holland, but
even by daily proof among our selves, where a small note, nay a Promise,
frequently serves to represent the payment of a considerable sum) Plenty or
Scarcity of Current Security and Credit, (the manifest effect of high or low
Interest,) must needs cause Plenty or Scarcity of Current Money. Besides the
Loan of Money corresponds in good Measure with Letting of Land: Now the
Landlord that Lets good Penny worths seldom wants substantial Tenants, who,
commonly thriveing, pay their Rents punctually, And challenging a kind of
Tenant right, securely repair and improve as upon their own Freehold: Whereas
hard Landlord's are generally and justly met with by hinderly and troublesome
Farmers, and have their Estates often and ruinously turned into, and lying on
their hands. Upon the same grounds of Reason, may we not observe, That even in
this low Ebb of Credit, such as are known to have sound Estates, and noted to
be current paymasters, shall oftimes be trusted, upon much easier then the
common terms of lending; As on the other side, those that accept low interest,
pick and choose their security. And is it not most pregnant but withal most
evident, That wheresoever Trade is clogged with high Interest, there is no end
of Pledges and extreme Cautions* where the rate is tolerable there appears
little use or need of them, Fame it self in effect serving as the common surety
for Borrowers, and few that have a name of honesty wanting convenient Credit?
Admit then for Arguments sake, the Land of this Kingdom most of it to be vastly
over-letten, so as no usual husbandry could raise near the Rent of it* (And
whether this be not now too like ^^e case of borrowing at six per Cent. I
appeal to the sad experience of all those, either L^ndlords or Tenants, whose
misfortune it has been of late considerably to borrow,) what could thence
ens^e, but such a decay of Farmers, failer of payments* and dearth of fair
dealing on all sides, as must needs speedily tend to public ruin? Wherefore I
^onclude, that sober Creditours, who propound not to themselves the Lucre of
mere Extortion, though for their ease and benefit they choose Interest money as
their livelihood, yet (if they will give themselves leave and leisure to
think,) cannot but prefer four and even three freely paid and fully secured,
before six nay eight per Cent. ventured upon the stretch of Security and
Credit, torn piecemeal from their debtours, with such breach of Friendship and
Charity, such ill natured Arrests, Seisures, Entries, Shifts, Hazard^, Charges,
and delays, as now do, and must every day more and more attend those
contracts; And consequently that the moderating of Interest to a Rate, which
the Land may comfortably bear, is the only means now left for men to lend
safely, borrow easily, and pay duly, Costly Experience, will some say, may in
time rectify all, when most that borrow do not pay,, and few that pay borrow:
When our great and numerous encumbrances expiring and discharging themselves in
the ruin of most borrowers and too many lenders, Credit and Security shall
sink together, as they fairly begin to do, and our disease abate for want of
humor to feed it: But truly I cannot fancy this Remedy, which too much
resembles the decay of Nature, and in stead of real comfort faintly bids us
hope, That when things are at the worst they may mend.

Their last Argument importing the danger of calling in Sums unseasonably by
such as being abridged of their former income will endeavor otherwise to
repair their loss, to the great inconvenience of borrowers, presents more
shrewdly to those at least, who spy not its fallacy and self-contradiction:
For quitting all public considerations; and yielding, as it were the main
dispute, it craftily insinuates it self, and whispers singly to every borrower
this seemingly pertinent Question, What then will become of you, when all your
debts shall be called in together? Now this meeting with the natural ^w of
Borrowers, frights many of them into a Palsy; And the more unreasonable it is,
perhaps the more unanswerable, since for a groundless and extravagant fear, no
humane wisdom can provide: Thus are the maintainers of this Policy furnished
with Arguments of all kinds and colors, accommodated to every purpose; To the
sender they suggest, that they visibly loose one third of their Revenue,
without any hope of recompense, for that all the improvements from thence
expected are silly projects; To the borrower, that however, in the end it may
fare with the Public, yet they, to be sure will in the mean time be undone, by
a general calling in of Sums to purchase Land; To persons more indifferent, as
not greatly or immediately concerned in either Condition, That abatement of
Interest by Law will never in any degree answer what is expected from it; For
such as have Power will use it as they list, and no man be induced to purchase
or trade one whit the sooner; To vulgar capacities, that our rich men will
hoard, our best stocks lie dead, and there will scarce be any lending. To
reconcile these were indeed a Masterpiece of wit: But in the mean time, such
shifting of Scenes and shuffling of Notions (so inconsistent,) notably serves
to amuse the unwary and embroyle discourse which in popular causes, as I said
before, proves oftimes a dextrous way of Arguing* The only way therefore to
deal with such a Proteus is to confront his several Arguments, and hold him
strictly to the point, which an unsound Thesis will scarce abide For Instance,
How comes the note to be so changed say I? It was once alleged that Lenders
would still use their own discretion, and take no notice of any Law for
Restraint; The^ in another vein, most men would be so sullen, as neither to
Purchase nor Lend; Now in full career, and, as it were in some grand conspiracy
(for plots must be all along presumed) All will call in their sums together and
be dealing: What a sure Bow is this that has so many and so able strings! But
is there no medium betwixt these extremes? Are there not in the world persons
of different Condition, genius, nay humor? Are there not many by their
Education or present Capacity qualified only to live upon Interest? Are there
not others, who being either affected with thrifty retirement, or enured to the
ease and immunity of good Towns, nay, addicted to special fraternities and
cabales, are so wedded to it, that a sentence of the Spiritual Court would
scarce divorce them? Are there not yet others, who being engaged in Callings
and Employments scarce consistent with Country Affairs or Foreign Traffic,
may prudently enough continue to lend at a lower rate, rather then entangle
them with such variety of Concernments? And may there still be good store of
those, who merely guided by their natural Arithmetic, do now betake themselves
to Interest for its many present advantages, but were the tide and stream of
Profit turned, would certainly row and Sail with it? He that was sent to
discover the strength of the French-Army at Agencourt, ^eturned with this
auspicious verdict, that there were enough to Kill, to take, and to ^scape by
flight. So were the gain of lending now reduced to a nearer correspondence with
that of other dealings, by the same good omen, it might soon appear, that among
our Legions of Creditours, there would be enough greatly to raise the value of
our Lands ^y purchasing; Enough, vastly to agument the bulk of our commerce by
Trading, and ^et enough, if not too many to Lend at Interest: However our
comfort is, they would ^en, Live, and let Live, this being the principal end
herein aimed at, and indeed most ^^portant to the Commonwealth, that such as
will not use their own stock, may, (if not ^or private conscience, yet for
public good,) afford a Pennyworth to those that manage for them, of whom it is
certain, that now (in husbandry at least,) not one of twenty ^oth, or can, with
his best condu^^, thrive, But in truth this objection of prejudicing ^ebtours,
by the sudden and general calling in of sums for better employment, answers it
^elf by granting all that is required: For who sees not, that such a summons
necessarily im^orts great store of Purchasing whereby the Market of our Lands
would be exceeding ^ickned, all that have Estates to more in value then their
debts, abundantly gratified for ^eir trouble, if any they should receive, and
enabled to relieve themselves by ^onvenient sale; And the Gentry being this in
good measure disenthralled; Bor^^wing would soon become more easy and
tolerable to Tradesmen, who now ^^stly complain, that Credit is almost
engrossed by Land: Certainly the Notion of rui^^ng Borrowers by abatement of
Interest, (if the parties concerned would vouchsafe to ^^nsider it,) is not
much unlike that of undoing Tenants by letting them good penny^orths, and
punishing Landlords with ease of their Taxes.

It were not unreasonable to suppose, that well-advised Creditours, finding
they can^^t mend their rate, liking their security, and naturally both fearing
hazard and loath^^g trouble, (perhaps the most of any,) would be as backward to
demand their Princi^^, as Borrowers to provide it, since the difficulty of well
placing a sum proves commonly ^ow a days equal in effect with that of
procuring it (So generally do Credit and Secu^y go hand in hand, being, as was
said before, perfect Relatives:) Yet to leave nothing considered, but even, if
possible, prevent the doubts of all such as do not either affectedly ^take
Scruple for Wisdom, or are naturally afraid of their own shadows, whom miracles
^ly can convince, I refer the unsatisfied to the wise provision and president
of former ^tutes for abatement of Interest, whereby the Reducement takes place
only in new and succeeding contracts, the former Rate being still permitted,
where the Security is no^ altered; Upon which Account much Credit in this
Kingdom is yet legally continued ^ eight per cent. if not to the Profit, yet
to the presumed Ease of Borrowers, in whose option it rests; Thus would the
wise Lender be further bribed so compliance as it were with the yearly Brokage
of two per Cent. Debtours that have, or can procure Credit would be forthwith
considerably relieved in their constant payments, others equally (...) their
trouble, and necessary Charges, And the suffering, in comparison of the gaining
Bo^rowers, must needs be, (if any) not one to a hundred. Having thus, as
briefly (...) I could, delivered you my sense, I Remain.

SIR, Your Faithful Servant. R. W.

FINIS.

