SOME Questions Resolved CONCERNING EPISCOPAL AND PRESBYTERIAN GOVERNMENT IN
SCOTLAND.

I protest before the great God, and since I am here as upon my Testament, it
is no time for me to lie in, that ye shall never find with any High-Land or
border Thieves, greater Ingratitude, and more Lies, and vile Perjuries, then
with these Phanatick Spirits. And suffer not the Principles of them to brook
your Land, if you like to sit at rest: Except you keep them for trying your
Patience, as Socrates did an evil Wife. K. J. his (...), lib. 2. p. 51. Land.
LONDON, Printed for the Author, and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor, near
Stationers' Hall, 1690.

IMPRIMATUR,

Z. Isham, R. P. D. Henrico, Episc. Land. a Sacris.
March 10 1690.
THE PREFACE.
THE Government by Archbishops and Bishops, was in Scotland restored An. 1662,
as being most agreeable to the Word of God, most convenient for the
preservation of Truth, Order, and Unity, and most suitable to Monarchy, and the
peace and quiet of the State. Those motives for its Restitution are every way
so great, that none others can be so worthy of the Wisdom of that Nation, which
challenges a more early Profession of Christianity, and an Ancienter Race of
Kings, than any of these parts of Christendom can well pretend to. But that
Ecclesiastical Government, which in its self is most agreeable to the
Scriptures, and best fitted against Heresy and Schism, may to prejudiced Men
seem burdensome, and by them be Misrepresented to others.

From this it has happened, that the Episcopacy (as Exercised in Scotland
these 26 years) has been of late abolished, as an unsupportable Grievance to
the Nation, contrary to the general Inclition of the People, and inconsistent
with the Legal Establishment of that Church at the Reformation: Whoever duly
compares the Narratives of these Two Acts, the one, about its Restitution, and
the other, about its Abolishment, may find some of their Reasons why no other
Ecclesiastic Polity is yet settled in its place; For by this delay, every
Member of Parliament has had time to consider what Church Government for
Essentials is of Divine Right, and may both preserve the Church from Heresy
and Schism, and the State from Usurpation and Rebellion; and which may best
conduce to the satisfaction of all Religious Protestants, and Loyal Subjects in
that Kingdom. For this Effect, the due consideration of the following Questions
is doubtless of great importance, and the impartial Resolution of them cannot
but be at this time very seasonable. Whether they are resolved here with such
impartiality as this matter requires, is submitted to the unbyassed Judgment of
the Reader: Whom I shall desire that if he has any thing to object, he will
tell the world in Charity and Meekness, that are the proper Characters of
Christianity, and not in that Unchristian way of Evil Speaking and Reviling,
which sufficiently shows what Spirt he is of, that writ, The brief and true
Account of the Sufferings of the Church of Scotland, occasioned by the
Episcopalians since the year 1660.

I wish I had seen that Pamphlet before this was going to the Press. It would
have Occasioned me to add some things more, though I do not find my self obliged
by it, to alter any thing that I have Written.

SOME Questions, etc.
QUESTION I. Whether Presbytery (as contrary to the Episcopacy restored in
Scotland, An. 1662.) was settled by Law when the Protestant Religion came to
have the Legal Establishment in that Kingdom?
1. ALL the Dispute here, intrinsic to the notion of a Church Governor, is
purely this; Whether he should be nominated by the State or by the Church;
whether after Nomination, the power to Elect him should be entrusted to a
Delegated Number, or remain in the mixed Synod of Clergy and Laity; and whether
after the Election is past, his Institution unto his Office should be for Life,
or only during Pleasure; and lastly, whether in the Exercise of his Function he
have a Negative voice over his Synod, or they a Conclusive Voice over him:
Wherefore the Presbyterian Moderator An. 1662. abolished, is rightly defined,
the Church-Moderator, Nominated and Elected by the Clergy, Lay Elders and
Deacons of the Synod; instituted unto his Office during their pleasure;
invested with no fixed Power of Ordination; nor any Negative Voice in the
exercise of his Jurisdiction. And the Episcopacy which was then restored, is by
the Rule of contraries a Church Government of a Moderator Nominated by the
King; Elected by the Chapter; invested with a fixed power of Ordination
regulated by Cannons; and of Jurisdiction balanced by assisting Presbyters.

2. Now although such an Episcopacy was in Scotland taken away April last, yet
since Presbytery is not yet settled by Law, this question of Fact proposed about
it, may be stated and resolved according to Truth, without the crime of LEESING
MAKING.

3. It is not to be doubted, but that the Protestant Religion had the Legal
Establishment in Scotland, in the year 1567, in which year by Parliamentary
Statutes Popery was K. James 6. Parl. 1. Act. 2, 3, 8.
Abolished, a Protestant Confession of Faith Authorized, and their Kings by the
Coronation Oath obliged to maintain it.

4. By the Nature of the Scottish Monarchy, neither the King without Advice of
his Estates, nor they without his Royal Consent touching the Public Act with
his Scepter, can make or unmake Laws to govern the People: Wherefore the
Constitution of Bishops having then the Public Authority, (the Popish Bishops
sitting in this Parliament which thus settled the Reformation) must in the
construction Spotswood's 3 Book
of the Law be confessed to remain firm and valid from the aforesaid year 1567,
till the full Legislative Power of the King in Parliament, concurred to shake or
destroy it.

5. But whatever was done at that time in favor of Mr. Spotswood Book 3. p.
152. Book 6. p. 289.
John Knox his Book of POLICY, (proposing a superintendency which is another
Model of Episcopacy) or Mr. An. Melvil his Book of DISCIPLINE, (proposing
Presbytery, An. 1578) by Acts of Privy Council extorted in tumultuous times,
through the Menacing Applications of Clergy Men Assembling themselves without
Warrant; yet before the year 1592, there is no Act of Parliament either in
Print or Unprinted, settling that Presbytery which is contrary to the Episcopacy
Established before, and remaining in substance at the time of the Reformation.

6. Wherefore the impartial Resolution of the Question proposed, is in short
this, That Presbytery, as contrary to the Episcopacy restored in Scotland An.
1662, was not by Law settled 35 years after the Protestant Religion had the
Legal Establishment in that Kingdom.

QUESTION II. Whether ever Presbytery was settled in the Church of Scotland,
without constraint from tumultuous times?
1. KING James describing the Presbyterians, calls them the very Pests in the
Church and Commonwealth, whom (...). lib. 2. p. ^8. Land. Ed.
no deserts can oblige, neither Oaths nor Promises bind, brea thing nothing but
Sedition and Calumnies, Aspiring without Measure, Railing without Reason, and
making their own Imaginations (without any warrant of the Word) the square of
their Conscience. And thereafter describing their Church Polity and
Discipline, calls it that Parity which can never stand with the Order of the
Church, nor the Peace of a Commonweal, and well Ruled Monarchy: Now when these
are the Characters which the British Solomon gives Presbyterians and Presbytery
(and with a Protestation before God that he lies not) Who can with any shadow
of Reason, or grain of Charity, think that he either was so Unwise or
Irreligious, as by Act of Parliament to Establish Presbytery in the Church, out
of his own free choice, and not out of some kind of Compulsion: Nay, when that
Government and its Admirers have these Characters from him, can any thinking
man read over the Act of Restitution of Bishops An. 1606, and not believe that,
according to its Preamble, the former Act An. 1592, impairing that first Estate
of his Kingdom, was purely owing to his young years and the unsettled Condition
of Affairs?

How he was forced to it we may learn from his own Book, (...), l. 2.
wherein he says, that God Almighty was pleased that the Blessed Reformation of
Scotland should begin with Unordinate and Popular Tumults, of men clogged with
their own Passion and particular Respects; that some fiery spirited Ministers
got such a guiding of the People at that time of Confusion, as finding the gust
of Government sweet, they began to fancy a Democracy to themselves; that having
been over well baited upon the wrack, first of his Royal Grandmother, and next
of his own Mother, and usurping the liberty of time in his own long Minority,
there never rose any Faction among Statesmen, but they that were of that
Factious part, were careful to persuade and allure the Churchmen to Spotswood
6 Book.
espouse that quarrel as their own: Wherefore in the year 1592, the pernicious
Feuds between the Earls of Huntley and Murray, and those Contests between the
Assembly Men of the Clergy and the Lords of the Session: Together with repeated
Treasonable Plots carried on against his Royal Person, by Bothwel, and his
Associates, of the greatest Power and best Quality, forced that young King to
settle Presbytery in the Church, that thereby he might bring off Presbyterians
from joining with the Acts of their Kirk to unsettle his Throne.

3. Charles the First of ever Blessed Memory, he pleads that in Charity he may
be thought desirous to preserve the English Church Government by Bishops in its
right Constitution, as a Matter of Religion, wherein both his Judgment was K.
Charles (...), 17 Chap.
justly satisfied, that it has of all others the fullest Scripture Grounds,
and also the constant practice of all Christian Churches. And after he had
written this Confession with Ink, and then Sealed it with his Royal Blood, who
can imagine that his once giving some way to Presbytery in Scotland, was his
voluntary Act, especially when his Majesty's Commissioner the Earl of Traquair,
(according to instructions) gave in his August 30. 1639.
Declaration to the contrary: But here there is no need to declare the unhappy
State of Affairs that forced him to it: Since there are Volumes written
concerning that Religious Rebellion, which produced the most horrid Murder of
the best King that ever was in these Kingdoms.

4. Wherefore the Impartial Resolution to the question proposed, is in short
this, that K. James the 6th, and K. Charles I. settled Presbytery in the Kingdom
of Scotland, being constrained thereunto by troublesome and tumultuous times.

QUESTION III. Whether the Principles of Scottish Presbytery grant any
Toleration to Dissenters?
1. SINCE the solemn League and Covenant is the Canon, and the Acts of the
general Assembly the Comment, of the Principles of Scotch Presbytery, this
Question in reference to their Toleration of Dissenters, plainly resolves in
this, Whether Covenanters and Assembly-men according to their Principles, are
for Liberty of Conscience, or against it?

2. In the first Article of the Solemn League, they swear, That they shall
sincerely, really and constantly endeavor the preservation of the Reformed
Religion in the Church of Scotland in Discipline and Government against their
common Enemies.

3. To preserve this part of the Reformation, they swear again in the second
Article against Popish Prelacy, that is, the Church Government by Archbishops,
Bishops, their Chancelors and Commissiaries, Dean and Chapters, Archdeacons,
and all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that Hierarchy, Superstition
and Heresy.

4. What is meant by their Sincere Real and constant endeavor against their
common Enemies (King or Parliament) for preserving that Reformation in
Church Government, by extirpating such an Episcopacy, is manifest in the last
Article, in which they swear to assist and def^nd all those that enter into the
League and Covenant, in the maintaining and persuing thereof, and that they
shall not suffer themselves directly or indirectly, by whatsoever Combination,
Persuasion or Terror to be divided from their Blessed Union and Conjunction,
whether to make defection to the contrary part, or to give themselves to a
detestable indifferency or neutrality in the Cause, which so much concerns
the Glory of God.

5. But if after all these parts of the first, second, fourth, and sixth
Articles of the Covenant compared together, any Seruple yet remains, whether
those Men who make Conscience of the Oath they have taken against any
Indifferency or Neutrality in this Cause against Episcopacy, (which in Charity
I believe they think the Cause of Christ) can allow any Toleration to
Dissenters, let us in the next place consider some Acts of their General
Assemblies, which are the Infallible Interpreters of this Rule of their Faith
about Ecclesiastical Polity. Now although the Episcopal Clergy in the times
before the year 1639, (when they saw that destruction of the Church Government)
neither themselves appeared in Tumults nor in Sermons, or Books, exhorted
others to Tumultuate, (for to preserve it) yet the Presbyterians were so far
from taking pains to gain them unto a Conformity, or in case they conformed,
from letting them continue in their Cures (as the Presbyterians were dealt
with, after the year 1662) that on the contrary they pass these following Acts.

6. The General Assembly ordains, the subscription of the Covevant to all the
Members of that Kirk and Kingdom. Aug 1639.


7. And whereas the former Act Aug. 1630. hadnot been Aug. 1643.
obeyed, it was again ordained by another Assembly, That all Ministers make
intimation of the said Act in their Kirks, and thereafter proceed with the
Censures of the Kirk against such as shall refuse to subscribe the Covenant;
and that exact account be taken of every Ministers diligence herein by their
Presbyteries and Synods, as they will answer to the General Assembly.

8. Neither was this last Act, inflicting Ecclesiastical Censures only to fall
heavy upon those who were hinderers of their blessed Reformation, (whom they
called Anticovenanters) but in the Assembly, it is appointed, that all Ministers
take special May 1644.
notice when any secret disaffecters of the Covenant shall come within their
Parishes, that so soon as they shall know the same, they may without delay,
cause warn them to appear before the Presbyteries, within which their Parishes
lies, or before the Commissioners of the Assembly appointed for Public
Affairs, as they shall find most convenient; which warning the Assembly,
declares shall be a sufficient Citation unto them.

9. And that all, and every one of such Offenders shall humbly acknowledge
their Offense upon their knees, first, before the Presbytery, and thereafter,
before the Congregation, upon a Sabbath, in some place before the Pulpit; and
in the mean time, they be suspended from the Lords Supper. And in case they do
not satisfy in manner aforesaid, they be processed with Excommunication: And
this is as easy an Ecclesiastic Censure as the whole body of their Acts of
Assembly have upon Record, or any now alive can remember. Nay, the Assembly
enjoins this Excommunication against Covenanters themselves, who but in so far
comply with Malignancy (the King's Evil of those times) as to drink the health
of any declared a Common Enemy of that Covenanted Kirk and Kingdom.

10. And in case any Excommunicated Malignant should, for all his being
Heathen, be yet so much the Christian, as to long after the Communion of
Christ's Body and Blood, they did all they could to hinder it: For not only is
it by them ordained, That all Deposed Ministers, who after the Sentence of
Deprivation pronounced against them, exercise any part of the Ministerial
Calling in the Places they formerly served in, or else where, they should be
proceeded against with Excommunication: but Five Years before, Anno 1643. it
was by them provided, that if any Covenanted Minister should haunt the company
of any Excommunicated Person, he should for the first fault, be suspended from
his Ministry, by his Presbytery, during their pleasure: and for the second
fault be deprived: and in case the Presbyteries be negligent therein, that the
Provincial Assembly shall censure the Presbytery thus negligent: And when they
have done sufficiently to deprive the Excommunicate person of all Spiritual
Mercy (as far as they could do) they proceed to take from him all his temporal
comfort of Liberty and Property according to their Act, whereby they order his
Person to be A^g. 164^.
imprisoned, after the loss of his Goods and Estate.

11. Now these being the Principles of Presbytery, founded upon the Oath of the
Covenant (to extirpate Episcopacy, and never to be indifferent in the Cause)
and explained in the Assembly-Acts, (enjoining Censure and Excommunication, and
recommending to the State the Temporal punishment of Forfeiture and
Imprisonment to pass thereupon against all Persons disaffected) the impartial
resolution to the Question is this, That the Principles of Scottish Presbytery
grant no Toleration to Dissenters.

QUESTION IV, Whether between the Year 1662. and the Year 1689. Presbyterian
Separatists were guilty of sinful Separation?
1. THE Larger Catechism agreed upon by the pretended Assembly at Westminster,
with assistance of Commissioners from the Kirk of Scotland, and thereafter
approved by their general Assembly, teaches such Doctrine, as from it can be
demonstrated how necessary it is for Salvation that every person keep Communion
with the particular Church established by the Laws of the State he lives in;
unless she either enjoin in her Canons any sinful term of Communion, or propose
in her Confession of Faith any Heretical Article, or prescribe in her Directory
for Worship, any Idolatrous impurity. So that the Question here proposed
plainly resolves into this, Whether the Episcopal Church of Scotland these 27
years enjoined any sinful Canon as a term of Communion, or prosess'd any
erroneous Doctrine to be believed, or directed any Idolatry to be performed in
Divine Worship.

2. All the Presbyterians in the World cannot produce one Canon of any Synod of
the Episcopal Church of Scotland, from 1662* to the last year, with which they
will not readily comply, excepting those Canons that qualify Ministers to the
Exercise of the holy Function: and none of those are enjoined the Clergy of
that Persuasion, as a term of their Communion, but as a condition of their
Ministration: So that however these should debar any Ministers from the Pulpit,
they cannot shut them out of the Church* Nay, when it has been demonstrated to
them (in a Letter for Union, dated at Edinburgh the 4th of March last) that
never any Confession of our Reformed Church avowed a Divine Right in a parity
among all Church Officers; and that the Solemn League did not abjure the
President Bishop, and that the English Presbyterians, in Conscience (...) An.
1661.
of their Oath of the Covenant, petitioned for such an Episcopacy; I think it
may be presumed (when twelvemonths are past without any Reason published
against the said Letter) that they now believe that sin lies at their door,
for leaving their Charges after the Restoration of our Kingly Government, upon
the point of Difference about Episcopacy.

3. In the second place, the Scottish Presbyterians, for Matters of Faith,
adhere to the Westminster Consession, in obedience to the Act of their General
Assembly: Now let any Aug. 1647.
Presbyterian discover, if he can, one single Article of all the three and
thirty Chapters of that Confession, that was ever condemned by the late
Episcopal Church of Scotland, in any whatsoever Synod, since the time of its
Restitution.

4. Thirdly, Scotch Presbyterians, for public Worship in the Church, retain
the Directory, composed by the foresaid pretended Assembly at Westminster, and
thereafter approved Feb. 1645.
by the General Assemblies of their Kirk. Now to this Rule of Divine Service
the established Episcopal Church there has these 27 years been more
conformable than the Presbyterians ever were or are. It is true, that those who
have Sworn in the Solemn Leagne to preserve the Protestant Religion as it stood
reformed in Scotland, An. 1638. and to reform the Kingdom of England, in the
same point of Worship, according to the Example of the Church of Scotland, are
by virtue of this their Solemn Oath obliged to ling the Doxologie after the
singing Psalms, ever after the year Forty Eight, as well as they did it all the
ten years before; and to avoid the sin of Perjury, they were bound to make
their English Brethren to sing it, rather than at their instigation to forbear
to sing it themselves. But not to insist upon this Covenant-Obligation,
doubtless when the Episcopal Church of Scotland continues that Christian Hymn,
which the Directory has no where forbidden, their sin of Commission is not
half so great as the Omission of the Lords Prayer, which the Directory
enjoyneth to be said at Sermon times, of which Omission the Presbyterians are
only guilty, of all the Christians in the world.

5. Again, in Administration of both Sacraments, the Episcopal Church of
Scotland, observes the Directory in all things, save one which is a very
justifiable Practice; and that is in the Office of Baptism, the solemn
Confession of the Apostolic Creed, which both the pretended Assembly here at
Westminster, and the General Assembly there in Scotland, (at the end of the
shorter Catechism) acknowledge to be a Brief Sum of the Christian Faith,
agreeable to the Word of God, and amiently received in the Churches of Christ:
This their acknowledgment of its Antiquity and Scripture Purity, must force any
Scotch Presbyterian, to grant that there is no more sin in saying the Apostles
Creed publicly in the Church, though there be no precept for saying it, than
there is in sprinkling water upon the Baptized Infant.

6. Now laying all these considerations together, that the purity in Doctrine
which Presbyterian Synods confess, and the purity of Public Worship, doing
nothing which the Directory forbids, could be as well retained in the Episcopal
Church of Scotland these 27 years, as in any Presbyterian Kirk or
Meeting House: And that no Confession of any Reformed Church, asserts the
Divine Right of their Presbytery as before defined: And that the Covevenant
abjures not the Epis opacy likewise defined, but on the contrary it was
peti^ioned for by the English Covenanters, I say laying all these things
together, the impartial Resolution of the present Question, is this, That
between the year 1662, and the year 1689, Presbyterian Separatists were guilty
of sinful Separation.

QUESTION V. Whether the Penal Laws against Scotch Presbyterians, had any thing
of Persecution in them?
1. IT cannot be denied but there may be a party in a Kingdom of well meaning
men, truly Pious and Peaceable, who yet for some Nonconformity to the
Church-Establishment, may have too severe Laws Enacted against them, by the
Execution of which they may suffer for Conscience Sake; so that the question
here proposed, plainly resolves into this, Whether the Penal Laws against
Scotch Presbyterians had any thing in them which cannot be justified in
Christian Policy as necessary, (at those times in which they were Enacted) for
the Preservation of true Religion and Public Peace in the Church and State? Or
whether they were the uncharitable effects of a peevish resentment,
inconsistent with good Nature or Christianity?

2. Forasmuch as it had pleased Almighty God to compassionate the Troubles and
Confusions of Scotland, by returning King Charles the 2d, to the exercise of
that Royal Government, under which, and its excellent Constitution, that
Kingdom had for many Ages enjoyed so much Happiness, Peace, and Plenty; The
Noble Lord the Earl of Middleton, being for his unshaken Loyalty honored with
his Majesty's High Commission, the Administration of the Oath of Allegiance, to
all the Members of Parliament, was the first thing enacted by the States
thereof.

3. In Conscience of their Oaths of Allegiance, to maintain and defend the
Sovereign Power and Authority of the Kings Majesty; and in consideration of the
sad consequences that do accompany any encroachments upon, or diminution
thereof, they, from their sen^e of humble Duty, wholly applied themselves in
this Session, to Establish such wholesome Laws, as might by acknowledgment of
his Majesty's Prerogatives, prove Salves to cure the State from the Diseases of
Anarchy and Confusion, which had before in the Usurpation seized her Vitals.

4. But all this time of the Parliaments sole application to matters of State,
in this first Session, the Presbyterian Clergy did not neglect to do all they
could for a Parliamentary Confirmation of their Ecclesiastical Government.

5. First, the Synod of Edinburgh, applied themselves to a Person of great
Interest with his Majesty's Commissioner, that his Grace might be entreated to
procure from his Royal Master, instructions to give them Presbytery without
Bishops; and they promised that they should themselves Enact, never to meet
without his Majesty's Commissioner, who should call and dissolve them at his
pleasure: Which Act of theirs, they promised to get ratified by the first
General Assembly.

6. And when they found this Address of theirs to be without any success, they
sall upon another method, and send a Clergyman, whose name (because of his
Memory for his Piety and School Learning) I shall not mention, with this
threatening, that if the Estates in Parliament consirm'd not their Presbytery,
they should have the People let loose upon them*

7. In that first Session of the Parliament already mentioned, the King with
the Advice of the Estates therein Convened, had before forbid the renewing of
the Solemn K. Chapter 2. Parl. 1. Act. 7, 9, 10.
League and Covenant, and by several Acts annulled all the pretended
Conventions of the preceding Rebellion; but this imperious Address from the
Ministers, gave them a new sensible occasion to be persuaded, that all the late
Disorders and Exorbitances in the Church, encroachments K. Chapter 2. Parl. 1.
Sess. 2. Act. 1.
upon the Prerogative and Right of the Crown, and Usurpations upon the
Authority of Parliaments, and the prejudice done to the Liberty of the Subject,
were the Natural Effects of the Invasion made upon the Episcopal Government;
and therefore upon deliberation of twenty Months, they past an Act of its
Restitution, in the beginning of the second Session of that Parliament.

8. This Act of Restitution of Bishops had this effect, in reference to the
Scottish Clergy: Whoever among them were disappointed in their hopes of
Preferment, or were Lovers of Ease from the burdensome Service in the Church,
or else impatient to be made subordinate to those with whom they so lately had
been upon a Level, forsook their Ministry, but they lived quietly at their
respective habitations, and in Personal Conformity to the Church Established.
Others again (and of them not a few) were sensible that the Established
Episcopacy, being obliged to exercise their Jurisdiction in a Synod with the
balance of Assisting Presbyters, was the only Church Government which could be
obtained of the State, (and which was not abjured in the Solemn League) and
therefore did keep their Charges, and were willing to own Canonical Obedience
to their Diocesan Bishops.

9. This Example of Christian submission to Authority, given by the generality
of Presbyterian Ministers of both sorts, gained the Laity of that Persuasion to
a Pious and Sober observance of the Public Worship; so that at that time
nothing was wanting to render that National Church happy without Protestant
Dissenters, but a competent number of Godly, Learned, and Grave Men to fill up
the vacant places of those who, for any of the Motives before mentioned, had
left their charges; and till that deplorable want (especially in the West,) the
Separation from the regular Meetings for Divine Service, was so little
observable, that before June 1663, the wisdom of that Nation had by no Act
provided against it.

10. It is true, that the libellous Sermons and Books of some wicked Men, which
were written to justify the Murder of Charles the I. and the Banishment of
Charles the II. the renovation of the Covenant, the necessity of taking up Arms
to promote its Ends, and the sinfulness of compliance with the legal Settlement
in Church or State, did now alarm that Parliament.

11. They considered how seditious, and of how dangerous example and
consequence Separation from the rugular Church might prove for the future: And
therefore for security of the State from the confusions they had so lately
smarted under, they were forced to enact a Penal Law against it, importing,
That every Person having an Inheritance, should pay the fourth part of K. Chapter
2. Parl. 1. Sess. 3. Act. 2.
his yearly Estate; every Yeoman Tenant or Farmer the fourth part of his free
movables (after the payment of their Dues to their Master;) and that every
Burgess should lose all the Privileges within the Borough, and the fourth part
of his movables.

12. But notwithstanding this Penal Law, the contagion of those Books and
Sermons which poisoned so many with Principles of Separation from the
established Church, produced the renovation of the Covenant, contrary to the
Authority of the King and Parliament; and that again was followed by an open
Rebellion of the Western parts (known by the name of Pentlin Hills) in the Year
1666, defeated by the King's Army, so that they were out of capacity of
resisting: However, the King in his Royal Clemency, at the Address of some
Statesmen, gave them indulgence to convene in Meeting Houses for Divine
Worship; and they made this good use of his Mercy, as that by them the
incumbent Ministers (whose Characters would have secured them any where but in
the West of Scotland) had their Houses in the night time invaded, their Persons
assaulted, wounded and pursued for their Lives. Then indeed, that merciful
Prince, with advice of his Estates in Parliament, having a just indignation of
such horrid and unchristian Villainies, thought fit to brand the same with a K.
Chapter 2 Parl. 2. Ses. 2. Act. 4.
signal mark of displeasure. And this Act of the Date, Aug. 1670. is the first
that punishes with Death and confiscation of Goods.

13. It is true indeed, the King and his Estates of Parliament, filled with
indignation at the scandalous sin, which procured this former Penal Law; and
understanding from thence, that the specious pretenses of Religion were
altogether false, and taken up by seditious Persons; They immediately K. Chapter 2.
Parl. 2. Ses. 2. Act. 5.
passed another Act against Conventicles; the Preamble of which last Act
declares, That such Meetings were the ordinary Seminaries of Rebellion as well
as Separation, that they tended to the alienating the Hearts of the Subjects
from their Duty and Obedience they owe to his Majesty and the Public Laws, and
by consequence, to the reproach of the Authority of the King and Parliament, as
well as the prejudice of Gods public Worship, and the scandal of the Reformed
Religion: And therefore they were obliged in reason of State, as well as for
the Peace of the Church, to make the Penalty of this Law fall heavy upon the
Transgressors thereof.

14 And the Penalties therein contained (as nigh as I can value Scottish Money
by the current Coin in England) are these following: That every Minister,
preaching at a Conventicle, should be imprisoned till he find surety for 275 l.
that he should not do the like thereafter, or else oblige himself by Bond to
remove out of the Kingdom, and never to return without his Majesty's leave;
that every one of any Inheritance should pay the fourth part of his yearly
Estate; that every Servant should pay the fourth part of his yearly Wages; that
every Farmer should pay Forty Shillings, and every Tenant under them Twenty.

12. Further, His Majesty understanding that diverse disaffected Persons had
been so maliciously wicked and disloyal, as to convocate his Subjects to open
Meetings in the Fields; and considering that those Meetings were the rendezvous
of Rebellion, and tending in a high measure to the disturbance of the public
Peace, declares, that those who in Arms did convocate in Field Conventicles,
should be punishable by Death, and confiscation of Goods; and that those
present at them, should be punished in double the respective Fines appointed
against House-Meetings. This Act is dated Aug. the 30th. 1670.

13. These acts against Separation in Meeting Houses, or in the Fields, were
appointed to endure only for the space of three years, unless his Majesty
should think fit to continue them longer; wherefore his Majesty considering
that they had not received due Obedience, and that the execution thereof had
not been so prosecuted, as by the Tenor of the same is prescribed, found it
necessary, with the advice of his Estates in Parliament, in Sept. 1672. that
they should remain in force for other three Years to come.

14. These are the Penal Laws in Scotland against the Presbyterians, made by
diverse free Parliaments against their sinful Separation from the Church, to
frequent Meeting Houses or Field-Conventicles, upon mature consideration of the
inconsistency of it, with Religion toward God; Affection to the Laws; Loyalty
to the King; or Study of the public Peace of the State: And three Rebellions
in 23 years (from the year 1663 to the year 1686) have justified the Justice
and Wisdom of these Parliaments. But none ever suffered for mere Separation but
in purse; and never any was punished that way, but such as came to Church to
save their Money, notwithstanding all their pretended scruples of Conscience:
Wherefore unless we derogate from the Authority of King and Parliament, justify
Rebellion, and prefer private Humor to public Peace, the impartial Resolution
of the present Question is this, That the Penal Laws against the Scotch
Presbyterians had nothing of Persecution in them.

QUESTION VI. Whether the Episcopal Clergy in Scotland from the Year 1662 to
the Year 1686, showed any thing of the Spirit of Persecution against
Presbyterians?
1. NOtwithstanding that the Presbyterians are pleased to say, they were
dragoon'd by the Bishops and Episcopal Clergy, alluding to that way of
Conversion in France, which indeed was procured by an Address of the Assembly
of the Clergy of that Kingdom; yet this is a palpable Injustice and Calumny.
For certain it is, that all these twenty four years never produced one Address
of the Presbyterial, Diocesan, Provincial, or National Assembly of the
Established Church of Scotland, either beseeching the High Court of Parliament,
or the Lords of the Privy Council, to make or execute Laws against Protestant
Dissenters: Wherefore, notwithstanding all the passionate Exhortations in
private, and the public Sermons in the Church, concerning the guiltiness of
Schism, and the necessity of Union among Protestants, against their common
Adversaries, the Inferior Clergy there cannot be possibly charged with the
Spirit of Persecution against Presbyterians. Nay, upon the contrary, our Clergy
were so averse from giving obedience to the Act that enjoined them to present
written Lists of the Dissenters in their respective Parishes, and so very
inflexible to the Public Order for their Judicial informing upon Oath against
Separatists, that the Judges competent, and Officers of State chid them in
Public for disaffection to the Royal Government; so that under that Imputation
they had nothing but their Innocence to support them, in the Spirit of Meekness
and Charity to their sworn Enemies.

2. Again, it were a great Injustice to the Lords Spiritual, the Bishops, to
charge any of them as having been the first movers of those Penal Laws against
Separation; but since the repeated Rebellions of Forty Years past, convinced
all Mankind of the necessity of those Laws for the security of Religion and the
Peace of the State, the Bishops consenting, or even advising to those Laws, is
so far from inferring their having a Persecuting Spirit, that on the contrary,
their doing otherwise, had demonstrated them to be Enemies to the Commonwealth,
in all its concerns both Sacred and Civil.

3. But withal, it cannot but be acknowledged by any one that considers things
calmly, that none of those Bishops had it ever in their power to show acts of
Compassion toward deluded Separatists of whatever quality, but he cheerfully
did it, in relieving their Necessities, or mitigating the execution of the
Penalties by Law enjoined. To make a proof of this by enumerating particular
Acts of Charity (which Presbyterians, to this day alive, will acknowledge)
would make the Resolution of this Question swell Four times bigger than all the
Four Letters concerning the present Persecution of their Clergy; therefore I
shall forbear it.

4. Now since Private Exhortations, and Public Sermons against Schism, and
recommending Union, were all the appearances made by that Inferior Clergy
against Separatists; and since all the Bishops in Parliament advised to no
Penal Laws against Separation, but such as were justified to the World by a
Threefold Rebellion, to be necessary in Policy as well as Religion, for the
common good of the State as well as Church; I say, after all, the impartial
Resolution of the present Question is this, That the Episcopal Clergy in
Scotland, from the year 1662 to the year 1686, showed nothing of the Spirit of
Persecution against Presbyterians.

QUESTION VII. Whether the Episcopal Church of Scotland were Compliers with the
Designs for taking away the Penal Laws against the Papists?
1. FOr the clearer resolution of this Question, let us distinguish betwixt the
Scottish Episcopal Church, diffused through all the Laity of that Kingdom; and
that Church again under the more restrained notion of Representative,
comprehending the Clergy: and let us likewise distinguish the Clergy unto the
Lords Spiritual the Bishops, and the subordinate Ministers and Pastors; that so
without partiality, every one of these Societies of Protestants may be
considered in reference to the matter of fact in question.

2. And to begin with their Episcopal Church Diffusive. The Two Estates of
Barons (great and less) and Burgesses, fully represent them, in Parliamentary
Assemblies; the free and full Parliament convened An. 1685. consisted of such
Men as had all of them sworn in the Test against the Covenant-Principles of
Presbytery: This Episcopal Parliament so resolutely owned themselves to be
averse from taking away these Legal Restraints upon Papists, that the Vote
about repealing those Penal Laws came never further than the Lords of the
Articles: All this the Episcopal Church Diffusive did, with the apparent hazard
of displeasing the Prince, who was then so zealous for an extensive Liberty to
Papists, that for the disappointment which he found therein from that
Parliament, he chose to turn out of his Service, some who had been the most
faithful to him both in Civil and Military Affairs.

3. Again, for the Church Representative of Scotland, the most malicious
Enemies to the Episcopal Order, asperse but two of fourteen Bishops, for their
compliance to these designs; and it is as well known that two of the twelve
were deprived.

4. Then as for the inferior Clergy, they were constantly faithful in Preaching
against the Doctrines of the Roman Church, notwithstanding the necessity they
were under, of reading the Law against LEESING MAKING, every quarter of the
year, to affright them into silence; they as often as they preached, remembered
in their Public Prayers, the persecuted Protestants in France, notwithstanding
all that was done to stifle and disparage the belief of the Persecution; nay,
in none of their Synodical Sermons, was the eminent danger from the busy
Jesuits and other Papists forgotten; nor in any Sermon, the miserable
Fopperies of Popery omitted, even before his Majesty's own Commissioner,
whether in the Cathedral Church at Edenborough, or the Chapel Royal at
Holy-Rood-House: And in the Synod of April 1685, (when the Bishops could not be
with them, by reason of the approaching Parliament) they drew up their
Remonstrances against Popery; and like dutiful Sons and Zealous Protestants,
showed their ready concurrence with the Bishops, in that day of Trial: And it is
certain, that to their Interest with the Country, it is chiefly to be
attributed, that the Penal Laws against Papists were not then repealed.

5. All this they did, not with connivance of the Court, but with apparent
hazard of its heaviest displeasure, executed in the censuring of some,
suspension of others, and deposition of others, who were all patient and
cheerful Confessors for that Holy Religion, which they Professed and Taught in
season and out of season: Wherefore the impartial Resolution to the present
Question, is this, That neither the Episcopal Church Diffusive, nor
Representative the Clergy, whether Superior, or Inferior, were Compliers with
the Designs for taking away the Penal Laws against Papists.

QUESTION VIII. Whether the Scottish Presbyterians were Complyers with the
Designs for taking away the Penal Laws against Papists?
IN satisfying this Question, let us take the same method which we took to
satisfy the former: And to begin with the Laity of the Presbyterian
Persuasion, none of these were ignorant that the Convening of the Parliament in
1685, was to obtain of them a free admission of Papists into all places of
Trust; King James his Principles for Liberty of Conscience, filled up all his
Declarations for Indulgence within his Kingdoms; none of the Presbyterians were
unacquainted that he had sent an Ambassador to the Pope, and that the Pope had
his Nuncio at Whitehall; none of them believed that the English Court in those
circumstances, would do any thing relating to Religion, but what was agreeable
to the measures of the Conclave; none of them were ignorant, that Papists call
all Protestants Heretics, and that they damn all Heretics to Hell; and that
King James often declared, that Presbyterians could not be Loyal; and that he
could never so much forget the Murder of his Royal Father of ever Blessed
Memory, as to trust them himself: There was none of them but knew, that every
Zealous Papist believes the Roman Church Infallible; and that Infallibility is
inconsistent with Liberty of Conscience: And therefore all the Presbyterian
Laity were doubtless conscious, that the Indulgence given to them by a Popish
King, assented unto by the Pope's Nuncio, conformable to the Sense of the Roman
Conclave, could never be intended for the Ease of Protestant Dissenters, but
with design of making Papists share in the Blessing; and that by this step
Papists, got into Power, might apply it to the overthrow of the Reformation,
was doubtless obvious to every Presbyterian: And therefore the acceptance of,
and thanksgiving for such an Indulgence, was a gross compliance with the
designs for Popery, tending to the destruction of the Protestant Religion.

2. All this Charge lies equally heavy upon the Ministers of that Persuasion,
with these aggravating circumstances, that whereas in the Reign of a Protestant
King, they preached against Popery as imminent and at hand; they in the Reign
of a Popish King, were guilty (for the most part) of shameful silence; yea when
one of their number (more faithful than the rest) viz. Doctor Hardy, in a
Sermon at Edenborough, which he preached at their Provincial Assembly, had
Exhorted them to take heed, that the Indulgence to Proustant Dissenters, might
not be an Engine for bringing Popery into the Kingdom; and when for the
preaching of this Sermon, he was Arraigned for his Life, none of all his
Brethren, nor any of the Laity, (except the good Mr. R. B -- d Merchant in
Edenborough) would show him any Friendship: But on the contrary, they did
openly condemn his doing his Duty, as indiscreet Zeal: And certainly he had
suffered as the worst of Malefactors; had it not been for the Episcopal
Advocates that pleaded for him, and the Episcopal Judges that acquitted him,
and took all his danger upon themselves: Wherefore the impartial Resolution to
the present Question, is this, That the Scotch Presbyterians were Compliers
with the late Designs for taking away the legal Restraints against Papists.

QUESTION IX. Whether Scottish Presbytery in the Church, be consistent with the
Legal Monarchy in that Kingdom?
1. AS the Solemn League is the Canon, and the Acts of their General
Assemblies, the Interpreters of the Principles of Scottish Presbytery; so on
the other hand, the Acts of Parliament of that Kingdom, are the only
Interpreters of the Rights of their Monarchy: Wherefore the Question here
proposed, resolves unto this, Whether the Scotch Presbyterians in their
Assembly Acts, which are founded upon the Covenant, make any Enchroachment upon
the Royal Prerogatives of that Crown, which are asserted by their Acts of
Parliament unrepealed.

2. To choose Persons qualified by Law to be Officers of State, Counselors, and
Judges, is one Prerogative acknowledged to be K. Chapter 2. Parl. 1. Act. 2.
inherent in the Kings of Scotland: but the Principles of their Presbytery,
make this to be the Prerogative of the Kirk; as appears by the 4th Article of
the Covenant, wherein they swear to endeavor with all faithfulness the
discovery of all such as have been or shall be evil Instruments, by making any
Parties contrary to that Covenant, that they may be brought to public Trial,
and receive condign punishment. This is Aug. 1648.
farther declared in their Answer to the pretended Committee of Estates; by
which Answer they propose as a safe Rule in this case, that the Duties of the
Second Table, as well as of the First, namely the Duties between King and
Subject, Masters and Servants, being contained in, and to be taught and cleared
from the Word of God, are a subject of Ministerial Doctrine, and in difficult
cases a subject of cognizance and judgment, to the Assemblies of the Kirk: Now
what cases are difficult, in which King and Subjects are the Parties, the Kirk
must judge, and be as Infallible in Scotland as in Rome.

3. Another Perogative of the King of Scotland, is declared, K. Chapter II. Part.
1. Act. 3.
his power of Calling and Dissolving Parliaments (by himself) and making of
Laws with their Advice and Council. And this Prerogative, in all its Branches,
is usurped upon by the Principles of Presbytery. As for his power of calling
Parliaments by himself, either Presbyterian Kirk-men are not Subjects of the
Scottish King, or else by their acknowledgement of this Royal Prerogative, his
Letters Patents directed to them, may command their Assembling about
Ecclesiastical Affairs, as well as the other Estates to convene for Matters
Civil: But should they once grant that the power of their Assembling flows
immediately from the King their Sovereign, and not immediately from Christ;
then should they by Laws of consequence be obliged to confess, that Christ
gives them no Warrant to Assemble without Warrant from their King. But this the
Presbyterian Kirk cannot grant to the State, because thereby their Covenant
should become an unlawful bond of Treason, and the most of their Assembly Acts
null and void; since first that Oath was sworn, and thereafter the most of
those Acts were passed without, yea, and contrary to the express Will and
Pleasure of their King.

4. Then the Kings Power to Dissolve Parliaments by himself is another Branch
of his Royal Prerogative: But this is likewise Usurped upon by the Principles
of Presbytery; for as much as the Second Article of the Covenant binds to
preserve the Privileges of Parliament, with the July 1648.
preservation of which Privileges, the General Assembly declares the Kings
negative Voice inconsistent. Now if the King have no Negative Voice in a
Parliament that enjoys its Privileges, then any thing concluded by the
Majority of such a Parliament, may pass into a formal Act, though the King
should deny his concurrence; and by consequence, without the Royal Assent, they
might make a Law for continuing their Session as long as they please; by virtue
of which Law, the Royal Authority could not Dissolve them, according to these
Covenanting Principles.

5. In the Third place, the power of making Laws is Usurped from King and
Parliament by the Principles of Presbyterians: For in the last Article of their
Covenant they swear that they shall all the Days of their lives zealously and
constantly continue therein against all opposition, letts, and impediments
whatsoever; and in conscience of this part of their Oath the Kirk Assembly Men
passed an Act declarative against an Act of Parliament and July 28. 1648.
Committee of Estates ( dated in June, the same year,) and in general, against
all others made in the common cause without consent of the Church.

6. A Third Prerogative Royal in the Crown of Scotland, is that of making
Leagues and Conventions of the Subjects. Now that cannot consist with the
Principles which flow from that Covenant which was entered into by the Assembly
of the Subjects, without the King; and more particularly is it Invaded by those
Principles by which they emitted an Act declaring against the bond subscribed
by the Scotch Lords at June 3. 1644.
Oxford, and inflicting the highest Ecclesiastical Censures against any who
subscribed, or framed, or were accessory to the Execution of the same.

7. The making Peace and War with Foreign Princes, is another Branch of this
Prerogative of the Crown of Scotland, acknowledged to be in the King. But this
also, according to the Principles of Presbytery, is Usurped upon by that K. Chapter
2. Part. 1. Act. 5.
Kirk; for she, in the Explication of the Sixth Article of the Covenant
(already mentioned in the Fourth number concerning the Third Question) declares
her self in her solemn and seasonable warning to all her Children of the
Covenant, after this manner, Whosoever he be that will not according to Feb.
12. 1645.
public Order and Appointment adventure his Person, or send out those that are
under his power, or pay the Contributions imposed for the maintenance of the
Forces, must be taken for an Enemy, Malignant, and Covenant-breaker, and so
involved both into the displeasure of God, and censures of the Kirk.

8. Now the King's Power to choose Officers of State, Counselors and Judges
qualified by Law, to Call and Dissolve Parliaments by himself, and make Laws
with their Advice, to make Leagues and Conventions of the Subjects, and to make
Peace and War, being all Prerogatives Royal of the Crown of Scotland, asserted
by Acts of Parliament unrepealed; and all these being so notoriously Usurped
upon by the Presbyterian Kirk, the impartial Resolution of the Question is
this, That this Scottish Presbytery in the Church, is Not Consistent with legal
Monarchy in that Kingdom.

QUESTION X. Whether Scottish Presbytery be agreeable to the general
Inclination of that People?
1. AFter it has been Demonstrated that the Principles of Scotch Presbytery
are inconsistent with that Monarchy, to say that Presbyterian Church Government
were agreeable to the mind of the Representatives of that People in the current
Parliament, might be constructed the capital Crime of LEISING MAKING to his
Majesty, against his Supreme Judicature: And therefore this Question has
Reference to the People whom they represent; and resolves into this, Whether
the generality of the Scottish Nation would be glad to accept of Presbytery,
instead of the Episcopacy lately abolished.

2. For the clearer resolution of the Question thus stated, that Kingdom may be
distinguished into the Laity and Clergy; and the Laity distinguished into the
Nobility, Gentry, and Commons: And the Clergy again into the Bishops and
subordinate Pastors, after whom we may consider the Universities and Colleges
of Learning.

3. As for the Nobility. Since that Honorable Estate of the Kingdom have by
birth their Peerage in Parliament, beside that it were Scandalum magnatum to
say that they inclined to that Church Government, which is not consistent with
their Monarchy; it were also a Scandalum Christianorum, to say that those Men
of Honor and Conscience, who (a very few excepted) swore in the Test against
all Fanatical Principles, and renounced all Covenant-Obligations, do incline to
Presbytery. And it is well known that there never were in Scotland above a dozen
of Peers so much Presbyterian as to refuse the Declaration against the
Covenant-Principles, the taking of which qualified them to sit in Parliament*

4. Again, for the Scottish Gentry, it is certain, that not One of Forty in all
Scotland but has taken the Test; and Four years ago, not Fifty in all Scotland
(out of the West) did upon the Indulgence, forsake their Churches to frequent
Meeting Houses. And it cannot be supposed of any who have so generous Blood in
their Veins, that they should have so little Honor or Conscience as to Incline
to that Church Government, which usurps the Privilege of entering into
Covenants and Leagues, and Convening in Assemblies, for Treating, Consulting
and Determining in matters Ecclesiastical, without the Royal Command, or
express License: Which is a Practice contradicting the Promissory part of that
Oath of the Test.

5. Then for the Commons; it is certain that the generality of them (as well as
the richest and most sensible part) live in Cities and Market Towns; now all
such Burgesses who were either worthy to be of the Common Council of the Towns
they lived in, or were able to follow any ingenuous Trade, were obliged to take
the Test before they could be qualified to elect Burgesses for Parliament; and
therefore, according to their Sense and Conscience of an Oath, they cannot but
have an aversion against Presbytery; yea, their loud Cries and Rivers of Tears
at the Farewel-Sermons of their Episcopal-Pastors (for whom they would have
plucked out their right Eyes) in all other parts of Scotland but the Western
Shires, heighteneth the probability, that they are not in love with Presbytery.

6. Then for the Clergy; since they all have owned Episcopal Ordination, sworn
the Oaths of Allegiance, Supremacy, and the Test, it cannot be suspected of any
of them, without a blemish of their Integrity or Constancy, that they should be
inclined to Presbyterian Government. And if Twenty of a Thousand are Trimmers
betwixt the Bishop and the Presbyterian Moderator, yet sure those Twenty added
to all the Field-Preachers and Meeting-housekeepers* will not make up the
number of a fifth part of the Episcopal Clergy: No doubt they will say, that
what they want in the number, they have in the worth of their Ministers: But
how far we may believe them in their setting value upon themselves, may partly
appear from the consideration of their late Commissioners to this Court; for
doubtless, for the managing of their Cause, they made choice of the fittest Men
they had, as for all other Abilities, so especially for soundness in the
Principles of Presbytery, also of the greatest moderation; and yet one of the
Three, Mr. W -- son, before he got his First Wife, was a malignant Lecturer
under Bishops, and so continued, till his first disappointment of getting his
Rectors Place, made him desert his own with Indignation, and that made him an
enemy to Episcopacy. Another of them, Mr. K -- die, was, before the restitution
of Bishops, deprived by his Presbyterian Brethren, (to use their own Words as
near as I can remember) as a Firebrand of Hell to inflame the Church on Earth.
The Third is so famous, that I never heard of him till he came in this
Character.

7. Then in all the Four Universities, it is certain that not Four Masters,
Head or Fellow, incline to Presbytery; and the Colleges of Justice and Physic
at Edenborough, were so averse from it, that the generality of them were ready
last Summer, to take Arms in defense of their Episcopal Ministers. Wherefore,
since neither the most part of the Scotch Noblemen, Gentry or Commons, Clergy,
Universities or Colleges, are for Presbytery, or in Honor or Conscience can
be; we conclude, That Scottish Presbytery is not agreeable to the mind of that
People.

FINIS.
The CONTENTS.
Quest. 1. Concerning the time of the first settlement of Presbytery in
Scotland. page ^ Quest. 2. Concerning the manner of the settlement (...)
Presbytery in Scotland, in the Reigns of K. Ja. V^ and Charles I. page ^ Quest.
3. Concerning the Principles of Scottish Presbytery in reference to Dissenters,
page ^ Quest. 4. Concerning the Separation of Scotch Presbyterians from the
Episcopal Church since the Year 1662. p. ^ Quest. 5. Concerning the Penal Laws
against Scotch Presbyterians, since the Year 1663. page ^^ Quest. 6. Concerning
the Carriage of the Episcopal Clergy of Scotland, toward Dissenters, page ^^
Quest. 7. Concerning the Carriage of the Episcopal Church of Scotland, in
reference to the Penal Law against Papists. page ^^ Quest. 8. Concerning the
Carriage of Scotch Presbyterians, in reference to the Penal Laws against
Papists. page 23. Quest. 9. Concerning the Principles of Scottish Presbytry, in
referenee to the power of the King. page 25. Quest. 10. Concerning the mind of
the people in Scotland, in reference to the Presbyterian Government in the
Church. page 28.
FINIS.

