A Curious COLLECTION OF PAINTINGS,

This present Wednesday the 23th. of this Instant March, at Four of the Clock
in the Afternoon, Will be be continued the Sale by AUCTION of a curious
Collection of Pictures, with an Addition of more pieces very Extraordinary
Fine, with Tables, Stands and other Curiosities, at the OVTROPERS-OFFICE in the
West End of the Royal Exchange, which are there Exposed to public view.

Catalogues whereof are to be had at the said Office.

The Conditions of SALE.
THE highest Bidder is to be deemed the Buyer. But if two (or more) shall Claim
any Lot, than it shall be put up again.

The Buyer is to pay for and take away what Pictures, etc. He or She shall Buy
within Five days after Bought.

Every Person Buying is desired to give his Name and place of Abode, and if
desired, to pay down a fourth part of the value of what shall be bought, or
else to be put up again.

And for the Satisfaction of the Company present, it is engaged that no
proprietor of any Painting, etc. now exposed shall bid for his own Goods.

A THree small landsk. by Vandeest in 1 lot B 2 Canary glasses C a weather
glass D a fine landsk. by a great Mr. E a fine landsk. with a moon shining F a
General with a fouling pc an half length an orig. G 4 sweet meat glasses H a
weather glass I a landsk. with cattle by De Boyce K K. W. in a gold frame L 2
landsk. in 1 lot M a book of 90 prints and drawings 320 a battle between the
Swedes and Danes finely painted 321 a pc of still life incomparable fine by Van
Sutten 322 a sea port very fine by Wagener 323 an orig. of boors by Hemskirk
324 a pc of fruit finely painted by Smart 325 a landsk. with fig. by Lenard 326
Sir Francis Walsinham finely painted an orig. 327 the Map of London on cloth
finely colored 328 K. Chapter II. in Crayons 329 a sea port by Salemaker finely
painted 330 a landsk. finely painted by a Dutch Mr. 331 a landsk. with Ruins by
a good hand 332 an orig. head by old Hemskirk 333 the Map of England on cloth
colored 334 a small landsk. in black and white by Edama 335 a large landsk.
with fig. by Edama 336 K. W. and Q Mary in small very fine 337 a landsk. with a
water-fall 338 a pc of good fellowship on orig. by Hemskirk 339 a landsk. with
buildings finely painted 340 K. Will. and Q. Mary in fine carved frames 341
Vropa finely painted by Verelst 342 an orig landsk. warranted to be of best
Brugel 343 a ruin supposed by Grefier 344 a pleasant hanging on a deal board
345 a head supposed by Holbin 346 an old woman reading supposed by Jordain 347
Oliver Cromwell in Crayons 348 a battle pc well painted 349 the tower of Babel
full of figures 350 a Droll by Mooy 351 a battle pc by Verdoyes 352 the
Monarchs of England pasted on cloth 353 a landsk. with a thatcht house an orig.
354 K. W. and Q. M. in Crayons 355 a flower pc by a Dutch Mr. 356 2 small
landsk. in 1 lot 357 a moon-sh. finely painted by Mooy in back and white 358 a
market pc by Berkhiec 359 St. Peter a very fine pc by Sir PP Ruben 360 a winter
pc by a good hand 361 Doctor Paraclistus on board 362 K. Will. and Q Mary in
small very fine 363 a landsk. with cattle by Bruynix 364 Mrs Bridget Cotterell
by Corn. Johnson 365 a large pc of Gentlemen at tables by an Italian 366 a sea
port finely painted 367 K. Will. and Q. Mary after Wissen 368 2 fruit pcs in a
lot 369 a history pc by Hondius 370 St. Ambross by Hemskirk 371 a landsk. with
a windmill by Waterman 372 a Conversation an orig. well painted 373 a pheasant
by the life 374 a landsk. finely painted 375 a fire pc by Fisher 376 a hunting
the hare by Hondius 377 a man's head by Rembrand 378 a battle finely painted in
a fine carved frame 379 Jup. deceiving Diana in a gold. shower, Vanhayden 380
the tower of Babel 381 a camp of Soldiers finely painted 382 a winter pc well
done 383 Table players finely finished by Hemskirk 384 a lands. with Cattle by
Crab 385 Sir Godfrey Kneller the K. painter well painted 386 a fruit pc. neatly
painted 387 Two fruit pcs. in one lot 388 The destruction of Jezabel by
Beldemaker 389 a Droll pc. after Brower 390 a Droll pc. by Vanderoast 391 Dutch
Boores at Cards 392 a hunting pc. after Wike 393 The Lady Hollis by Sir Peter
Lilly to the Life 394 a Conney Warren by Bartloe 395 a Ruin by Greffeir 396 a
Quakers meeting an orig. by Hemskirk 397 K. W. and Q. M. by Vansumers in fine
carved frames 398 a large pc. of vanity by Deboyce 399 a pleasant landsk. 400 a
Fish pc. by Hondius 401 a large orig. lands. with the 4 Elements by old Franck
402 a lands by Bartholomew 403 Judith by Elsamer 404 An orig. head by Teniers
405 a lands. with Cattle by Deboyce 406 An orig. pc. of Fish 407 a large lands
with fig. an orig. finely painted by Bratle 408 Princess Henrieta whole length
supposed by Vandkye 409 An orig. Sea fight between the English and Dutch 410 a
fine Sea pc by Pomp 411 a landscape with Cattle by Brugell 412 a large lands.
with the good Samaritan finely painted by Botts. 413 a Ruin by Fargison 414 a
Weather Glass 415 The Lord Brunkerd by Lilly 416 a landscape the figures very
fine 417 An Italian Monument with figures 418 a Sea port well painted by
Wagener 419 a Fruit pc. with still Life finely painted 420 Savior our
Hood-winckt by Albert-Dura 421 a lands. by Rubens most fine 422 a lands. by
Mulinex the figures by Vanderburg 423 a Salver with Glasses finely engraved 424
a large water Glass 425 a Ship pc. by Peter Vandervelden of Antwerp 426 Two
heads an orig. in one frame 427 a hunting pc. very fine 428 a pc of
Architecture an orig. by Collony 429 a lands. by long John 430 a lands. with
figures and orig by Soyinge 431 Process and Saphira by Pauling 432 a Sea pc. by
Vandersquire 433 a Table stands and Looking Glass frame In. La. work 434
another of the same 435 a lands. with Saturn and Venus an orig. by Hickers 436
a prospect of St. Peter in Prison by Deniefe 437 an orig. head in an Oval frame
by Ruben 438 a Droll an orig. by Brewer 439 a Dog finely painted 440 a Fruit pc
by a dutch Master 441 a fine fruit by Verelst 442 a Table Stands and Looking
Glass frame In. La work 443 Another of the same 444 The Tower of Babell finely
painted by a dutch Mr. 445 a Sea storm by William Vandervelden 446 The whole
length of K. Charles the 2d. 447 K. W. and Q Mary in one lot 448 a Table Stands
and Looking Glass frame Ind. La. work 449 a large History pc. of Arnoldo and
Armedia by Hemy 450 a Bachanalia by Vanhock touched by Ruben 451 Saint
Pauls-Church finely painted by a great Mr. 452 a Droll an orig. by Dusart most
fine 453 a Pleasant picture of Diana and her Nimphs 454 Two Fruit pc. in one
lot 455 An In. La. Table and Stands and Looking Glass frame 456 The Duchess of
Marzareen and Diana in one lot.

