A CURIOUS COLLETTION OF Paintings and Limnings. Of the most Famous, Ancient
and Modern Masters in Europe, Viz.
Mich. Angelo. Van Hock. Spranger. Pluto. Moy. Porter. Pierce. Vario. Saverus.
Roose. Ferguson. Rerry. Lawson. De Vernet. Van Clave. Post. Stope. Melle.
Spinolett. Folet. Crique. Guido. Pulla. Harfield. Farker. Langreen. Moriner.
Stanarett. Cl. Lorrain. Vousterman. Egremont. Braman. Dignole. Romboute.
Cornelia. Benest. Perbius. Van Pauten. Rosa. Van Span. Noah. Vergoson. Strado.
Verhulst. Vohett. Fite. Pousine. Henns. Vanderlane. Quinton. Bogeart. Ray.
Botts. Pollen. Halem. Denelf. Cautelmo. Wouterson. Holbein. Brockhurst.
Vanhoope. Vanuliger. Mason. Vantaven. Van Peterson. Old Bean. Vanderwitto
Fetti. Palma. Laplas. Vandermure. Smott. Vanolavan. Segors. Lust. Van Heyder.
Vaugoure. Jordaens. Pincaere. Moratto. Hoockert. Homdier. Dellon. Scott.
Floriteer. Brent. Morvelt. Breda. Colonie. Vanderpoole. Teniers. Walker.
Skinner. Van Base. Rombola. Lacoosin. Croyer. Caruo. Frouquer. Brill. Foulett.
Stavan. Taxes's. Busler. Queelen. Wissen. Lapplass. Bomlt. Varbett. Van Hatton.
Botte. Offligar.
With many more Famous Masters not here Inserted. Will be exposed to Sale by
way of Auction, on Monday the 30th, and Tuesday the 31st of this instant March,
and Wednesday, April the 1st, 2d and 3d, at Smythers Coffee-House in
Thames Street, by the Custom-House; the Sale beginning each Afternoon* at Three
of the Clock, The said Paintings are to be viewed from this day forward.
Catalogues may be had at the place of Sale.

Conditions of SALE.
I. THat he who bids most is the Buyer, and if any Difference arise which the
Company cannot Decide, then the Paintings, etc shall be Exposed to Sale again.
II. That the Money for the Paintings etc. so bought is to be paid at the place
of Sale within three Days after the Sale is ended, but for the Convenience of
such as desire them sooner, constant Attendance for delivery will be given
every Day at the said Place. III. That all Gentlemen, Ladies, etc. after the
buying any Painting, will be pleased to give in their Names and Lodgings, at
the Sale; otherwise to pay the third part of the Price, or the whole Money
presently for them, where upon payment of the remainder within the time
limited, the Paintings, Limnings, etc. shall be delivered to them or their
Order. IV. That no Person is to bid less than six pence a time, for any Lot
exposed to Sale. V. That the Paintings, etc. may be viewed by any Persons that
please to repair to the place of Sale; Where Catalogues are given to those that
require them.
Paintings and Limnings, etc.
1 A Lady walking 2 a French Lady sitting in a Chair 3 a Droll 4 a French
Gallant 5 Destruction of Troy 6 Our Savior and Tho. Didymus 7 Noah's Flood 8
Crucifying our Savior 9 Accusation of our Savior 10 a Haven with Ships 11 The
Angel and Shepherds 12 a piece of Harvest 13 a Hunting piece 14 Daniel in the
Lions Den 15 a Winter-piece 16 a piece of Autumn 17 a piece of a Droll 18 a
piece of Robbing the Caravans 19 a Man smoking 20 a Man's Head 21 a Landscape
with a Swan 22 K. William and Q. Mary finely done 23 a Mary Magdalen by a Dutch
master 24 Europa by a good hand 25 a Gentlewoman playing on a Cittern 26 a fine
piece of Titian and his Mistress 27 a Hen by Varelst 28 The Angels and
Shepherds after Bassan 29 a Roman Monument, 3 qu. Orig. by an Ital. 30 a
Landscape with Fuzman Paggs, by the life 31 Meleagar and Attalanta, by a Dutch
master 32 a fine Landscape with a Waterfall, by Pierce 33 a Sea-piece of
Sailmaker 34 a large Landscape fit for a Chimney 35 Venus and Cupid by a great
master 36 a piece of Pomona and Jupiter, an Original 37 a piece of Ruins
finely done 38 a pleasant Landscape 39 a piece of fruit, fish and fowl, by
Stenwick 40 a Sea-piece by Peter's 41 a fine piece of burning the Ships at
Argier 42 One of the Sybils well done 43 a large piece of David with Goliabs
head, an Original, by Castelles 44 a Banquet of Oysters and Wine 45 K. William
and Q. Mary, a half length 46 a fine piece of Cows, by Colona 47 a fine piece
of Prudence 48 K. William Landing at Carrickfergus 49 Jupiter enjoying Leda, by
a Dutch master 50 an Original Frost-piece by Debryan 51 a Fruit-piece by
Guilman 52 a curious piece of Vanity very fine 53 a large piece of a Tomb fit
for a Chimney 54 King Williams embarquing at High-Lake 55 William Summers K.
Henry the 8ths. Jester 56 a Friars Head by Francis Floris 57 Londonderry well
painted by Sailmaker 58 Hagar and Ishmael 59 a Landscape after Van Die 60 a
very fine piece of Queen Dido 61 a Droll by Vaussan 62 a small Head by Brower
63 Meleagar and Attalanta on copper 64 a 3 qu. Landsk. by Hullenburgh, figures
by Wyck 65 Procris shot in the breast, by an Italian master 66 Judith and
Holifernes an Orig. by Johannes Mola 67 a laughing Philosopher by Old Boon 68 a
Landscape by Eyebright 69 a fine piece of St. Jerome 70 an Italian Head well
painted 71 Van Dycks Head 72 a small Fruit-piece by a Disciple of Bogdan 73 a
Sea-piece by Old Pierce 74 Achillis amongst the Ladies, by Guiov. Valessio 75
an Original Landscape by Breughel 76 a piece of still-life with a Violin, by
Lion 77 Toby and the Angel, on copper, well done 78 a curious Moonshine by Van
Die 79 an original of Nymphs and Satyrs, by De Ryck 80 an Ital. piece of
Pipers with a Dog and Cat dancing, and stand where you will they seem to dance
toward you 81 Venus and Adonis by a Dutch master 82 Lot and his Daughters an
original 83 a piece of still-life, with a Pipe and Books, by Lion 84 a School
by Mustard 85 a very-fine Old Woman's head 86 K. James, a half length, in his
Robes, well done 87 a Flower-piece by Varelst 88 Apollo with the Muses and some
Satyrs, finely done 89 Plymouth finely painted by Sailmaker 90 a Man reading,
in a carved frame, by Brower 91 Balshazars Feast by a great master 92 The story
of Diana and Acteon, by Croas 93 a curious Landscape, by a good hand 94 a
Landscape by a Dutch master 95 Q. Mary a half length, in small 96 a House of
good Fellowship 97 a Guard-Chamber well done 98 a Landscape by a good hand 99 a
Cupid Painting 100 a Landscape by a good hand 101 a piece of Snuker Snee 102 The
Seven Bishops on a 3 quarter Cloth 103 a piece in black and white of Sheep
sheering 104 The King of Jerusalem 105 an old man's head very fine 106 a Giants
head 107 a small piece of a Battle 108 a small fire-piece by Colona 109 a small
still-life well done 110 a Gentleman courting his Mistress 111 a Festoon of
Flowers by English 112 a woman with Bells about her Neck 113 The 12
Philosophers well done in Japan frames 114 a Head by Castro telling Guinies 115
King William and Queen Mary finely done 116 a curious Landscape by Van Die 117
a sleeping Venus and Satyrs after Titian 118 a half length of a Lady supposed
by Holbien 119 a Diana and her Dogs well painted 120 Jane Shore well done 121
Two Beggars in stone colors by a good mast. 122 The Grot of Vulean, Venus, and
Cyclops, an orig. 123 a Landscape by Devenet 124 Diana by a very good hand 125
Czar of Muscovy finely painted 126 a Land storm by a Dutch master 127 a small
Landscape by Vanuliger 128 a Landscape by a Dutch master 129 a Ballad-singer 130
Mary Magdalen by a Dutch master 131 a Hare and Dogs finely painted 132 a
winter-piece 133 a Comical fellow making Supernaculum 134 a Drunkard hugging
his Pot 135 a fine piece of Fruit by an Italian master 136 a small piece of
Cherries by the Life 137 a small Landscape well done 138 a piece of still-life
with Herrings by Wolton 139 The weeping Philosopher an orig. by old Boon 140 an
Obscene piece 141 a fine piece of the Queen that beat the Romans out of England
142 a piece of Ballad singing by Van Often 143 King William's landing at
Carrickfergus 144 a piece of flowers an original by Varelst 145 St. Peter's
Church at Rome, full of figures by Roberto Meglietti 146 a Gate at Rome finely
done by a Italian 147 a Head by the Life supposed by Kneller 148 Mosos striking
the Rock finely done 149 The offering of the 3 Kigns supposed by Rubens 150 a
view of the Kings at Rochester 151 a curious Fortune almost as big as the life
152 a Turks Head painted by an Italian 153 a fine Landscape by a great master
154 a piece of Beasts very fine 155 a fine piece of Boars 156 a Head of K.
Charles II. after Sir Peter Lilly 157 a pc. of Still-life with Hens and Birds,
by Varelst 158 a fine piece of Dives and Lazarus 159 an original piece of
Oysters, by Adama 160 a Landscape by a Dutch master 161 a Sea-storm finely
painted by Sailmaker 162 St. Peter and the Cock well done 163 an Orig. Landsk.
and story out of Ovid, by Edima 164 a Man and Woman dressing themselves, by F.
Holst 165 a small piece of St. Katherine 166 a piece of Beasts after Berkham
167 a piece of still-life with pickled Herring 168 a delicate head of an Old
Woman and Monky 169 an Old Woman's head by a great master 170 Boys playing after
Deryck 171 Lucretia and Tarquin an Original 172 a Winter-piece very fine 173 a
Seaport by a great master 174 Our Savior bearing his cross, by young Frank
175 Duke of Monmouth on copper, curiously done 176 K. Charles II. supposed by
Kneller 177 a Winter-piece finely painted, in an ebony frame 178 Daphnis and
Apollo, by Berry 179 a Bakers boy winding his Horn 180 a fine piece, hunting
Buck and Do 181 a Sea-piece very fine 182 a Frost piece where they are
building of Ships 183 a Sea Fight betw. the French and English, by Sailm. 184 a
Sea-piece in black and white 185 a Friar at Confession 186 a piece of Charity
and Fidelity 187 a Dog by Hondius 188 The Garden of Eden 189 a small Landscape
very fine 190 a piece of a Tomb fit for a Chimney 191 a Ruin by an Italian
Master 192 a fine head by a great master 193 an original Fruit-piece by a good
hand 194 King William and Queen Mary 195 a fine piece of a Grotto, by Stopes
196 a piece of Bread, Cheese, Bacon and Eggs 197 a Landscape well done 198 a
Seaport, by Waggoner 199 a Shepherd and Shepherdess, well done 200 Diana in
black and white, well done 201 a small piece by Colona 202 a Landscape by a good
hand 203 a piece of two Parrots 204 a fine piece of Goddesses 205 a Landscape by
a good hand 206 a Hermit by a great master 207 K. William and Q. Mary 208 a
fruit piece 209 an old man's head very fine 210 a Mary Magdalen 211 a small
piece of spring 212 a Basket of flowers well done 213 a fine piece of a Thunder
Clap 214 Two Japan pieces upon Glass 215 a Fruit piece by a Disciple of Bougdan
216 Two beggars in two Collors by a good hand 217 a Gray Friars head 218 a
Landscape with a waterfal 219 Narcissus after Titian 220 a Man's head after old
Haemskirk 221 Andromeda in a very fine frame after Medana 222 a small fire
piece well done 223 a Winter piece by a Dutch master 224 a Sea piece in black
and white, by Moye 225 a piece of still Life after Robison 226 a Man mowing by
Brughel 227 an Original Sea storm by Sailmaker 228 a Droll by Haemskirk 229 a
Sea storm very fine 230 Two Angels in the Clouds 231 The grott of Vulcan and
Venus with Cyclops an or. 232 a piece of fair Rosamand 233 a Turkish sea port
234 a Bacchanalia pleasant picture 235 a fine piece of Europa by Lamence 236 an
original of the Moon and Edymion 237 a Moorish Horse and Morroccos by Wyke 238
a sketch being Venus by Rubens 239 a piece of Italian Horses 240 Our Savior
carrying his Cross 241 The holy family by Cento Brand 242 The 3 Kings by a
Dutch master 243 K. William and Q. Mary by a Dutch master 244 a Head finely
painted 245 Carrickfergus with Ships by Sailmaker 246 a Drunkard by Teniers 247
a Dog Teacher 248 a piece of Birds finely done 249 a Battle by Moon Light by
Wyke 250 a curious flower piece by Van Everbrook 251 Jove in the shape of an
Eagle carrying Astrea to Heaven 252 St. John Preaching in the Wilderness 253 an
Italian piece of the Nativity of our Savior 254 a head in small, by Abraham
Blomaert 255 King William and Queen Mary finely done 256 a German battle before
Hatein 257 a Feast of the Gods by a good hand 258 Diana an Original 259 The
Regalia finely painted 260 a Charity supposed by Vohitt 261 St. Jerome in the
Wilderness 262 an Italian Landscape with the Sun setting 263 a fine Landscape
with Cows 264 a Tankard and Lemon, an Original 265 Old Boon with a Pullet and
Lemon 266 Medea an Original 267 a small Landscape well done 268 a Woman working
bone-lace 269 a piece of Ruins finely done 270 a Landscape well done 271 an old
man's head by Travessiano 272 Diana and Calista by a good hand 273 a piece of
Flowers by William Varelst 274 My Lady Cromwell supposed by Walker 275 a
Landscape with a Church 276 The beginning of Love, and privately another picture
in the same frame showing the perfection 277 a large piece of Roman Monuments
and Tombs, by a Dutch master 278 a Lady with a Glass of Wine in one hand, and
a good old piece on board 279 a delicate piece of Fish 280 a Dutch Woman
Rocking her Child 281 a large piece of a bull-baiting 282 a Landscape by Ostade
283 a black Horse very fine 284 a Landscape with Goats, by an Italian 285 a
Landscape by Loton 286 Duke of Monmouth on copper 287 an original Turkywork'd
carpet, by Meeres 288 King William at the River Boyne, by Lamence 289 a
Landscape by an Italian 290 Caesar's Ghost appearing to Brutus 291 Portia, a 3
quarter piece, well done 292 a pleasant Landscape 293 a Landscape by an Italian
294 a Landscape by a good hand 295 a sketch in black and white, well done 296 a
small Sea-storm 297 King William and Queen Mary 298 Mars and Venus curiously
painted 299 a Sea-piece in black and white well done 300 a Landscape by a good
hand 301 The Three Graces 302 Perseus and Andromeda 303 a Mary Magdalen on a
three quarter Cloth 304 a young Lady 305 a Country Lady very fine 306 a
Flower-piece 307 a Winter-piece 308 a Frost-piece 309 a Woman smoking by a
great master 310 a man hugging a Jugg 311 an old man's Head well done 312 a
small Landscape 313 a piece of Vanity 314 a Cieling-piece by Cupid 315 The
French Kings Head 316 a Festoon of Fruit and Flowers 317 a Winter-piece in
small 318 a small Landscape finely painted 319 K. William and Q. Mary by a good
hand 320 a fine piece of Venus and Adonis 321 a Smoking by Castro 322 Hagar
and the Angel 323 St. Jerome well painted 324 a Woman's Head a Reading 325 a
piece of Still-life well done 326 a Fruit-piece on Board by a Dutch master 327
Father Peter's Fishing for the Dissenters 328 a Cuckoldy Cobbler well done 329 a
Sea-piece by old Pierce 330 a piece of Vanity 331 a woman's head by a great
master 332 Young Haemskirks Head painted by himself 333 a Conversation by old
Haemskirk 334 K. William and Q. Mary in Oval Frames 335 a curious Landscape of a
Prospect 336 a Friar in Contemplation 337 a Landscape very fine 338 a Sea-piece
of Sailmaker 339 St. Jerome by Simon Fern 340 a Conversation of Dutchmen
playing with cards 341 a Woman milking a Goat, by an Italian 342 a
winter-piece by a Dutch master 343 Our Savior and St. John, by a good hand 344
an Olive-wood Dressing-box 345 a fine head after Rubens 346 a fine piece of our
Savior taken from the cross 347 a wanton Lady 348 a Drunkard with a
Rhenish-wine Glass 349 a Boy playing at Cards finely done 350 The Princess of
Orange, King Williams mother 351 a Landscape by a Dutch master 352 a Sea-piece
by Vandervelden 353 a half-length in little by Holbien 354 a Sea-piece by
Peter's 355 Peaches by the Life well cone 356 a large Landscape well done 357 an
Original piece of Birds by Hondius 358 a Head by old Haemskirk 359 a Landscape
well painted 360 a fine piece by Mustard 361 a curious Landscape by Edima 362 a
Landscape by Snelling 363 Wise men Offering to our Savior 364 a Landscape by an
Italian 365 another ditto 366 a Head by Titian 367 a Head by Haemskirk 368 a
piece of two Horses 369 a piece of Still-life by Roustrate 370 a VVomans Head
in a carved frame 371 a Head by Haemskirk 372 a winter-piece well done 373 a
curious Sea-piece by Moy 374 a fine Landscape with figures, by De Ryck 375 a
Fruit-piece by Bogdan 376 Two Nuns Heads very fine 377 Jupiter and Pomona 378
Virgin Mary and our Savior on copper 379 a Fruit-piece by a Disciple of Bogdan
380 an Original Sea-storm 381 a piece of still-life by Virgulo 382 a piece of
still life by a Disciple of Bogdan 383 a Gentleman in a Ruff 384 a Droll by
Brower 385 a Head supposed to be Prince George's 386 a Vanity after Wissen,
finely done 387 a Roman Charity well painted 388 a 3 quarter cloth with Cattle,
by Moy 389 a Landscape after Emy 390 a piece of Cattle after Berkham 391 a piece
of still-life by Virgulo 392 a Sea-piece well painted 393 a piece of Flowers
and Fruit well painted 394 a Sea-piece by Vandervelden 395 a piece of flowers
well done 396 a Head by old Haemskirk 397 Young Teckleys head in an Oval 398 an
Original Fruit-piece in a right gold frame 399 a VVomans head well done 400 a
Landscape with a VVind-mill 401 a piece of prospective well done 402 a Landscape
with figures, by De Ryck 403 an Original piece of Fruit, by Bogdan 404 a piece
with two Bogs 405 a piece with a Ship 406 a Sea-piece of Vandervelden 407 a
small piece of Japan flowers 408 an Old man's Head very fine 409 Queen Dido 410
an Original Turky-work'd Carpet 411 a pc. of Hell, and Devils cutting off K.
Chapter head 412 an Amorous piece on a 3 quarter cloth 413 a Landscape with
Hedge-Hoggs, by the life 414 a Roman Monument in a Grove, by an Ital. 415 an
original Owl by Snider 416 a Woman sucking a Child, by Ostade 417 a fine Head
by Albert Durer 418 Oliver Cromwell well painted 419 a Conversation by old
Haemskirk 420 St. Peter with the Cock, very fine 421 a Dog after Lasuliere 422
a Hanch of Venison 423 a VVinter-piece finely done 424 King William and Queen
Mary 425 Our Savior triumphing over the world 426 a fine Horse by Woverman 427
a small Landscape supposed by Griffiere 428 a Dutch Landscape neatly done, on
copper 429 a Dutch Landscape in an ebony frame 430 an Original Turkey Carpet in
an eb. frame 431 Jupiter in shape of a Swan, enjoying Laeda 432 a Landscape with
a VVater-mill 433 a fine old VVomans head 434 a piece of David and the High
Priests 435 a Buck-hunting 436 a Bear-hunting 437 an Orig. Landscape with
figures, by Wyck 438 an original Moonshine 439 Ital. pc. with Pipers, with Dog
and Cat dancing, so that they seem to run after you wheresoever you stand 440 a
prospect with buildings well painted 441 an Emperors Head curiously painted
442 a winter-piece by Evenbrood 443 a piece of Ruins 444 a laughing
Philosopher, an orig. by old Boon. 445 Our Savior at his last supper 446 a
Spanish conversation, by an Italian 447 a Bull-baiting after Hondius 448 a
Leopard and Dogs 449 a Head by Castro, telling Guineas 450 a Bull-baiting 451 a
Pilgrim, an Original, by Haemskirk 452 The story of Jeptha and his Daughters
453 The 7 works of Charity finely done 454 a Woman with Child, finely done 455
Nero and Seneca by a Dutch master 456 a fine piece of a Mackarel 457 a Madona
458 a Landscape finely painted 459 Pyramus and Thysbe by an Italian 460 a pc. of
Cards, an Orig. of old Haem. on cop. 461 a fine piece of Dogs and Monkies 462 a
Painter drawing his Mistress 463 a Ladies Head 464 a half length of a Shepherd
465 Don Scotus a Philosopher, a half length 466 a sleeping Venus by a good hand
467 Jupiter in the shape of an Eagle, carrying Astrea to Heaven 468 a Turkey
worked Carpet by Moss 469 an original Flower-piece, by Varelst 470 a Fools head
471 a fine pc. of a Lady, supposed in Holbins time 472 a piece of a Deaths
Head, and Hourglass 473 a Droll by Brower 474 a curious piece of Flowers, by
Varelst 475 a Nymph sleeping, with other Nymphs and Satyrs, an orig 476 a piece
of still-life, with a Jarr and Fruit 477 an Amorous piece curiously painted 478
a piece of Diana well painted 479 The story of Achilles, where he finds the
Trojan Ks. Son in his Fathers Tomb 480 a Flower-pot by a good hand 481 a
Sea-piece by Moonshine 482 a Landscape with a VVater-mill 483 a fine
Flower-piece by Bunnyeroy 484 a French Gallant 485 a French Lady walking 486
Destruction of Troy, with the Trojan Horse 487 Crucifixion of our Savior and 2
Thieves 488 a Dutch Droll 489 a Droll, playing at Tables 490 Noah's Flood 491
The Angel appearing to the Shepherds 492 a Sea-piece 493 a Fruit-piece of
Hunting 494 a fine piece of Autumn 495 a piece of Harvest 496 Daniel in the
Lions Den 497 a VVinter-piece 498 Our Savior and Thomas Didymus 499 Our
Saviors Ascension 500 a Turkish battle

