THE VISIONS OF PASQUIN, OR, A CHARACTER OF THE Roman Court, Religion and
Practices; Together with an Account of The Arts of the Popes Nephews to get
Money, The Tricks of the Priests to fill the Churches Coffers by Masses for the
Dead, The Policy of the Jesuits to Cully Princes, and Cheat Christendom.

AS ALSO An Exact Description of Purgatory and Hell. In a Dialogue between
Pasquin and Marforio, Tran slated out of Italian.

-- Ridentem dicere verum
Quis vetat? --
Licensed, Feb. 9. 1689.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by Richard Baldwin near the Black Bull in
the Old-Bailey. 1689.

THE PREFACE.
THE Vices of the Roman Court have been so notorious, the Pride of their Popes,
the Ambition of their Prelates, the Covetousness of the Nephews, and the
Hypocrisy of their Monastic Orders (not to instance in their Lusts, and
Brutalities) have been, and still are so visible to the World, that in their
own Country Italy, under the awe of the Inquisition, and within the immediate
reach of his Holinesse's Catchpoles (the Sbirri) there have been found some men
of Courage, and Honesty, who have dared to pull off the mask, and expose their
pretended sanctity, and let the World see, that no men have erred more grossly,
than the bold pretenders to Infallibility; no men are more slaves to the World,
its Pomps and Vanities, than those who have vowed to forsake them; and no men's
minds are so eagerly set upon hoarding up wealth for their ravenous kindred, as
those who say in Hypocrisy, what St. Peter said in truth, Silver and Gold have
I none. For there are a sort of Inbabitants of the Roman World, who have no
Estates, and yet have great Revenues; no tillage, and yet abound in corn; no
Wives, and yet have more Children to a single man's share, than the Countess of
Holland had at a birth.

It is true, the learned men of the Reformed Church, have with much strength of
argument, and authority, baffled, and confuted the false Doctrines of the Papal
faction, but perhaps those, who have shown their actions in a true light, and
made appear, how specious their sanctity is, and how ridiculous their devotion,
dressing up their Narratives in a Jocular, and Comical habit, have used the
more successful method to make the World acquainted with their extravagancies.
This course the old Satyrists took to expose Vice, and in later ages the Copy
was transcribed by Orthuinus Gratius, and Rabelais, who gave the World an
excellent Picture of the Ignorance, and Luxury of the Friars; and of late the
Author of the Cardinalismo, the Nepotismo, the life of Donna Olympia, and the
History of the Roman Curtesans has admirably described the practices of the
men of the Purple, the sottishness of the Papal Nephews, the incestuous
intrigue between even his Holiness himself, and his Brother's Wife Olympia,
together with the unlawful, and preposterous Indulgences of that Court, that
pretends to unspotted sanctity: many other such writings having been sent into
the World, some of which have visited this Country, while others are still
confined to their foreign dress.

Such writings are for the most part called Pasquils, or Pasquinades, from the
statue of Pasquin in the middle of Rome, to which they are commonly affixt. It
is thought by learned men to be the remains of a statue of one of the old
Gladiators with his Enemy lying dead at his Feet; and the conjecture is happy,
for Pasquin is invincible, he triumphs over Princes, and subdues all the World,
and without the help of Arms or Armies, makes even Popes stoop and tremble, and
executes those in Effigy, who by their power rescue their persons from the
punishments they deserve. It has been often consulted (and perhaps in the
Conclave) to remove this statue, and a certain Prince once resolved to throw it
into the River Tyber, but changed his resolution, when his Servant told him,
that it would make a greater noise under Water, than while above-ground, and
produce a spawn of Frogs, whose croakings would deafen the City that sits on
seven Hills: and what a noise then, may we imagine, makes he, when his friend
Marforio attends him, and like some Echoes repeats what he says, much louder
than it was first spoken? Such a couple of Companions are enough to laugh.
Impudence it self out of countenance, and put the Governess of a Roman Bordelli
to the blush.

Nor is it but requisite, that those who by their Station, or their Interests
are above the Laws, should be subject to the lashes of a smart wit, as well as
to those of their own Consciences; the Furies within, when they lay on most
severely, are seldom heard by the bystanders, but the World takes notice, how
a dissolute Grandee is whipped by a keen and implacable Satyrist, who rubbs off
the Paint, and shows the deformities, who strips the Actor in Religion of his
mortified dress, and exposes the Covetousness and Hypocrisy, the sensuality and
leudness, that lodges under the habit of devotion, and by these means instructs
mankind to make a less show, and to be more truly, and really pious and honest,
and not to admire a demure outside, which covers all manner of villainies. For
what inclinations can we have to believe that Pope Pius who being forbidden to
eat Pork, lest it should throw him into his grave, made answer, that he would
indulge his appetite al despito di Dio, in despite of God, and his Authority?
What encouragement have we to think him just, who throwing St. Peter's Keys
into the Tyber, said, that St. Paul's Sword should conquer his adversaries? Who
can believe Alexander the 6th to have been true to his vow of chastity, who
prostituted his own Daughter Lucretia? Or Leo the 10th to have had any regard
to Religion, who boasted of the vast sums he had gotten, by the Fabula de
Christo, the fabulous accounts, which the Gospel gives of our Holy Savior, as
he blasphemously styled the Sacred Scriptures? Who can believer the Inquisition
to be the Tribunal of Christ, while their proceedings are a demonstration, that
they are the Executioners of the Kingdom of Darkness? Who can think that there
is much charity at Rome, when the Papal Nephews like the Plant-animal Boranez,
eat up, and devour all that comes within their reach? Or that Chastity is to be
reckoned among the Virtues of that City, in which their Curtesans are the
Companions of their mitred men, and the Monks are the notorious practisers of
Masculine Venery? While the book of God is locked up in Libraries, and made a
Prisoner under the restraint of an unknown Tongue, and those who all their life
long, walk in the direct paths to Hell and Destruction, hope to enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven at the backdoor by the help of an Indulgence, or a thousand
Masses, as if every thing were to be bought in the Court of Christ above,
because there is nothing to be had in the Court of his pretended Vicar on Earth
without Money.

But I detain you too long in the Portal, the Book it self affords signal
instances of the inefficaciousness of Holy Water, (which if it could fright
Devils, would undoubtedly drive the Priests themselves out of the Church) of
the Vanity of Prayers to the Dead, and Masses for the Dead (while the Damned
can neither help themselves nor others, and those in Bliss, do not hear; and
could they be touched with a sense of our wants, their happiness would not be
complete) that it is no greater wonder, that Pasquin's statue could die, than
that a luxurious Friar should, when he dies be saved, since to raise such a
Bacchus to the Palace of Bliss, would require such an Engine, as that whereby
Pope sixtus Quintus, (commonly called Sicecinque) raised the Pyramid; that too
many depend so much on Indulgences, that they believe there is no need of the
Blood of Jesus Christ to make them happy; that in Hell the very Serpents have
on their Heads Friars Cowls; that the Infernal Vatican is built on as weak a
foundation, as that which is at Rome, that the Papal Grandeur has no
foundation in Scripture, or Primitive Antiquity, but only in the forged
Donation of Constantine, and that to make two Heads of the Church, Christ and
the Pope, is to make the Church such a Monster, as the Imperial Eagle; that
there is a vast difference between the habit of the Virgin Mary in Heaven, and
at Loretto; that the Papal spectacles lessen true merit, and magnify what is
vile and contemptible; that the employments of the several members of the
Kingdom of Antichrist are either wicked or ridiculous; that the holy Scriptures
are kept from the people, because they discover the Vices of the Papacy, and
would, if known, incline men to the love of Virtue and Holiness; that the
Inquisition is the greatest Plague of mankind; and that the Infernal Court is
more obliged to the Popes Nephews, than to all other men, because by their
cruelty they cause many Thousands to die in despair.

But above all, here you have a Map, and a description of a large Kingdom, over
which Christ's Vicar pretends to a Jurisdiction, while his Master had never any
such Territory, as Purgatory; in it are houses of entertainment without number,
where amidst many inconveniences you have much diversion, and you may purchase
a license, while you are on Earth, to live here as merrily as under the
protection of the Vatican; and what makes the habitation the more tolerable,
you may get a lodging for a Month or a Year, upon condition that you pay your
Rent, as if you were to dwell there for ever; for, besides Closets, and other
private Apartments, you may steal out by a back-stair, when you please, only
the passage is so narrow, that you can carry nothing with you more than the
clothes you brought with you into the World; and by this the Papal Grandeur is
supported, for tho your sufferings are but for a time, the Legacies given for
Masses for the Souls in Purgatory, are the Churches perpetual and unalterable
inheritance; happy are the poor then, you will say, who are never sent to
Purgatory, because they have no Money to purchase their redemption, nor are the
rich so very unhappy, who may choose how little while they will stay there, and
cannot fail of easy Penance both here and hereafter, while Father Cornelius is
the Confessor, and Father Dominic, by virtue of a peculiar Bull from his
Holiness, sets the term of years, or days, you must spend there; so true is
that observation, that he who would enjoy all the sensualities of this World,
and die in the assurance of eternal happiness, should choose to live in Italy,
and die in the Communion of the Roman Church.

These, and many other such accounts does this Book afford of the extraordinary
qualities of that Church, that excluding all others, calls it self Holy and
Infallible, to which it may be wondered, that our Blessed Savior has not as
yet given a Bill of Divorce, while she has been so notoriously guilty of
frequent prostitutions, and has degenerated from the Church of Christ into the
Synagogue of Satan.

Pasquin Dead and Revived.
Pasq. What, Marforius, do you go away without bidding me farewell, as if we
had never seen one another before?


Marf. Who calls me? what voice is that? methinks I see Pasquin alive in that
Statue? but how is that possible since he is dead? without doubt it is some
Phantasm, which would make me believe he was alive. I am very sorry I have no
holy water to drive away the Devil.


Pasq. Be not afraid, Friend, I am the same Pasquin who have been so long thy
acquaintance; and therefore there is no need of holy water to make me fly away;
who am most miraculously come to life again; for no Human Inventions have any
force against the Decrees of Heaven, and I would have thee lay aside that false
Opinion that so many fools have, who believe that holy water has virtue in it
to drive away Devils. This is but a jest, for were it so, the Pope's Nephews
and other wicked Priests would run out of the Churches; for in Hell it self
there are not worse Devils to be found than them.


Marf. But how do thou know that? have thou been in some parts of Hell? O God
how I tremble! and the more I look on thee, the more I am frighted.


Pasq. Be not so terrified, Brother, at the sight of an old friend; for true
friendship ought to last in the other world. I am not now dead; I am alive
again; but if I were dead, as I was lately, what reason would thou have to be
afraid of me? the dead neither kill nor steal, nor walk in the street in the
night to assassinate any; they break not open houses to violate Virgins, nor
combine to transgress the Laws. Whilst I was in the world I never was afraid of
the dead, but often of the living, who were wicked enough not to spare the very
dead; therefore I would wish thee to be of the same humor.


Marf. Well, I will be as you please, and although I have never kept company
with the dead, yet I will now begin to practice it.


Pasq. O take heed of that! for fear thou should run into that great
ignorance which so many thousand people are immerged in in this Age, who invoke
the dead. Alas! this is but an invention of the Friars to deceive the world,
and to fill their Cloister with the Alms that are given them, to intercede for
the favor of this or the other Saint. I would have thee know that the departed
which are in Heaven enjoy so great a beatitude, which holds them in so
continual and holy a contemplation, that they can neither see the miseries, nor
hear the supplications of this world; otherwise their felicity would not be
perfect, which is a thing too wicked to be believed. And the dead who are
tormented in the Infernal Pit, suffer such acute pains, that they think of
nothing but their own sad infelicities: so that to call upon them would be a
madness; for how can they give help unto others, that are not able to receive
any help for themselves. For this reason I exhort thee to be sure to live well
thy self, and concern not thy self so much with the dead.


M. But must I not converse with thee, since thou art returned to me with so
much favor and kindness?


P. But I am not dead, I am alive, and my death was rather a miraculous Ecstasy
than any thing else, which the Heavens ordained for the confusion of those who
would never believe me whilst I spoke and writ against the Vices of the
Christian Church.


M. Tell me, how is it possible that thou which art a Stone could take a
Soul, and then die, and now rise again?


P. And thou which art a Roman of Rome, how can thou be astonished at this?
it should be a much greater wonder to thee to see so many lazy Friars who eat
like Swine, and drink like Fishes, grow fat in the idleness of the Cloisters,
and dare pretend to the enjoyment of Paradise. Nay, I know one who esteems
himself already very near the celestial glory, who is so fat, that I am
confident he is much heavier than St. Paul's Statue, which stands upon St.
Peter's Church. Nay, this is the least of the wonders; for thou know, or
ought to know, that the Divines in general write that there is nothing to be
found in the world to be of equal weight with sin: Nay, they will have Iron,
Brass, Gold, to be as light as Straw in comparison of it. Do thou not think
then that to raise from the Earth but one of those good Religious men, Seculars
or Regulars (who are laden with such enormous sins) it would be necessary to
frame such a Machine as Sixtus Quintus did to raise up those great Pyramids to
the top of St. Peter's, where they now stand. Briefly, dear Brother, I esteem
the foolish belief of some Christians an absolute Miracle, who seeing with
their own eyes so many Priests keep Whores behind the Altars where they
celebrate Mass, sleeping with the Catamites with so much liberty, that amongst
the religious, Sodomy is now esteemed a Virtue, stealing the sacred Vessels for
profane uses, treating about Homicides, Whoredoms, Poysonings, and all manner
of frauds in the same place where they say the Divine Offices, and then to
imagine that such Hypocrites can fly to Heaven as easy as Birds do from one
Tree to another, is a madness and a folly in those that can believe it. For my
part, dear Brother, I think it would be a less Miracle to see a Stone fly to
Heaven, than one of the wicked Priests of this Age.


M. Thou wast ever exceedingly learned in the particular vices which reign at
Rome, and amongst the Religious, but now thou have traveled into more remote
Countries, thou must have made deeper searches. Tell me therefore all thy
History.


P. With all my heart; we will sit down in this retired corner, and to satisfy
thee, I will tell thee of my ancient Genealogy. My Father was Born in Rome of
the noble Family of the Satyrists, in which he was instructed by his
Forefathers with great accurateness till the Age of eighteen years, when he
remained an Orphan by the death of his Parents; after which he Married a Lady
of the Noble Family of the Detractours Maledicenti, with whom he lived twelve
years without the hopes of Children. But whether it was by the means of devout
Prayers, or physical Medicines, my Mother after that conceived with Child, and
I was Born into the world and brought into it with me all the inclinations and
dispositions of those two Families of the Satyrita's and Maledicenti's, which
remained so boldly in me, they both quickly dying after my Birth, left me so
very poor that I was forced to seek out some Art to live by; and some advised
me to be a Messenger, that I might understand by the practice of that I might
become more skilful in the Affairs of the world, others advised me to become a
Tailor, assuring me, the Scissors would be very properly placed in my hands to
cut every Body clothes fit to their Backs; but I resolving to follow my own
inclination set up a Barbers Shop, finding in my self sharp desires to shave
off the Beards of so many slovenly Friars. At my first opening my Shop, whether
it was my too much Youth, or too little Experience, or some other reason my
Custom was not so great, but I remained many days idle in my Shop, which
wakening my Poetical Vein, I fell into making of Verses, Songs and Madrigals
which were soft enough, absolutely degenerating from the name of both my
Paternal and Maternal Family, flattering every one so much, that though I
acquired but little credit, yet a great number flocked into my Shop under a
pretense of being shaved, yet indeed it was rather to hear me recite my
pleasing compositions; so that I exercised that flattering Art with no small
profit for many years. From all Antiquity Adulation has been rewarded, till at
last by the Prayers of some sincere Souls who abominate the Art of flattery, I
was Metamorphos'd into a Stone, that I might remain constantly in one place
with a free faculty of discoursing and making Verses. As soon as I perceived
this change, and severe chastisement, I immediately resolved to change my
method, and to obtain pardon for so many faults committed in my way of
flattery, I began to correct the Vices of others to demonstrate my true
repentance to so great a degree, that this my Conversion was in a short time
published throughout all the City, and from all parts thereabouts a mighty
affluence of people ran to hear me; whereupon the Learnedest people perceiving
that no other compositions were honored like mine; all their works were put
out under my name, and that none of their works might be known one from
another, they passed them all under the Title of Pasquin's, as though it had
been unlawful for any but Pasquin to compose Satyrs and Libels. Various
accidents occurred unto me at this time; for the Ecclesiastics, against whom I
most whetted my Poetry, were so incensed to see their Errors published by me,
procured me often to be thrown into the Fire, that I might be reduced to a
Flint Stone, to have removed me out of their sight, but they were stopped in
their intentions by a Revelation, that I had been transformed from a Man into a
Speaking-Stone by the will of Heaven, to show the world that the Vices of Men
have been observed by the very Stones that have neither Life nor Senses.


M. I remember by this your discourse that I once heard a very famous Preacher
declare in the Pulpit that at the Day of Judgment the very Wood and Stones
would speak and publish those guilts which had been committed in secret.


P. It Is certain without all dispute, and I wish thee to believe it, that the
Pasquinates of Rome are the very Image of the Day of Judgment, whilst the Stone
speaks to reprove the Ecclesiastics for their many failings. But to come
closer to our time, I will tell thee, that when the Chair was empty by the
death of Alexander, the common Exclamations of all Christendom concurred, as
thou know very well, to bring in Witnesses to examine what things were laid
to the charge of that Pope. Now I that was very well informed of all the things
of the world, had a great desire to know what was the Opinion of him in Hell
and in Heaven; and whilst I was tossed about with these thoughts, the violent
imagination of Death and Hell turned my Brains, like the drunken Saints of the
Cloisters, or whether the Heavens had a mind to give me more Experience in the
things of both this and the other world, that I might with more certainty
convince the Ecclesiastics of their guilt, I fell into an Ecstasy, and saw
what I could never have believed, and was in places so different from any in
this world, that I could never have imagined I should have returned to see thee
again in this world.


M. Tell me then, I pray thee, all that befell thee, for I imagine it must needs
be very curious, and every Novelty is pleasant.


P. I cannot tell thee, what the stroke of death is, but I know very well that
I was greatly oppressed, and something within me forced my living Soul out of
my Body, and so I flew immediately into the first Regions of the Air, where I
found thousands of millions of Aerial Spirits, which buzzed about like Bees
flying up and down to seek for a Hive; but I passed on without any impediment
to the second Region, where I was mightily puzzled, not knowing what path to
take, and whilst I was tortured with this confusion, I saw a certain person at
a great distance off, which I took for the Soul of some Friar that was waiting
for his Sentence, but I was mistaken, for he was either an Interpreter, or a
guide for Strangers, who having seen me afar off, came to me to know what I
desired, and to show me the way. I was extremely pleased to see him, and
accosted him with great joy, and he answered me with all civilities, and
entreated to know my name, which I presently told him, and prayed him to
conduct me, to some full inhabited place: Because I was ever used to see a
great number of people; to this my request he answered me, there were three
ways to take my choice of; one led to Paradise, the second to Purgatory, and
the third to Hell.


M. Is it true then that there is a Purgatory? and yet they -- deny it with a
Sword in their hands.


P. Who says they deny it? There is no body purges more than they; for they
throw their Sir-reverences in every corner of their City. It is very true that
in a Democracy it is impossible to shut either the Mouth or the Tail of the
people, as you see in that City, where the civiller the people of high and
indifferent Quality are, the more rude and boarish the Plebeians are.


M. What resolution then did thou take when that stranger offered thee that
choice of three ways.


P. You may easily judge that I prayed him to lead me into Paradise, which he
most willingly did, declaring that it was his most particular Office; so taking
to that path he bid me follow him, and I who knew not where I was, did not only
follow him, but took hold of his Girdle to be the more secure, we passed over
then a narrow Bridge, which was so exceeding high that it made our hair stand
an end; after which we met with so many great Rocks, Clifts, Ditches and
Precipices, that I could hardly believe that this was the way to Paradise, and
I fancied we had lost the right path, but my companion assured me we had not;
and I was a little better encouraged, because we presently saw a few persons of
each Sex laboring to go on in the same hard way, and it was a great pleasure
to see how they swate and toiled to beat the path.


M. This is a great sign that the Faithful must suffer and labor to obtain the
glories promised to them.


P. Very certain! But to tell you the truth, I had the pleasure to pass through
that strait path at the labor and sweat of others; in fine after a long Voyage
we arrived at the Gates of Paradise, which were very little and strait: Nay
more, there were three doors, every one of them straiter than the other. And at
the first Gate stood two Angels, who would minutely know every thing of us,
because one was the Examiner, and the other the Secretary; and the Examiners
Office was to know what they could say, who pretended to enter into Paradise,
and the other read the process of their Life. The Examiner then, as soon as
they saw us, asked my Guide who I was, and he having told him that I was a
Roman (I having in the way discovered my self to him) he began to laugh so loud
that I was pleased to see him, but when he had left laughing, not being content
with the information he had received from my Conductor, he turned unto me and
asked me these following questions, What is your name? What Countryman are
you, and whence do you come? What have you done in the other world? What do you
come to do in this? What good do you bring hither? What evil have you left
there? What way have you passed? How many days have you been a coming? Did you
come a foot or a horseback? and an hundred thousand such questions; but the
greatest concern was, that the Secretary at the same time asked me the Articles
of my Faith, and an account of what I had done in the other Life, at which
demand I was astonished, not having thought that in Paradise they had required
such an exact information; and he perceiving my amazement, and that I had no
Faith to show no reasonable answers he dismissed me with these words, What
then, you are one of those brave honest men, who having lived a long time in
ignorance believe they may have the Gates of Paradise open at their pleasure. I
am sorry Friend that you as well as many others have deceived your self, and
come hither with the hopes of entering in without any difficulty, but are
afterward forced to seek for an Habitation somewhere else. Know then that here
they look narrowly into the actions of others, and therefore the place is for
some particular persons, and not for all; yet many enter who did not believe
they should get in, and many kept out who fancyed themselves within.

This whilst I remembered my self that I had with me, I cannot tell how many
Papal Indulgences signed with the Popes own Hand, which I took out instantly to
show him, esteeming them effectual to facilitate my entrance into the place,
but I found my self mistaken, for one of the Angels had no sooner perceived
that this was a Pass from the Datory of Rome, but he began to cry out, Get ye
gone from hence, get ye gone from hence, and so turned away his face from me,
which I perceiving, immediately threw away my Indulgences, which did so please
the Angels that they turned to me and said, All Indulgences were bought and
invented by the Clergy only to draw Money out of the people; and that since the
Popes had begun to be so prodigal of their Indulgences, the Monarch of Heaven
had given order that the Chains of the Celestial Gates should be doubled, to
take away the hope of all those who pretended to gain Heaven by buying such
like Indulgences, for God will have his Souls acknowledge the possession of the
Heavenly Glory to his infinite mercies and goodness, and not to the power the
Popes have Usurped in the World.


M. It Is indeed a great enormity, for they speak so much of Indulgences amongst
the Christians, as if Paradise had been made only to be disposed of at their
pleasures, and what is worse, they speak of Christ as if he had not died for
our sins.


P. But whatever they think of, or pretend to in Paradise, I am sure that if
the Souls which are in the other world could rise again, the first thing they
would drive out of the world would be the Popes, because they occasion the
Damnation of many, and the Salvation of none.


M. Did thou stay a long time with these two Angels at the Gates of Paradise?


P. Above two hours, nay, If I should say three I should not Lie.


M. In that time if thou did not see other Souls come in at that place there
must needs be other Gates to come in at.


P. No, there is no other Gate to enter in at, nor any one that appeared there
all the while I stayed.


M. That Is impossible, since they commonly say that Souls fly into Heaven by
thousands and thousands.


P. These are the Doctrines of the Priests, which Lie like the Devil, and fell
abundance of these Fuz-balls by Owl-light to deceive Idiots, for no body else
can possibly give credit to them, nay, I had been cozened my self to such a
degree, that I thought Souls had gone into Heaven in as great crowds as they go
to receive the Jubilee from the Pope; but now seeing that for two hours there
was no concourse of Souls at all. I begged of the Angel to tell me the reason
of it, who told me that it proceeded from the too much Faith which the
Christians gave to the Popes; some being lost by believing nothing at all,
others by believing every thing, and gave me a reason for it, from the Seven
Trumpets which St. John Records in the Apocalypse which must have done sounding
before the end of the world; that Six of them were past in the time of St.
Paul, which was about the 5000 year of the world, and therefore the last by the
same computation should have been ended before now because it is 1600 years,
yet the Trumpet had not done sounding by reason the empty places are not yet
filled up. I then beseeched him again to tell me why they were so long a
filling up, and he replied, that there was no likelihood that they should be
filled up whilst the Popes turned them out of the right way: And indeed,
Marforius, I would have thee know, that till that time that the Papacy was
introduced into the Church, Souls flocked into Heaven, and the Heavens stood
open to them: But since that was brought in, and the Romish Bishops began to
ingrandize themselves above all persons, and to proclaim that it belonged to
them to open and shut Paradise; the Heavens grew angry, and have shut up their
Gates so against them, that there is no hopes of getting in without being at
enmity with the Popes; so that I fancy the world is to remain more than six
thousand years more, if but one Soul only in two hours can get into Heaven.


M. But why were not the Gates then presently open to thee, which wast ever
such an enemy to the Popes?


P. 'Twas enough for me to be so near: Besides, there is something more
required than that.


M. What did thou do then when thou wast excluded out of that place? what way
tookest thou?


P. I begged that they would at least permit me to go visit the Popes, because
I was a Roman Citizen; but both the Angels answered me, there was no Popes had
entered in there by the established Decree of the Eternal Father, since the 800
year after the Incarnation of his Son; i. e. since the corruptions of Popery
crept into the world, to avoid all Idolatry, lest those who had been such fools
to have been induced by the temptations of the wicked Priests, to adore the
Pope upon Earth, should be in danger of showing themselves such sotts as to
worship them in Heaven: This was the answer that both the Angels made me; but
one of them after spoke more clearly to me, saying, I know very well by this
your Question, that you are a Roman Pilgrim, imbibed with that perverse
Doctrine which they teach in Rome, where it is believed that all the Popes as
soon as they die mount straight to Heaven.

But rid your self, O Pilgrims! from this vain deceit, and know, that the Popes
of the Vatican are incompatible with the Citizens of Heaven. Be content with
this one example I will give you for all; that if Lucifer fell from Heaven into
such a great Abyss for but once desiring to be like unto God, without being
able to recover himself; how much more difficult would it be for the Popes to
continue in Heaven, who make themselves superior unto God? for Lucifer's sin
was much less that sinned only by intention, whereas the Pope's sin is actual.
I remained still more astonished than ever, and with humble prayers supplicated
the Angel that he would be pleased at least to instruct me what path I might
take to go to that place where they were, when he without answering me a word
whispered to him that was with me, whereupon he bid me immediately follow him,
and we two walked on toward certain obscure and solitary places, full of so
many Clifts and horrid Rocks, that for my part I esteemed it Hell, and the
rather, because I saw round about the Rocks a great quantity of Serpents, the
most part of which had Friars habits upon their backs; and now I began to lay
aside my thoughts and desires of traveling on further, when my Comrade told me
that there was no going back; for that way had a singular propriety to permit
one to go forward, but never to return back; and he added, perhaps to comfort
me, that the Popes had a particular place, which was neither Hell nor Paradise,
but only a a Demy-hell: And whilst he told me this, Lo a great Castle presented
it self to my eyes, not above two miles off, but so spacious, that it was able
to receive a million of Souls. Behold, says my Comrade, there is Vatican of the
deceased Popes. I marvelled at two things in it; first, at the immense height
and vastness of the Tower; and secondly, to see such a Fabric supported by a
foundation so weak, that none imagine it could uphold it.


M. What do thou tell me? How can this be? and what were these feeble
foundations?


P. Of Meddals, of Friars Cowls, of Monks Hats, Censers, Disciplines,
Hair-cloths, Chains, knotted Cords, Images Caps of a thousand colors, Sandals,
Clogs, Shoes, Pontifical Mitres, Nuns Veils, red and green Hats, Girdles,
Ropes, Saints Relics, Bulls, Candles, Breviaries, Books of Divinity, Herbs,
Pulse, Pasts, and such like things, which were all plaistered together with
Clay and Lime; and this was the basis of the whole foundation of that vast
Machine, that it was no small pleasure for me to see it.


M. There is no doubt then but this fabric must fall into ruin, there being
so great a disproportion between its weights and its foundation.


P. I believe so: and now being come near to the Walls of this Palace, we found
them built well enough, and upon the top of it stood four Statues, which were
the Images of Hypocrisy, Superstition, Pride and Ignorance: the two sides of
the Gate were engraved, one with the Copy of Constantines Donation, with a
particular inscription signifying that the Original was in their hands; the
other side with some Trophies of those first Popes, who by degrees had brought
Kings and Emperors under their feet. I sat down to laugh when I saw the
Figures of some Emperors engraven there, with their breeches in the Air, and
their faces on the ground, kissing the feet of some of their Popes; and there
were also other Sculptures, so obscure and ambiguous, I could not understand
them. Now, whilst I was observing these things, my Guide was knocking at the
Gate, but none answering him, he knocked the second time, and perceiving still
that no body came toward the door, he began to knock in great fury that they
made him wait so long: but I, who knew very well the nature of the Popes, that
very late, if ever, give Audiences, was not scandalized at this delay. Yet my
Guide, who was impatient to endure it, told me, that upon this account, he
would believe henceforward that the Popes were of a different temper from
Christ, who had said, Knock, and it shall be opened to you: Whereas the Popes,
the harder one knocked, the faster they shut the doors; to which I answered
him, that Christ had said these words to his Sheep, and the Popes spoke them
only to their own Nephews, at whose first knock they ever opened their doors.
But at last a certain Old man, with a hoarse voice, came to open the door, but
he first opened a little window, through which he asked us who we were? my
Guide answered, that I was a Roman Citizen, that desire to see those holy
Mountains: The Old man answered, That I must first tell him my Name, and my
Surname. When I told him, he no sooner heard the name of Pasquino, but with a
discomposed face, and threatening voice he said to me, Thou art he then, that
with so many railing Libels and Invectives, perverts the minds of our
Proselytes, to the great damage of our Dominion, drawing men from our service,
and counselling them not to worship as we do. Away from this place, for we will
not admit in any scoffers, detractors, or back-biters. I answered him; My
profession never was to invent Lies, but to vindicate the Truth; and I would
have perused other Arguments in my defense; but the good Old man, at the sound
of that word of Truth, presently withdrew, and shut the window, without saying
another word; which made me remember that passage of Pilate, who having asked,
Quid est Veritas? i.e. What is Truth? never stayed for an answer, but
immediately exivit for as, went out: From whence I concluded with my self, that
it is the Property of the Popes to avoid the Truth; and then turning to my
Comrade, I told him, laughing, that there was certainly in that Vatican many
things fit to be scorned and derided; because they would let no body in that
was capable to note and observe them. Nevertheless, being much troubled that I
could not enter in, I asked my Guide, what we should do not to lose our time
and our labor? he answered then, that he thought it best to go round about to
see if there were not some other Gate in the custody of a discreeter Porter.
Thus withdrawing some spaces from the wall to secure our selves lest they
should chance to shoot at us, we went round to seek for some other entrance,
observing in this time the structure of that Vast Mole. One whole day we
continued thus wandering, without seeing any thing like a Gate; but toward the
Evening we discovered some certain Caves and Holes, strait, but very deep,
through which we thought we might have got an entrance, but it was not possible.


M. What Holes were these? but you did well not to enter through them, because
you had run the hazard of being hanged for Thieves: for the Gospel tells us,
They that enter not in through the Door are Thieves and Robbers.


P. Do thou not know that the Popes have reversed all the holy Scriptures,
being resolved to Act quite contrary to Christ: therefore none but Thieves
enter into the Popes Palace Doors; and those that entered in by those Holes and
Caves were brave men. Now, if thou desire to know what these Holes were, I
will tell thee what I think of them, and what I have read in some old
Manuscripts; they were breaches made by Marcion, Montanus, Novatian the Roman,
Sabellius and Arrius, who all strive their utmost against this Vast Mole to
destroy it. But notwithstanding they sought several Ages, they could never get
in, because the Popes ever drive them back. We then seeing it would be in vain
for us to attempt to enter in by these Caves, followed on our way; but night
overtaking us, and we being both weary and hungry, we lay down upon the ground
upon our backs, and our mouths wide open.


M. If any of them had shit, you had been in a fine case.


P. Where they do not eat, dear Brother, they do not sh -- Indeed, if I had
been near the Roman Vatican, I had not dared to have slept with my mouth open,
lest some of the Popes Nephews should have squirted into it, since they eat
till they are ready to burst. For it is certain those Most Excellent Nephews
have done so many villainies and insolences against the poor Roman Citizens,
that perhaps they would have completed their good actions with so much stink;
therefore I am resolved never to trust them so much as to open my mouth in
their sight.


M. Pray whence comes this, that you lolled with your mouths open?


P. To the intent that if any of that party should pass by us, they might take
us for Priests, and so leave us to our selves.


M. Do the Prelates then in that Country sleep with their mouths open?


P. I know not how they sleep in those parts, because I have not yet seen them:
but I know very well, that they are so far from sleeping, that they continually
watch for the raining of Manna in the Vatican to fill their throats with.


M. I thought that the blessing of raining Manna had been peculiar to the Jews
of the Old Testament.


P. Thou art deceived, it belongs no less to the Jews of the New Testament, but
with this difference, that the Jews of the Old Testament had their Manna when
they came from the fetters of Pharaoh, and the Jews of the New Testament when
they go in Prisoners into the Popes Chains. But there is another difference
more notable, which is, that those ancient Jews were brought by force into
Pharaoh's bondage, but these new Jews voluntarily imprison themselves in the
Popes bonds.


M. Who are these Jews you speak of, and what sort of Manna is it that rains
upon them in Rome?


P. With reverence be it spoken unto thee, Marforius, thou art a very
Ignoramus; Do thou not know that the Jews of the New Testament are the Clergy
of Rome, who, in imitation of the Ancient Jews, who condemned the words of
Christ, do not only condemn the words, but, the very works, and holy Scriptures
of Christ, having expressly forbidden the people to read them in any Language,
but only that which is past their understanding? and herein is obvious the
great difference between Christ and the Popes; since that when the Ancient Jews
would have crowned Christ King, he fled from them, refusing a Kingdom from the
hands of the Jews. But the Popes refuse nothing; but as soon as the
Ecclesiastical Lords present them with a Crown, they receive it joyfully. And
as for the Manna which rains upon them now, it is of a nature infinitely
different from that other; for the old Israelites loathed the first Manna. But
this makes the Ecclesiastics still more hungry again; that Manna was given to
a people almost starved, that wanted refreshment; but this other is never
dispensed but to the fattest, and the richest, and consequently to such as have
least need of it.


M. But what is this Manna? explain thy self quickly, for my mouth waters.


P. Thou may shut thy mouth at thy leisure, for none of it will rain upon
either thee or me: but, shall I tell thee what this Manna is? it is
Prebendaries, Pensions, Canonries, Abbacies, Bishoprics, Arch-Bishopricks,
Patriarchships, and Cardinalships, and other such like things. Behold the Roman
Manna, which is never given to any poor people, but to the richest; as thou
very well know; some being crammed with them, and others getting nothing at
all. And I would also have thee know, that this Manna is of that nature, that
the more one eats of it, the more he would eat; and the good Prelates of this
Age are not such fools as the old Jews that desired to have exchanged their
Manna for the Leeks and Garlic of Egypt: for our Prelates leave the Onions and
Garlic, i. e. the labor and pains, to certain poor Curates, whilst they
themselves enjoy the sweetness of this Manna, and ever hold their mouths open
to gape for more.


M. I could wish heartily that sometimes a good Mess of Broth concocted in the
belly were discharged into their mouths to fill them.


P. We want some of these Pottages you speak of; for the Prelates are like
Dog-grass, which from one Root produces a thousand shoots. There are not so
many Thieves in all Europe, as there are Priests in Italy alone, which stand
gaping for Manna from the Pope. But now, to return to the thread of our
discourse, my Companion and I rise early the next morning to pass on in our
Journey; we had scarce gone two miles when we began to hear a horrible loud
noise, which frighted us a little, yet hoping to find some end of our desires,
we began to walk on; and in a very little time we saw one of the Towers of the
Vatican thrown down to the ground, and abundance of Swedes, Danes, Germans, and
other Nations climbed up upon it, and made great attempts; in the mean time
many Spaniards and Italians that were within, endeavored to repair the breach,
yet could not hinder but a great number of people, all goodly persons, entered
in, who courageously combated to overthrow all the Vatican. But the Devils of
Spain and Italy opposed all their attempts, and spoiled all: But when we were
come close to this breach, I saw a certain Frenchman, whom I had known in
Rome, and I asked him, What is this? and he told me, it was a Tower that Luther
had overthrown, by which breach those Nations had entered in. I had a mind to
shuffle in amongst the rest, but was afraid of passing over those Ruins, and
the rather, because I saw the defense of the contrary part was very great; I
turned about to consult with my Guide, but I could not see him, nor know how he
was lost amongst that crowd of people, which made me the more astonished and
confused, that I knew not what else to do but to entreat the Frenchman not to
leave me. And he, continuing his usual Civility, seeing my desires so inclined
to go in, bid me follow him, which I willingly did; but going on a little more
than a hundred paces from the Tower thrown down by Luther, I met with a deep
breach which went a great way in; and while I stood looking upon it, the
Frenchman told me, I might go in boldly, for that was a breach made by Calvin,
and enlarged by others: however, I was a while in suspense, but soon after,
seeing a great number of English, Hollanders and Switzers go in, and with these
a great many French, and High Dutch mingled, I took courage and followed them,
and rather because the Frenchman lent me his hand.


M. In fine, you may meet with honest men in all places, and this Frenchman
must be a brave fellow.


P. So he was; and the more, because he never showed himself very passionate
toward this Vatican, neither do I believe he would have shed many tears if he
had seen the whole building thrown down: and so we entered through the mouth of
that Mine, which was much greater than one could have judged it; there being
many Briars and Bushes which hid it, that the bigness of it might not be seen,
being laid on purpose that none might guess what it was indeed. But I must tell
thee one thing, my dear Marforius, which is this, that though I was much tired
in this Journey, and wearied with so much pains; yet going through this Mine I
felt, I cannot tell you what refreshments, in despite of those Thorns which
were round about the Entrance, which pricked me now and then on every side of
my body. In the extremity of the Mine stood a person with a very lean, yet
devout face, who held in his hand a Flag with an Inscription of one side with
these words, Post Tenebras Lux, i.e. after Darkness comes Light; and of the
other side, Venite ad me omnes qui laboratis, and onerati estis, and ego
reficiam vos, i. e. Come unto me all that labor and are heavy laden, and I
will refresh you. As soon as I had read these two Motto's, I was mightily
comforted, and the good man asked me my Name, and my Surname: then I said
within my self, I am gravelled again, for if this person should serve me as the
other did, I shall be sure to be stopped; so that I was almost resolved to change
my Name, but thinking better of it, I judged it fit to proceed with sincerity,
therefore I answered him that my Name was Mr. Pasquino a Roman: he seemed to be
extremely pleased with that answer, only adding, that I needed only to have
named my self Pasquino, because the name of Roman was not well liked here;
after that he told me, that none was permitted to enter into that place of the
side that he guarded, till they first confessed what he himself had been forced
to confess, and all the rest of his company; I told him then, that I desired to
be informed what was needful for me to confess; and he replied, tell me friend,
which of the two do thou believe to be Head of the Church, Christ or the Pope?


M. This was a hard Question; for my part I should have answered that they were
both Heads.


P. That would have been the answer of a foolish, ignorant and wicked
Christian; I wonder thou art not yet instructed better in this point. What!
thou believe the Church has two Heads as the Emperor's Eagle. The Eagle of
two Heads was the Invention of a German Poet, and the Church with two Heads was
the Invention of the Roman Priests.


M. I cannot Reason so finely; I go on in a plainer way: but what did thou
answer him then?


P. I confess that I believed the Church had only one Head, which was Christ;
nor would I ever believe there was any other Head, because I would not run into
such a diabolical Heresy: for the having so many Heads, and so many Bodies are
proper to Cerberus's, Briareus's and Devils, and not to celestial creatures;
and therefore it was necessary to believe as I believed, that the Church has
one only Head, and one only Spouse, and that is Christ our Lord; and that all
others are Members of the Church, one of which is the Pope. As soon as he heard
this, he rose from his seat, and came to embrace me with great tenderness,
saying, Truly thy words show thee to be that pleasant Pasquin who I have so
often heard spoken of with infinite praise; thou art heartily welcome; and when
he had said so, he hugged me several times, and called me his Brother in Christ.


M. This title is not so common in the Roman Vatican, for the Popes give it to
none but Cardinals.


P. It would be better for the Cardinals if the Pope would leave off calling
them Brethren, seeing he does not a little flatten their reputation in this
world; besides that he makes them perverse and wicked in the other.


M. How can this be? thou art either too obscure, or I am too dull to
comprehend thee.


P. They that come nearest the Fire are the hottest; and they that come nearest
to Clay and Dirt, are the most defiled: this is a general Rule in Philosophy,
therefore it must needs follow, that those who draw nearest to evil are the
most wicked. Now every one knows that the Popes are the fountains of all those
evils which the Church has suffered; therefore the Popes calling the Cardinals
Brethren, they cannot avoid the reproach of having their part in every
mischief. Moreover, the Popes are like Pitch, which defiles them most that roll
in it.


M. What can then be said of Kings which the Pope calls his Sons?


P. This also is a great Cheat: the Popes believe they have given half the
Heavens, and half the Earth to Kings, by giving them the title of Sons; and
Kings think they receive the other half of the Earth, and the rest of Heaven,
every time they call the Pope their Father: yet that title serves to no purpose
but to lowre and vilify Kings in the presence of the Popes, and to render the
Pope too proud and high in the presence of Kings; all the rest of it is nothing
but smoke: and tell me the truth, my dear Marforio, whether does the Natural
and Divine Law teach a man to love his Children or his Nephews best? without
doubt his Children: but this Rule is not observed with the Popes; for they rob
all the Treasure of the Church, and apply to their own occasions; and when they
die, give it all to their Nephews, without leaving any thing to their Sons.
Urban the 8th. Innocent the 10th. and Alexander the 7th. are great instances of
this, who left more than seven millions of Pistols to their Nephews, and to the
poor Emperor oppressed with the Turk nothing at all but the title of Son, I
would curse him a hundred times a day to the Devil.


M. I beseech you do not fall into passion, but go on with the discourse; how
did the Caresses end between you and that honest man?


P. He perceiving me to be alone, for the Frenchman was gone back to his own
affairs, promised me to be my faithful Companion, and conduct me to see all
those places. First then, he carried me up a very high Ladder, on the top of
which was a Terrace that looked toward Heaven, and when we were there, he bid
me look up, and as I looked, I thought I saw the Mother of our Lord, shining
with great glory, but I did not see any Pearls, or Jewels, or Gold, or Silver;
which amazing me very much, and my new friend perceiving it, asked me what was
the cause of it? whereupon I answered him, that having several times seen the
Madona of Loretto, loaded with Jewels, and Gold of inestimable value, I wondered
how she was now deprived of those rich gifts; to which he instantly replied,
that that Lady of Loretta was not the Mother of our Lord, but the Mother of the
Priests; for she not only gives them money enough to buy them food, but also to
feed their prodigality; neither are we to believe there is any correspondence
betwixt the Mother of Christ in Heaven, and that Mother of the Priests on
Earth; and possibly, I replied, the faithful, who give such vast Offerings and
Alms, believe they put them all into the hands of the Mother of our Lord, and
shall draw from her the remuneration of graces. Would to God it were so, said
he immediately; but the mischief is, that the poor Fideles impoverish
themselves, to enrich the Priests; so that being shamm'd into that false
belief, they thereby commonly lose both their Moneys and Rewards.

I have been fifteen times at Loretto, to impetrate some blessings, which my
Curate told me I should undoubtedly obtain, and every time I carried some Gift;
I still returned with a desire of attaining that which I thought I should have
attained; but that which is most material, my Curate seeing me ever return
empty handed, he told me, it was through defect of my Faith. I durst answer him
nothing then, because I was in the other world where the Inquisition reigns.
But I said within my self, It Is enough that the Priests have so much Faith as
to take the Gifts, whatever becomes of the rest. But now I am in a place where
Truth is unveiled; I am informed of all those Errors in which so many
unfortunate poor people are plunged; and it is a wonder to see how the
Christians can imagine that there should be Simony in Heaven, when the Popes
have banished it out of the world; it is a Diabolical thing not to be forgotten,
that the Popes have established and decreed a most severe Bull, that under no
pretense of Alms, Donatives or Debts, any one should receive the least thing
imaginable out of hope of obtaining any benefits or indulgencies; yet the
Christians of Rome, deceived, alas! by the Roman Priests, commit solemn Simony,
and indent with Heaven under the name of a Vow; some promising a pair of silver
Candlesticks to our Lady of Loretto, some a Lamp to St Nicholas of Toledo, some
a silver Statue to St. Antony of Padua, some this thing, and some that thing,
to this or that Saint, upon condition of obtaining their request; and in case
of not obtaining it, the Vow to become null. I know that in the Great Dukes
Gallery in Florence, they show an Altar-piece of Massy Silver, which was made
upon the occasion of a Vow made by the Great Duchess to St. Charles, but
because the desired Grace was not obtained, the Altar remains in the Great
Dukes hands, mocking at the Vow, since the Saint had mocked at the Offering.
This example made me remember another, which I did not fail to relate to my
friend. That Roman Lady being barren, whose Husband was very desirous of
Children, she recommended her self to the prayers of her Confessor, who was a
Theatine Father, making use of all those means that are necessary for such a
blessing. Finally, after two years use of prayers made in her own Chamber, the
effect of the blessing began to appear, there being manifest signs of her
conception; whereupon the Father Confessor being greatly pleased, and the Lady
no less, they both possessed the Husband that it proceeded from a Vow made to
the blessed Cajetan; and thereupon the poor Husband was to make a silver
Statue, which must be presented by his Wife to the blessed Cajetan: but the
mystery was, that this Statue must be solemnly blessed by this Confessor,
whilst the Husband and Wife were kneeling before him with so great a Devotion,
that all the rest of the Fathers rejoiced.


M. Thou will make me never credit such like Vows again; but what did your
venerable friend say to this?


P. He fell a laughing, but yet modestly; and I in the mean time begged of him
to know where were the other Mothers of God; at which he laughed out, and said,
What, do thou think then that God has many Mothers, or that there are many
Gods? I told him no, I had ever believed one only God, and one Virgin Mother;
but that which made me speak, was, that I had heard them at Rome discourse of
the Mother of God, of the Rosary, of the Mother of God of Popolo, of the Mother
of God of the Carmine, and of so many others, that the number of them is
infinite. Truly, said he again, the people of Rome have great need of that
Mother of God of Loretto, that she might lend them her Treasures, to ease them
from the many insupportable Exactions which the Popes Nephews have laid upon
them. It were better, said I, for the people, to find out some kind Madonna
like her who obtained the Victory against the Turks, that by her means they
might be once delivered from the Popes Nephews, which are worse than the Turks.
Come, let us leave, said he, all these Mothers of God invented by the Priests,
just as the old Poets invented a great number of Deities, and let us go down to
see the particularities of this Vatican. No, I beseech you, replied I, have a
little patience with me, and help me first to the sight of the Saints, which
are the Senators of Heaven, and the Advocates of the Earth; for I see none
here, and yet they see so many in the world. This Question did so extremely
displease him, that chiding me heartily for such a folly, he proceeded to say,
For ought I see, thou think God is grown so old, that he has not strength
enough left to govern the world alone, and so calls in the Saints to assist
him. I seeing him in a rage, endeavored to pacify him, professing it had
never been my belief, but that I always thought God was the only Ruler of all
things, without any help or assistance; but the Priests made the poor
Christians believe that God operated nothing at all but through the
intercessions of his Saints; it is no news to me, added he then, that the
Priests joy in the Ignorance of the faithful, and they borrow for lending too
much Faith to the Priests. 'hose who read the sacred Scripture, have no need to
lose themselves by the Lectures of the Priests.


M. He was well acquainted with the Plague which reigns at present amongst the
Christians in Europe.


P. After this he made me go down, and at the foot of the Ladder he asked me
whether I was satisfied; to which Question I answered, that my Curiosity did
but begin to be inflamed, whilst my Intentions were only set upon seeing where
the Popes lived; therefore the longer I was kept from seeing them, the more
violently my Curiosity increased; yet the Romans (said he then to me) ought to
be glutted with the sight of the Popes, having perhaps seen too many with their
eyes, and touched too many with their hands; so that methinks they should
esteem it high time to rid themselves of such Plagues, who infect the very
Liberty of Princes, and disturb the Tranquillity of the People: yet since thou
have such an anxiety still to see the Popes, let us go, I will accompany thee
not only to show thee the way, but to take care of thee, lest thou should
break thy neck; for usually near the Papal Habitations, there are great
Precipices, which are not seen till after one is fallen down into them. Thus
discoursing, we walked on, through a round Gallery, which looked liker the
house of some Magician, than the Palace of the Popes; at the end was a most
magnificent Hall of a quadrangular form, lofty, and of an admirable structure,
but it trembled like a Bush. I would have stopped, apprehending the Machine would
have fallen down upon my back, and buried me in its ruins, but my Comrade
encouraged me, saying, there was no danger yet, for the time of the destruction
of that place was not yet come; invigorated by these words, I advanced further
on, to see whence it could proceed that a Machine that was so beautiful, and
built with such strong walls, should be liable to shake in that manner, as if
it had been a little Tree newly planted in the midst of an open Field


M. There must needs be some mystery in that, because it is contrary to the
course of nature.


P. Thou must understand that this Hall is upheld by a multitude of Friars and
Priests, who kneeling with their hands upon their knees, bare it upon their
backs, and they began already to put their hands upon the ground, which made
them appear more like beasts than men. And because it was impossible for me to
observe it without my kneeling, I made no bones of it, to satisfy my
curiosity; it being very pleasant to me to observe the posture of those
wretched Friars; for some of them knocked their Noses to the ground, and others
endeavored to bear themselves up, and others had a mind to lie flat down, to
leave all the weight upon the rest of their fellows; others cursed those who
had planted them to bear up that building. On the backside there was a
multitude of persons heaving with their shoulders against the Wall of this
Hall, striving to throw down this building: but that which imports most was,
that they did it with so great delight and force, that their sweat ran down all
over their faces; being amazed at this, I asked my friend of it, who informed
me thus; Those which thou see uphold this Fabric, are the Divines and
Doctors of the Roman Church; and because the fatigue is great, they would be
willing to be discharged of it, but it is impossible for them to be freed,
being nailed there by their own fault. At first they bore it all upon their
heads, standing upright; but afterward being oppressed with the extremity of
the weight, they bowed down their heads, receiving the weight upon their necks;
but those being weakened, they shifted it all upon their shoulders, whereon
they upheld the building a great while, until their strength failed them, and
then they bowed down to the Earth, as you saw them. Those other who stand in a
posture to throw down all this pile into ruin, are the Doctors and Divines of
the contrary Religion, who labor stoutly for the destruction of this Fabric,
and would have done it before now, if it were not for the Assistance which they
often receive from the benignity of Princes. When he had said this, he showed
at the four corners of the Hall four Princes, who were stretching their wits to
prop it up, which was it that kept it upright; for still, as the others
endeavored to overthrow it; these staid it with the props which they held in
their hands; neither can it be discerned which were the readier, the one to
maintain it, or the other to throw it down.


M. What Princes were these who so much concerned themselves for the supporting
of this place?


P. The Emperor, the King of Spain, and the King of Poland at three corners,
and at the fourth many Catholic Princes joined together as well Germans as
Italians: but yet the greatest support is that which is given by the Emperor
and the King of Spain.


M. I have ever heard that France, and the Republic of Venice, have brought a
great many props to hold up the Vatican; how comes it then that you say nothing
here of them?


P. Softly; you do not give me time to tell all this will come after; but since
thou art in such haste to know it. I will tell thee that the King of France,
and the Republic of Venice, defend the Vatican, as thou say, with Policy,
that is to say, with moderation: and although some Ages past these two
Potentates, without considering of the infinite charge, and the hazard they put
their own States to, ran furiously to the defense of the Popes, when they saw
them oppressed either with the ambition of Princes, or the force of Heresies:
yet their principal end was, not to help the Popes to grow so proud (being wise
enough to foresee that which afterward came to pass, whilst these good Popes
growing great, not to say fat, by the protection of these two Monarchies,
spurned at the obligation, and like Mules kicked at those who brought them
their provender) but only to gain themselves a name of Piety and Zeal toward
Religion with the people; so that from that time they have gone with leaden
heels to the assistance of the Popes; and I see them in this part of the Hall
which I have described to thee, walking up and down with their props in their
hands; and I observe it is their policy to see the place attached, but not
conquered; they are pleased to see it tremble and shak'd, but not to be
precipitated or cast down; and therefore they incite the Combatants to fight
against it; and when they see the Victory inclining to them, they immediately
set to their props, not having the heart to see the place thrown down.


M. Now I do not doubt but that place was the habitation of the Popes, those
particulars which thou relates so clearly manifesting it, that it would be a
gross simplicity to question it.


P. There is no great wit required to conjecture it; I presently imagined it
before the good man told me any thing of it, and was immediately confirmed in
my opinion.


M. Why then did not the King of Spain, and those other Princes which strive so
much to uphold that place, arm themselves instantly to fight against the
Enemies, it being ever better to subdue an Enemy before they have had any
success, than to drive them out again when they have got any footing?


P. It Is certain the Spaniard and the Emperor would have disturbed the whole
world, and turned it up-side down, as they have often done with their violent
Remedies, if the King of France and the Venetian Republic had not hindered
them. But those two great Powers judged the things of Religion according to
Policy, and on the contrary the other Princes judged of matters of Policy
according to the Laws of Religion; for the King of France, and the Republic of
Venice know very well, that if the Heretics had not mortified the Pope and his
Ecclesiastics, the Ecclesiastics and the Pope would have been Heretics
against the Princes, and therefore they often help the Protestants at a pinch,
not that they would defend their Religion, but that they might with their
Religion mortify the Popes, and by consequence be more humbled to the
Catholic Princes. For my part I cannot say I ever received so much pleasure in
so short a time, as when I stayed in the out-parts of this Pontificial Seat:
for the King of Spain and the Emperor who upheld, now and then gave a kick to
those Adversaries that sought to shake it; the King of France, and the
Republic of Venice, when they saw it, interposed, so that they put off most of
the blows.


M. Do thou take this to be well, to protect those who attempt the
destruction of the Pontificial Majesty?


P. If the Popes seek to destroy the Majesty of the Princes, why should not the
Princes be permitted to procure the mortification of the Majesty of the Popes?
We must distinguish between mortification and destruction; for the French and
the Venetians endeavor only the mortification, but not the destruction of the
Pontificial Greatness, and in truth they much more benefit the Church, than the
other Princes do, who would destroy the whole world to please the Pope. But
when the concern is for the Church of Christ, then the King of France, and the
Republic of Venice are more zealous than the Spaniards, who esteem themselves
so Catholical. But on the other side, when the Popes Interest is upon the
Board, then the Spaniards are most zealous, and the French and the Venetians,
if they do not stand out, are at least content with a natural heat, and upon
this account, because the Zeal of the Spaniards looks more to the Interest of
the Pope, than the Interest of the Church, and the Zeal of the others regards
much more the benefit of the Church, than that of the Popes.


M. These Reasons of thine penetrate my heart, and make me think the Spaniards
great Catholics for the Popes, and great Heretics to the Church, and the
French and Venetians great Catholics for the Church, and a little Heretical
toward the Popes.


P. Very right: But now to return to our purpose, after I had observed all
things without, my curiosity went on to see every thing within, but I durst not
do it, though a Gate presented it self just before my eyes, where was an ascent
of three or four steps: but I waited to have the venerable person, who
conducted me, to show me the way, which he did, by going in first without much
ceremony. As soon as we entered that Great Hall, we saw a multitude of Popes,
and every one set upon a seat fixed to the wall. I who knew the great Reverence
that is used in the Vatican of Rome, walked very softly, my knees almost
trembling; nay, I will tell you more, I sneaked behind a pillar, to show my
greater Reverence to the place, which being observed by my good friend, who
went up and down so boldly, that he began to laugh, and drawing near to me,
said thus, Thou savours, Pasquin, too much of a Citizen of Rome, that is to
say, art but ill instructed in the nature of the Vatican; and indeed the Romans
are like Fish which live in the salt water, yet are themselves insipid; so
these Romans just live, because the Vatican suffers them to live, without
understanding the nature of their Vatican; but I am not able to endure that
such a person as thou art, so excellently well instructed in so many witty
Subtilties, should still lie immerged in so gross an Ignorance. Know then, that
to the modest persons that haunt the Vatican, it happens just as it does in
France, to such as will needs stand upon their formality and civility at Table;
for the French accustomed to their liberty of behavior, eat all up, and the
others rise hungry, and repent their starcht Modesty.


M. So that in France it seems they are no sooner set down at Table, but their
hands must be put into the dish as quick as the rest of the company.


P. Most certainly, unless they desire to keep Lent, whilst the French keep
Easter. But let me go on, I prithee, with the discourse my friend ran on in.
Know, Pasquino, said he, that this bashfulness in the Vatican runs the same
risque that it does at the Tables in France, where those that reach not out
their hands, go without their Dinners; so that it is necessary in the Vatican
to make use of the French boldness, that is, go confidently into all places,
pry into the most reserved Writings in Cabinets, ask impudently for any thing
they have a mind to, speak freely what they intend to do, look out for their
Dinners without being invited; in fine, quarrel with the Masters in their own
houses, if they give them not more than they offer to ask. Thus the French
comport themselves wherever they are admitted; and thus must all people do in
the Vatican, or else they must come out as empty as they went in. Fruits never
fall from their Trees, till they begin to lose their savor, and putrify; so
that those who make a Trade of them, must gather them before they decay.
Modesty in the Vatican ruins those that use it. They that would have graces,
must be importunate for them; and those that would receive favors, must
earnestly beg them; and they that would not be rejected, must be skilful to put
themselves forward. Those that rule in the Vatican, are usually deaf; and
therefore it is necessary to speak aloud; or they are blind, and those that
stand at a distance are not taken notice of; you must, if they be deaf, pull
them by the Coat, tell who you are, and what you desire; and like Jacob with
the Angel, not suffer them to depart till you have received the blessing; if
they be deaf, take them about the neck, set your mouth to their ears, and cry
out as the Jews do, when they call for their Messiah, and repeat your note,
till you have evident signs that all you say is well understood. Woe be to
those that stand at the Vatican Gates, expecting that the Alms of some Benefit
should be sent to them; for this is a place which can never be opened whilst
the Popes keep the Keys themselves, unless it be those who can force it with
Paul's Sword; since it is the nature of the Popes to despise those that
overvalue them, and to value those that despise them. The devout, the meek and
the humble are openly neglected; the insolent, the rash and the proud
immediately find Hats for their heads; because Cardinalships, Bishoprics,
Abbys and Benefices, are never given by the Popes, but always stolen by the
pretenders; therefore, my dear Pasquino, if thou will observe Modesty in that
place, thou art certain to have nothing fall to thy share.


M. This discourse must much encourage thee, and inflame thy desires to go
farther on.


P. It did so embolden me, that I got from behind the pillar, where I retired
out of respect to the place; so that I walked in the midst of those Great
Popes, strutting about with my hands on my Girdle like Bartholomew of Bergamus.


M. Methinks they should be enraged to see you in that posture; but perhaps
none of them knew thee.


P. I think not, or at least they would not know me; and I was not scandalized
at that, for I know it is the nature of the Popes neither to know, nor be
familiar with any but those they have a mind to know. Besides, the Hall was
great, and I was in the middle of it; therefore it is very possible that they
might either not discover, or not observe me; therefore I resolved to begin on
one side of the room, and walk on to the other; so drawing nearer to them, my
venerable friend following me, I began to look on the faces of those holy
Fathers one by one; when one of them instantly seeing me pass near him, took
out a pair of Spectacles and looked earnestly at me for a while, then taking
them off his Nose, he put them into their case, and took out another smaller
pair; and looked at me with those as long as he had done with the other, which
I did not much wonder at, because I believed he was short-sighted; for he had
two pair of Spectacles, one to look at a distance, and the other near hand; and
he had committed an error in taking the wrong first; but after, when I saw
that all the rest of them did the same as we were passing before them, I could
not but be amazed, because I could not imagine that all the Popes were so
short-sighted as to need two sorts of Spectacles; but the good man that was
near to me, perceiving my amazement, to clear my mind from so many wandering
imaginations said to me, Pasquino, for ought I see thou art in no little wonder
at this manner of the Popes looking at those that draw near them. Alas! thou
should rather wonder if they should look at any one as other folks do; for it
is their nature to do every thing quite contrary to all others, perhaps to make
them know that they are Gods, and not Men, seeing they don't act like Men,
which they are, but like Gods which they pretend to be. The Spectacles which
thou saw them put on and take off, have their particular virtues; for the
one pair makes things show bigger and greater than they are, and contrarily the
other makes every thing appear so little, that they mutilate the very nature of
many: Therefore when they will make a Fly an Elephant, they put on the first
pair; and when they will make an Elephant a Fly, they put on the second. I no
sooner heard this discourse, but my thoughts ran to the Roman Vatican, and I
began to discourse thus with my self: Now I understand the reason why so many
poor worthy and deserving Prelates who have served the Church with so much
labor, and sweat for many years, are returned to their own Houses without any
reward, but only having the faculty of going hastily out of Rome. And on the
contrary so many scandalous paltry Priests, that deserve no other honor than
the Gallows, who, as soon as they come to Rome, are seen suddenly to be
promoted to the highest degree of Prelacy, to the great astonishment and
heartbreaking of Christian people.


M. For my part I have been a thousand times Scandalized at such proceedings,
and would have been glad to know the true cause.


P. Well then you may leave being scandalized if you please. For the Popes will
never leave this practice.


M. You having then seen them both put on and take off their Spectacles, leave
me not thus confused, but tell me if you please how was it done?


P. To understand well the affairs of the Vatican, you must take pains to trace
them, but I am sure you will not be at that trouble, because you Expect it
should be thrust into your throat with a little Spoon, and I who am very much
inclined to lay open the Vatican defects, am Willing to undertake all the
pains, and the rather because I am obliged to it by the friendship which I have
professed to thee. Know then that when their most Illustrious Excellencies the
Brothers of our Lord, or their Reverend Eminencies the Nephews of his Holiness,
have a mind to favor some Petty Clergy man, fresh come forth from the lap of
his Mother, who had never seen but the outside of the Court; what do they do
but put a pair of Spectacles on the Popes Nose made with that admirable art,
which shall make my Petty Clerk look like a Mighty great Doctor? So that the
poor Pope deceived by that false perspective, believing him that might Doctor
indeed, the Petty Clerk comes out declared not a Bishop, or a Nuntio, but a
most Eminent Cardinal; whilst the Prelates of the Court, most worthy of such
honors, break their horns by dashing their heads together, to find out how
this comes about; neither do they leave beating their brains, till they come to
discover the virtue of these Spectacles. Now, because naturally the Popes
Nephews include the Brothers also, inclined by a certain natural instinct, to
vilify the merits of the most deserving persons; What can thou guess they do
to put them by the Honors due to them? As soon as they see those Prelates come
near the presence of the Pope, with a whole bundle of services performed to the
Church, and an infinity of Merits to obtain the deserved rewards of their
fatigues, but put the other Spectacles on the Popes Nose, which have the virtue
of diminishing things to such an extremity, that a Tower would scarce be seen
through them at the distance of four steps; so that that Mountain of Merit which
the good Prelate brings along with him, appears to the Popes eyes but as a
little bush, so that he is sent away without any manner of Reward; and the
worst of all is, that my Lords the Nephews laugh not so much to see the Prelate
so ill used, as to see their Uncle well deceived.


M. The guilt then is not in the Popes which are deceived, but in the Nephews
which deceive them.


P. The fault rather is wholly the Popes, who suffer themselves so to be
deceived, and that upon two accounts; first for admitting their Nephews into
the Vatican, and giving them the supreme command of all things; the second is,
for letting such kind of Spectacles be put upon their Noses, and be willing
rather to see with those false eyes of their Nephews, than with their own true
and natural ones. In the Infancy of the Church the Popes saw with their own
eyes, and not with their Nephews Spectacles; the merits of persons were
measured according to their own nature, i. e. as the Prelates made proficiency
therein, by means of the services which they performed to the Church, and the
Popes advanced them in honors suitable to the proportion of their services,
which so edified the people, that they adored those holy Popes which proceeded
with so much fanctity.


M. The Church has now great need to see either the Popes of those times
return, or those times themselves.


P. Yes indeed, for if it holds on in this manner, woe be to all Christendom!
for every thing begins to degenerate to such a degree, that all begin to be
weary of serving the Church of God; and if we will but consider seriously the
nature of the Roman Court but an Age backwards, we shall find such great
Extravagancies, that if a Book were made of the Metamorphoses of Rome, I am
very certain it would bear the Bell away from those of Ovid; but this is not to
be wished, lest it should be the occasion of more sorrow, to the Weeping
Universe.


M. I would fain know whether the Popes Nephews make use of the same kind of
Spectacles which the Popes use.


P. Yes, they make use of both sorts, but being made by their Supreme
Authority, they always order those which are made for their own use, to be
tempered much finer and subtiler, than the Spectacles of the Lords their Uncles.


M. I should be glad to know at what time, to what purpose, and to what persons
they make use of those Spectacles.


P. Well, I will tell thee then what things are done at Rome, which thou
should know as well as my self; but this is the common misery of the Romans,
who live at Rome and know not what is done in the Vatican, where they treat of
nothing but the destruction of the Romans. The Nephews then make use of these
Spectacles at all times, unless it be at certain days of Solemnities, when
blindness prevails, a giddy madness flying up into their heads, they do act all
things hoodwinkt, but at all other times, except those days, they put on, and
pull off those Spectacles in this manner. When they would reward some Servant
of their family, who has served them a great many years, they put on the
Spectacles which lessen and contract the sight; in considering of their
Services, and to take a view of what they should give them, they put on the
other Spectacles, that magnify every thing; so delighting themselves, by
esteeming themselves generous, they fancy they bestow much more than they have
deserved: but always when they are to receive any thing themselves, they take
the Spectacles which make every thing look very little; by which means they can
never be satisfied; for when a Genoese Prelate, for they bid highest, comes and
gives them fifty thousand Crowns, the Nephews instantly put on the foresaid
Spectacles, which contract every thing that the fifty thousand Crowns hardly
appear one thousand; by which means they remain with so unsatiable an appetite,
that they are always craving more.


M. Now I guess I understand their thoughts, or to speak trulier, the reasons
why my Lords their Nephews slight the Injuries which are discourst against
them, being called Thieves; nay, the worst of Thieves, because they look upon
all things which they steal with their lessening Spectacles, which makes great
things show as little or nothing, and cannot imagine there should be any cause
of complaint, being matters of so little moment.


P. God be praised, Marforius, that thou have once guest right, which I am
mightily pleased with; for, it is true, that if the Popes Nephews should look
upon all they steal in its own magnitude, they would not steal so much, because
the Art of Thievery needs some concealment, that it might be exercised with
such a closeness, that it could not be known to observers: but they rob with so
great greediness, that Children may discern it, with those hellish Glasses
which make Crowns appear but Farthings hence they insult over the People after
they have flead them, as if the People who were robbed rather deserved to be
punished, than the Nephews who play the Thieves at the very foot of the Altar.


M. Yet we need to pity those poor Nephews, tho they be Thieves, because the
fault is rather in the Spectacles than themselves; and methinks the disease
might be cured, by that sentence of Philosophy, Remove the cause and you remove
the effect.


P. They are worthy both of Compassion, and Punishment; of Compassion, because
they are induced to it by the Violent power the Devil has over them; of
Punishment, because they allow themselves to be tempted to do such actions,
which make them Scandalous to the eyes of the whole World. When a Servant will
Rob his Padron he never steals all his money at once, lest his theft should be
immediately discovered, but ingeniously takes now and then a Pistol, and so
would the Nephews of Popes do, if they had but so much wit, as to rob with that
Moderation, that might keep them from being accounted public Thieves: But I
believe they do not imagine, that they are great Thieves, or else think the
world is blind, for otherwise they would not have exposed their reputation so
grossly. The best remedy would be to take from them those accursed Spectacles,
which make Pistols seem like Farthings, and so diminish excessive thefts,
Reducing them to such minute Atoms, that the very Confessors absolve them as
if the theft were not of value enough to amount to a sin. But this is a thing
not possible, whilst these Spectacles are incorporated to them, by the blessing
granted unto them by his Holiness.


M. Let us then talk of something else; how did these Popes spend the hours of
the day that you saw.


P. I am ashamed to tell thee, and yet I will, that thou may have thy part of
the shame also. Some of them applauded themselves for what they had done, and
others employed their time in doing something worthy of Memory; now those
memorable things were either appointing the Cross to be adored in the Church,
and that it should be set upon a Pedestal representing Mount Calvary; in
Commanding prayers for the deceased, in distinguishing the Canonical hours; in
forbidding Marriage to the Ecclesiastics: in making Hymn's and Canticles for
the Church: in reforming the Breviary, in adding and diminishing the
Antiphona's, in blessing some Medals; in forbidding the eating of flesh in
Lent; in diversifying the habits of Priests, and Friars; in appointing Lamps to
be continually burning in Churches; in consecrating the Stones of Altars; in
making the bodies of Saints to be transported from one Church to another; in
decreeing that those of Religious Orders should abide in their Cloisters; in
Commanding Pillars to be set at the Gates of Temples; in altering the Colors
of the Sacerdotal Vests to Celebrate Mass; in repairing old Churchyards: In
Canonizing some dead Saint: in placing Images and Candlesticks upon Altars: in
confirming privileges on the Mendicants, in allowing Hermitages to be built in
deserts that devout Travellors may be there more easily robbed; in forbidding
Marriages between those who have been Gossips; in multiplying the number of
Bishops: in making the Relics of Saints to be adored and kissed: in forbidding
Religious orders wearing habits of silk: giving order that Hallelujah should be
sung in Churches: in conjuring out Devils; in commanding Processions through
public streets: in appointing dying people to be anointed with holy Oil; in
forbidding those of Religious Orders to own any Subjection to Princes; in
putting a Cross on the Popes Shoe: in decreeing Incense to Images; in granting
Indulgences some for years, and others for ever, together with an hundred such
kind of juggles, to which they bent all their studies.


M. I doubt not but thy pleasure was great in seeing and considering them so
prettily employed.


P. I was in a strange toss, not knowing what to make of it, not so much for
seeing the Popes busied with such trifles, as for seeing them disingaged from
heaping up riches, and I really said within my self; how strange a thing is
this! the Popes in Rome now think of nothing else but building Palaces for
their Nephews, and pulling down those which others have built with so much
Sweat, to advance their own memories in imposing Taxes and Customs on the
miserable people; in selling of Offices and Benefices to those who offer most
money for them; in threatening Princes with War upon every petty account; in
looking out for great Marriages to advance their own families, in charging
Bishoprics with heavy Pensions; In giving liberty to their Relations to
accumulate immense treasures; in robbing the Altars of Christ for to hang the
Walls of their Nephews palaces. And after I had made some reflections on these
particulars, I freely told my sentiments to the good man who accompanied me,
who quickly answered me thus; Friend, the Popes never change their nature,
always preserving the very same inclinations they had at first; though nature
is altered in them, yet whatever small difference thou see between this
Vatican and that at Rome, it does not come from the nature of the place, but
the alteration of time; for none of the Modern Popes enter into this place, for
those which thou see here were Popes of the Primitive Age, which were not
used to theft, perhaps because the Church in those times had not treasures that
could be stolen and therefore they employed the hours of the day in such
affairs as thou saw them busy in But since the Popes have had much Wealth,
and Estates to distribute, they have other thoughts, and apply themselves to
those Exercises that thou speak of, which are at present the business in
Rome. So that it is sufficient to satisfy thee at present to know, that all the
Popes which thou see in this place are those who have lived holily, or at
least moderately, and sworn Enemies to their kindred: But as soon as ever the
news was brought to this place, that the Popes had changed their nature, and
put on humane affections, and minded nothing else but enriching their Nephews,
to the prejudice of all Christendom, Heaven thought it Expedient to shut its
Gates against them, so that it is above two hundred years since any of them have
come into this place. I was astonished at this information, yet was curious
enough to go round a second time, the better to observe every thing there; and
truly amongst all the Popes faces which I saw there, I saw but three which I
knew, which gave me the greater amazement, because I had well known at Rome all
the Popes for two hundred years last past, from which time the Gates of that
place had been barred.


M. And who were those Popes you knew?


P. Adrian the sixth, Pius the fifth, and Sixtus, the fifth. And having a more
particular curiosity to look on them distinctly, I declared my Sentiments to my
good Guide; thinking it very strange, how they had got in after the doors had
been shut, but he who was better informed than my self, told me that these had
got in after the shutting up of the Gates by singular favor, two of them for
being enemies to their kindred, and the third which was Sixtus for having left
the Church so extremely rich. O then, cried I, Heaven looks more narrowly into
the Actions of the Popes than the men of the world do, for they dare not speak
the least word against their Holinesses, though they see them rob all the
wealth of the Church openly.


M. Heaven fears not imprisonment, as Men in the World do.


P. Seeing I saw not one of the last Popes in this place, particularly not
Alexander the seventh, I grew furiously angry, for having wholly lost all my
pains, which aimed above all things to be informed, not of the State of those
Popes who had died with the repute of holiness but those who had expired with
the Name of very Devils; and my fury raged more violently, because I had asked
that man if he knew where the Popes of the two last Ages were, and he had
replied he knew not any thing of them at all, because the Lord God in the
hidden secrets of his Justice had disposed of them suitably to the deserts of
their works at Rome. But I notwithstanding my knowing very well, that they
Merited Hell for their Tyrannies, and Extortions toward the poor people to
enrich their kindred, yet would not at that instant Judge so rigorously, but I
imagined they were in Purgatory.


M. There then you might look for them, for when the Purgation of their sins is
past they would come thither to the others?


P. Thy Council does not please me in this Matter, for I would never be such a
fool to wait perhaps in vain thousands of years there, and specially whilst I
was so uncertain whether they were in Purgatory, or indeed in hell; Nay, if
they were really in Purgatory it were madness in me to wait for their coming
out, the Popes having not only their own particular guilts on their backs, but
also the sins of their Nephews, and of Many others sinners, whom they lead unto
sin, therefore Purgatory must be a very hell to them.


M. What did thou do then having lost thy longing?


P. I threw away all those thoughts which so tormented my head to see the
Popes, and began to fix in my mind a desire to see their Nephews though it were
requisite to go into Purgatory for it; which that good person observing, he was
so scandalized at me, that he went out before me, and when we were in the
middle of the last Gate of the aforesaid Vatican, he disappeared I do not know
how, and I remained in an unknown place and where no body knew me.


M. Poor Pasquin, I begin to pity thee, but what resolution did thou take?


P. I was besides my self, and continued in suspense, for the space of a good
half hour, when wandering about in a strange perplexity, just like one of those
who know not whether they are of God, or of the Devil; in Heaven, or Earth; in
Hell, or Paradise; when not knowing which Leg to set forward, I perceived there
was but one way, so I determined to go on, and see the end of it. I bid farewell
to the Vatican, and mended my pace for the quicker dispatch; and had scarce
gone on two hours, when I found my self in a great Court, built about with
lofty Walls, painted with sundry stories, of Martyrs, of Confessors, of Nuns,
of Virgins, and of Hermits; at the very entrance into this Court, I met with a
person of good Mien, with an ill favored rough face, and a beard like a
Capuchin, in the habit of a Switzerland Carrier, I looked a little while on
him, and he did the same, looking wistly upon me; and I perceiving he carried a
great bundle of letters, I could not refrain inquiring of him, whither he was
traveling, and from whom he was sent? who courteously answered me in few
words, that he was going with some letters to the Romans, which Christ the
Redeemer sent unto them.


M. Without doubt this Messenger mocked thee, for heaven does not use to send
such Hatchet-fac'd Ambassadors, as thou describest this man to be.


P. He had not so much reason to mock me as I have to laugh at thee, who
wonderest at a thing so correspondent to truth; do thou believe that Heaven
knows not that the World at present is much more corrupt than it was ten ages
past? Experience is the best Tutor. The Sodomites were so extreme perverse that
they would have defiled the Angels who were sent from heaven to Lot, because
they were fair, therefore heaven will not send beautiful messengers to the
Romans, whom they account worse than those Sodomites, (not only the common
people, but the very Ecclesiastics which rule there) lest they should Incur a
worse hazard than those Angels did in that place.


M. But if this was so, how should it enter into thy fancy, that Christ should
write letters to the Romans?


P. True it is, that Christ having written sufficiently by the hands of his
Apostles, and Evangelists, which are indeed the true Interpreters of the divine
will, Christians have not any need of other letters to guide their Souls: but
of the other side if the rigorous orders wherewith the Inquisition forbids the
reading of the sacred Scriptures, be considered.


M. Softly; I must needs interrupt thee, for the Inquisition would have the
Sacred Scriptures read, but it must be in the Latin Tongue, forbidding the
Translation of it into the Vulgar.


P. Thou would make a very fly laugh, with this thy Latin Tongue, what
difference do thou find between reading, and making a thing be read that one
does not understand; or the allowing it to be read: This manner of proceeding
is an invention of the Clergy of Rome, of those of them who would rule the
consciences of the people, at their pleasure, and according to the dictates of
their own Interests, which could not be done without hiding from the eyes of
the People the sacred Scripture; which demonstrates all Errors, and needs no
helps to lead and guide the faithful into the paths of Salvation: but because
the total banishment of it would be a turning of Christianity topsy-turvy, what
have the good Clergymen done? They have found out this good Policy for
themselves, and Diabolical to others, to divide it into a hundred fragments and
pieces, causing part to be read in Quires by the Priests, and part on the
Altars by others of them, causing it be translated into the Latin Tongue, and
forbidding it under most rigorous punishments to be read in the Vulgar tongue;
which is the same thing as to banish it out of Christendom, for amongst three
thousand Christians you will scarce find two who understand the Latin tongue,
and perhaps those two are either such as least trouble themselves about heaven,
or such as know not how to unite those broken, and uncontinued fragments?


M. Thou think then that the prohibition of the Sacred Scripture in the
Vulgar tongue proceeded from the Policy of the Churchmen? But what would it
import them, if it were read in the Vulgar tongue?


P. Do thou ask what it imports them, Marforius? it would import their total
Destruction, and Ruin, or at least the Ruin and Destruction of the vast riches
they have usurped with so many subtle Arts.


M. I do not very well understand thee; prithee explain it a little better.


P. If the people read the Sacred Scripture in their Mother Tongue, as it was
compiled by the divine Writters; that is to say, all the Epistles of St. Paul
one after another, likewise those of St. Peter, and St. James, the Acts of the
Apostles, the Gospel of the Evangelists; in fine, all that is contained in the
Old and New Testament, the People would find so great a Consolation in the
reading thereof, that they would rely on nothing else, besides they would see
with their own eyes in what their salvation ought to consist, and so would turn
away from that false belief, which they have placed on their Ecclesiastics,
who seeing very well that the People do not know what is their duty toward
heaven, because they do not read the divine Decrees, living like beasts, being
led by their Noses, as they drag Asses into Forests, to load them with Wood;
these Ecclesiastics draw consequences levelled to their own Interests,
Establishing Laws against the Laws of Christ, and Decrees against the Decrees
of God; so that the people who know not the Laws of Christ, nor the Decrees of
God, think themselves saved by the Decrees and Laws of the Ecclesiastics. Ask
me not, Marforius, what it would import the People to read the holy Scriptures
in the Vulgar tongue? for if they once tasted it, their desires would be more
and more inflamed, and they would do nothing else but read it, whilst this
opened their eyes to see the infinite abuses introduced into the Church by the
Ecclesiastics, and the difference they would find between the Laws of God, and
the Laws of Men; in fine, they would clearly see their Errors, and know how
they are deceived by the Churchmen, who study with all Industry to keep the
people under, by leaving them in Ignorance, for as long as they are kept
without the knowledge of the holy Scriptures, the Priests will turn them and
wind them at their pleasure, pursuing every way their own Interests.


M. I could wish all these words of thine were scattered all over Christendom.


P. And I would have all Christendom furnish themselves with Bibles, and
particularly New Testaments in the Vulgar Tongue, by which they would see in
what state of perdition they are, and how they are abused.


M. I would have thee understand, that my eyes begin already to be much opened,
and I now remember, that some months ago there came ten Bibles in the Vulgar
tongue, five of which were for the use of five Cardinals. But let us return to
our discourse, and tell me what could incline thee to believe, that Christ had
not writ Letters to the Romans.


P. Thou know, Marforius, I am none of those wry Necks which Reign amongst
Christians, especially among Friars. There is nothing I hate worse than
hypocrisy, therefore it appears very difficult to me to believe, that Christ
after having left so many holy rules, and so many divine instructions in the
sacred Writ would send new injunctions, as if Heaven was obliged to accommodate
it self to the gust of men, and not men to the Decrees of Heaven; but then I
said within my self; What mighty miracle would this be? The Messineses do
believe they have received a letter which was Written by the Virgin unto them;
and shall I that was born in Rome refuse to believe that Christ writ letters to
the Romans? Perhaps the Messineses are more worthy than the Romans? Perhaps
there was Ink and Paper, found for the Virgin to write with to the Messineses,
and none found for Christ to write to the Romans with? Truly the Romans have
far greater need of the protection of Christ than the Messineses have of the
Protection of the Virgin yet the Messineses say that the Virgin offered them
her protection in that letter; now behold what made me think it possible, that
Christ should send an express from heaven to the Romans.


M. And I quite contrary should have believed that Christ had renewed his
Memory in Rome, with that particular Letter, that it might not be absolutely
effaced, because the Romans think so much of the Pope now, that they remember
nothing at all of Christ. But tell me, could not the messenger inform thee of
some particularities?


P. Messengers, dear brother, are such who carry without knowing what they
bear, or having any thing to do besides undergoing the Weight. Yet I could not
forbear asking him some questions, but he excused himself, saying he had no
time to discourse with me; besides, he could not tell any great matter unless
it were what he imagined, and what an Angel had told him, which was that Christ
exhorted the Romans in these letters not to suffer themselves to be abused with
so many false Introductions of Papal Statutes and that they should continually
read the Sacred Scripture in the Vulgar tongue, for in that they would see the
great abuses which were found in the Church his Spouse. The poor messenger
could tell me nothing else, so he followed on his way, and I entered into the
Court, turning about this way and that way to view the Pictures, which indeed
deserved looking on, for the curiosity of the designs.


M. But what were those curious designs, you so magnify?


P. Of some Fathers who force their daughters to become Nuns; of certain
Priests who select penitents, of Missionaries who manage the conversion of the
Heretics, of Prelates who Negotiate for Benefices, of Popes who dispense
Indulgences: of Merchants who buy Mules for the Cardinals, and a hundred
thousand of such kind of things; but that which delighted me most, was, to see
the postures those persons were drawn in: and as I was walking round about, a
Priest stood just before me, at least he appeared to be one to my eyes, who
showed me a great Gate, which was in the middle of one of the four Walls, which
I had seen well enough before, but had no intention to go in at it, Judging it
better to go in at another lesser door, which was in the other Wall over
against the great one: when the Priest coming near me, without asking me either
how, or when, or whence I came, or whither I went, persuaded me to go into that
great Gate which stood open, telling me it was my right way, and talking thus
he led me on to the threshold of that Gate; but I knowing very well of what
metal the Priests and Friars are made, ever teaching things contrary to what
the Apostles had taught, thought to have entered, in by the little Gate, (which
the good Priest had turned his back to) not being able to imagine that the
other Gate could Conduct me into any place of a good issue, because a Priest
directed it, who ceased not to reiterate his entreaties, to have me go in at
the great one; upon which making a little reflection I reasoned thus with my
self, What can this be? What can ever befall me worse than to go into Hell? And
if it be so I should not be the first man which has been sent into Hell by the
Priests: why do I then delay and linger so long before I go in? What is my life
more precious than the life of so many Emperors, and Princes, and Kings that
have suffered themselves to be led into Hell by the Counsel of so many Priests,
and Friars? But what do I say? What am I afraid of? This person can by no
reason be accounted a Priest, for the Priests will scarce open their mouths to
speak two Syllables unless they be paid for it before hand, with ready money;
therefore this man that does not ask me a farthing cannot be a Priest, no not
so much as a Friar.


M. The Argument was not bad; but what did you resolve at last?


P. I resolved to obey the Priest; and go in at the greater Gate, which I did;
but see the ill luck on it, I was no sooner gone in, but the Gate shut it self,
and the Priest remained without, and my self within. Then to tell thee the
truth, I thought my self dispatched, believing I had been Trepan'd; and the
rather because I observed that the inside of this place, was very different
from the outside, there being Light and Ornament, and here Obscurity and
Confusion.


M. God knows how thy heart beat, seeing thy self in such a place, and without
knowing of any body.


P. Truly I trembled all over, and would have been glad to have been near the
Gate of the people in Rome. Yet seeing it was impossible to get out of doors
that were shut, I began to knock, and cry out aloud to the Priest to come open
them for me: but all in vain, for the Priest who staid of the other side, let
me chatter and scold, laughing as if his sides would burst. If I had had any
money I would have proffered him some, because these fine Gentlemen the
Priests, are used to fetch Souls out of Purgatory, by the Virtue of money; and
I in that darkness, shut up with so many great Chains, resembled a Soul in
Purgatory, and imagined my self to be one indeed: Yet I left off crying any
more, Miseremini mei, being sure I should not have any relief, because I had
got no money to purchase it.


M. My thinks it is a great shame to Christianity to have it said that the
Religious will not fetch any Soul out of Purgatory without money.


P. It Is so; and what is worse, every thing is masqued under the Cloak of
devotion, and the Interessed Avidity of the religious Orders are come to such a
height, that they are no more looked upon as abuses, having so bewitched the
minds of the people that they believe those things to be Alms and Charities
which are absolute Thefts, and Ambition of ruling. But I will stop no longer at
this story of the door, but proceed to tell thee, that despairing of any hope
of getting back I resolved to pursue my Voyage further, though to speak the
truth, the further I went in, the more I repented the undertaking such a
Journey; being sure I should arrive very suddenly at Hell; because as I went on
I perceived many signs of it, as sparks of fire, stinking of pitch and great
heat in the ground to my feet, and huge showers of Cinders and Ashes, so that
it was impossible for me to Imagine that that way could lead to any other place
but either the Hell of the damned, or Vesuvius of Naples. That which most
afflicted me was, that from time to time I seemed to hear languishing voices,
howling of Wolves, Yelling of Goats, Neighing of Horses and other such kind of
noises. Which voices, though it was impossible for me to see any person, seemed
as if they had been just before me. And now being very weary of walking, my
Spirits began by little and little by my great sufferings to fail, when coming
to the end of that path, where I espied the mouth of a great Dragon, so
monstrously big that the Popes Coach with all his Nephews in it might very
easily have driven in; which I coming as near to as it was possible, I saw two
passages, one of which I imagined led to Hell, and the other to Purgatory; and
whilst ghastly I was looking not without fear into that most horrid mouth, a
certain person flash't before my eyes like him that had tempted Christ in the
desert, which in plain words speaks him to be a devil, nevertheless I durst not
give him that name, because I was not certain of it, neither had I indeed seen
from whence he issued. When he notwithstanding came very courteously toward
me, and asked me what I sought for, but in such an intelligent way that showed
me he was well informed of all my adventures since my departure from Rome,
asking me only whither I desired to go; and because he saw I was out of breath
he cheered me up, with such kind of Consolations, as the Capuchins bestow upon
those whom they accompany to their Execution; whilst having a little recovered
my Spirits, I answered him in few words, that my intention was to go into
Purgatory to Visit my Lords the Nephews of the Popes, if I might be permitted,
believing in that place I should certainly find a great number of them; I would
have added further that I should willingly go on, and if I did not find them
there, it would be a great delight to me, to pass in as far as hell to see
them: but I forbore, thinking it better to say no more, being confident I might
at any time find out the Gates of that place. When this reverend Devil
understood my intention of going into Purgatory to Visit the Popes Nephews, he
began to laugh at such a rate as I had never seen any body laugh in the World,
holding his hands on his sides as if he had feared bursting.


M. It would please me also to see the Devil once laugh: but what did he laugh
at so heartily?


P. At my simplicity in imagining that the Popes Nephews were in Purgatory; so
that being weary of his laughing which held him a good half hour, he with a
smiling face spoke thus unto me; I know very well that thou art a Pilgrim from
Rome where the people are abused by the Crafty malice of the Ecclesiastics who
make them believe that there is a place of Penance for those persons who are
impenitent, and that the very Guilt is purged in Purgatory, without so much as
giving an account of the wickedness committed to any except a Priest. But I
would have thee know, O Roman, that none enters into Purgatory, that robs the
Church to bestow it on the World, but those who rob the World to give it to the
Church. None of the Nephews of the Popes enter into Purgatory, though there be
some to be found amongst them who Justly deserve it, because heaven is forced
to send them all into Hell out of policy. I was now more astonished than ever,
not being able to comprehend how it was possible to send the Popes Nephews into
hell out of Policy; but this reverend Devil, having perceived my amazement,
relieved me from my Anxiety by unridling the Aenigma presently in these words,
Thou ought to know, being born a Roman, that all which the Popes Nephews
possess are the very bowels and subsistence of the Souls in Purgatory; stealing
out of the treasury of the Church that Wealth and Riches which is given by the
People only to ease and alleviate with their alms those poor Souls who are in
Purgatory; now if the Souls in that place should see the Nephews of the Popes
enter into it, they would fall upon them and Revile and Tear them with these
words; Ah Barbarians and wicked Enemies of our rest, Ah Cruel and Tyrannical
destroyers of our treasures, you make our pains perpetual, which would have
ended some ages ago. You cause us to burn still in these flames, you deprive us
of the Divine Vision, you Enemies of Purgatory, that devour the substance,
which our friends have given unto the Church, for the mitigation and relief of
our pains. You build Palaces with the Price of our blood. You hang your Walls
with that Gold which was set apart, to have delivered us of these flames, you
buy Coaches, and Horses with that money which should have helped to have carried
us up to heaven? You walk up down in Gardens with fresh fountains and fine
Waterworks, whilst we are hear broiling in these fires. Now since these
reproaches would be certainly given to the Nephews of the Popes of they should
enter into Purgatory, not to add Misery to Misery on those unhappy Souls which
are in that place, the Popes Nephews are sent to hell, that the sight of them
which are so justly Odious to those inhabitants of Purgatory might not so
provoke them, though they deserved indeed to have come first into that place.
This discourse most tenderly wounded my heart, nevertheless I could not forbear
looking Earnestly on the Eyes of this Orator, not being able to think he was a
Devil. So much truth was there, in what he said, who whilst I was looking thus
fixedly on him, went on, saying, I might have gratified my curiosity in seeing
the Nephews of the Popes, by descending into Hell by that other mouth; but it is
worth observing, that he had so much inflamed my desires of seeing them, that I
thought he must needs be either a Roman Inchanter or Sorcerer, or at least a
German Witch; and when he perceived that I was resolved to obey his
exhortations, he summoned an hobgoblin as black, and as ugly as the Devil, and
whispered in his Ears, so that I do not very well know what he said, whereupon
he entered again into Hell, and a Minute after that came out again, and brought
along with him a Vessel very like those which the Priests keep their holy Oil
in, which they use at the Extreme Unctions; and without making any great
Compliments to me, he made me lie down flat upon the ground and anointed my
body all over with the Liquor which was in that Vessel. I instantly fancied
that this was the Oil of Extreme Unction in Hell, in Intimation to me, that I
should never return from thence; but the Devil bid me take Courage, for that
Ointment had a certain Virtue, not only to Quench, but also to cause the very
Ardour of the flames not to be felt.


M. If this remedy was in Rome a great many Priests would run to Martyrdom,
because they love to see sufferings, but not to feel them; but what followed
after this Ceremony of the unction was over?


P. The Chaplain of the function having received his Orders from the other,
gave me his Parole, and courteously assured me that he would faithfully
accompany me: So rising up on my feet I thanked him, as I did the former, who
disappeared I know not how, so that I remained with this last Devil: Who
expected that I should go first into hell, and I on the other hand thought he
should carry me on his back; and having told him my intention, he answered me
to it, that the Devil did not use to carry any body into hell, because it was
forbidden by a very rigorous Edict of the divine Majesty, who had Established a
decree in his Sacred Throne, that those who had a mind to go into Hell should
go Voluntarily, without being carried thither by any one; whence the Devils had
this advantage, that they had not the trouble of carrying any Souls into Hell,
for they came of themselves thither. I answered him I understood not how this
was, and therefore begged his Pardon, adding that I the rather believed the
reverend Devils had carried men into Hell, because that in the World, and more
particularly in Europe, at every word when any dispute arises between men, they
instantly say, The Devil take thee, so that I imagined it had been the Devils
Office to have carried men into Hell, because men did so give one another unto
the Devil. To which he replied, that those Cursings did make the Devil the more
enraged. Seeing men offer one another so frequently unto him without his being
able to lay hold on so fair an Opportunity, by reason God would have those men
who so often wish to go into Hell, should go of themselves, that they might not
have that excuse to allege that they were forced to go thither.


M. It Is a pretty Complement to go into Hell; thou then were content to go
first without any Ceremony?


P. Why what would you have me do? I should have been better pleased to have
been carried, but seeing the Devil either would not, or could not undertake the
charge, I resolved to pass on first; true it is, that being entered into the
Mouth, in which were two holes, and offering to go down by that which was on
the right hand, the Demon cried out with a loud voice, that I mistook the way,
for I was to go on the left hand, which I immediately obeyed, and cast my self
on that side, which slided me finely down in such a dainty manner, that I had
no sooner set my feet in it, but I was at the bottom in the Twinkling of an
Eye, descending just like those who Glide upon Ice. The Devil helping me a
little also, pushing me on behind, to hasten our Journey the better, that we
might end it in good time.


M. I think the Devils do so in the world also; never driving any into Hell,
unless they first press themselves forwards.


P. Most certainly; now both of us Precipitating our selves sliding on still,
we came to the Shore of a large lake, which was extremely Agitated and tossed,
the Waves rising up above two hundred yards, and then precipitated down again
with a hideous roaring which I wondered much at, seeing so great a tempest, and
not being able to hear the smallest breath of any Wind. But the Devil who was
with me told me that Water boiled, by the great Violence of fire, which is
underneath it, to whom I said then, that the flames of Hell must needs be very
ardent, seeing they force the Waters to rise with so much Violence, which
seemed to part into five parts, and yet held great correspondence, though the
Nature, or Perhaps the Virtue, of one part of the Water, did not agree with the
Nature, and Virtue of the other; the Devil proceeding on to inform me better,
as follows, the Water which thou see, every one that goes to hell is
necessitated to ferry over, and it is Expedient for them to steer so exactly
that they may be sure to go through each of those divisions which thou
observest: And if thou will know the cause of this Lakes being divided into
five parts, I will tell thee briefly; that the first has the Virtue to cause
every thing to be forgotten, and thence is called the Water of Lethe; the
second is nominated the Water of Phlegeton which signifies the Ardor of
Torment; the Third the Water of Acheron which imports deprivation of all joy;
the Fourth the Water of Cocytus which denotes Weeping; and the Fifth is the
Stygian Lake, which is as much as to say Eternal Hatred and Misery.


M. But how is this Water past? do they swim or are there boats ready to waft
them?


P. There is one boat, which is commonly called Charon's Ferry which is loaded
with passengers twice a day, but it is worth noting that the Barque goes
thither, but never comes back, for the said Waters are easy to be navigated in
the return upwards; therefore there are a multitude of Shipwrights ever
building new ones, a Bark serving only for one Voyage, being always broken in a
hundred pieces at the other Shore. I embarked then in this boat, together with
the Demon, for want of a better companion, but Charon would not take any other
passenger in at this time, bestowing a thousand civilities upon me, and the
Mariners behaved themselves with more than ordinary Courtesy, striving with one
another who should be most serviceable to me; at the entering into this boat,
there came an Intolerable stink to me of Pitch, of Bitumen, Sulphur and such
kind of things, but above all of Assa faetida, to such a degree that I thought
the Violence of the stenches would have poisoned me, and thought what fools are
they who would go to hell; when we were arrived at the haven an Infinite number
of Demons came and met us, every one of them having Five or Six Horns on their
Heads, and every one of them offered me his service, without any thing for
their pains, which was the more Remarkable, so that I wondered very much that
none should demand of me payment for my passage or freight, neither did any of
them so much as ask a little drinking money. So I blessed God that had once let me
see a Country that was disinteressed and freehearted; the Devil who conducted
me knowing my admiration, interrogated me whether frankness was not in fashion
all over Rome; to which Query I answered thus: Since Meum and Tuum have been
Introduced into the World, Taxes and Customs have been brought to such an
Extravagance, that the People are forced to buy at dear Rates every thing which
Nature had given freely to mankind: But this sort of Tyranny which is so
universal in the World, seems to be most peculiar to Rome, where the Popes have
introduced so many impositions and so many Customs, that the very deceased are
not exempted, whilst those bodies are often kept unburied which have not left
enough to pay the Priest his burying fees; in fine, those who travel in the
World, had need be always with a purse in their hands; for strangers, besides
their paying for the very roads they tread, and suffering a hundred Insolences
from the watchmen who keep the Gates for the Officers of the Customs, are also
constrained under the Notion of Alms, to pay for the kissing the Relics of
the Saints, for the very confessing of their own sins.


M. God forgive the inventers of these things, but what need had the Devil of
this Information, if, as the Divines say, the Demons do already know all that
is, or has been done in the World.


P. Thou art deceived, Marforius, for the Devils know nothing else besides
those things which they are able to penetrate by the subtilty of their nature
but the Roman Ecclesiastics commit certain kinds of rogueries that the Demons
have never been able to Penetrate into with all their Speculations; therefore
it is requisite to know that where the greater Spirits prevail, the lesser
Spirits give place immediately; besides, the Nephews of the Popes have invented
in Rome more Tyrannical ways to draw money from the People, than the Devils to
draw Souls into Hell; therefore the Demons may be called ignorants in Rome,
because the Ecclesiastics, and the Popes Nephews out-wit them; in fine, the
Devil who was with me took great pleasure in my information, and gave me many
thanks, tho in few words, by reason of the mighty complements which the
other-Devils made me, who all conducted me Triumphantly to the true Gates of
Hell, which opened without any difficulty, and before I could set my feet over
the Threshold of the Gate, Lucifer, who had notice of all, sent me abundance of
Pages, and Footmen to wait on me; but I thanked him, and beseech't him to
reserve these favors for the most Eminent Cardinals, and Prelates who are used
to be served by certain Pages and Lacquies, who are no whit inferior in Craft
and Wickedness to the courtiers of Lucifer himself.


M. Thou say true, and for my part I believe that this race of Rascals, are
put to School in Rome, at the cost of the Lords the Cardinals, and Prelates, to
fit them to serve with the greater assurance the Devil himself.


P. I believe the same, and therefore, rid my self of them, being better
content to go Incognito without any attendance, than to be waited on by such
beasts, although it would indeed not have cost me a farthing, whereas in Rome
one is forced to pay not only for being ill served, but for being betrayed
also; yet notwithstanding my refusing the attendance of those Servants Lucifer
had sent unto me, I was not waited on with a jot less Majesty, and Grandeur,
for an infinite Company of Devils seting themselves in Ranks on both sides, one
behind another, saluted me as I passed through with so high Civility that I
thought I was another Pope going to Monte Cavallo. I had scarce made ten steps
within Hell, when a Person came toward me so full of Lace and Ribbons, and
with low Congies pulled off, and put on his hat again, and then instantly began
to untye my breeches, which I had tied with double knots fearing they might
have fallen down in my Journey; but he set himself so earnestly to it both with
his hands and his teeth, that I had some sport, to see him torment himself;
that gave me some pleasure, but on the other side I sound I cannot tell what
alteration in my self, concluding positively that this man was some Sienese or
Florentine who was used to Untruss the Boys Breeches in Rome; and therefore I
defended my self as much as it was possible, objecting unto him my Age; but
these reasons not causing him to desist from the Office he had begun, heating
himself more and more with the resolution of prevailing, he put me into a
mighty rage, which the Demon who was my assistant perceiving, he endeavored to
pacify me, by assuring me that that Person was neither a Sienese, nor a
Florentine but an honest Frenchman. How! a Frenchman, cried I? and how long
is it since Frenchmen are become Sodomites? I have been told, that they love
the easier pleasures and are seldom willing to struggle hard for what gives
little Satisfaction; their impatience makes them Shrink from trouble, and it
seems more natural to them to Ruffle a Petty-coat, than to put their Teeth to a
Cod-piece point? O answered the Devil again to me, there is great mystery
hidden in this, which would please thee well to be informed of. Thou know
the French study nothing else than to search and pry up and down wherever they
go, so that they run about thrusting their noses into every thing; now you must
know, our Lucifer who loves to employ every one as his Inclination leads him,
not to leave the French idle in Hell; since idleness is the Domestic Enemy of
that Nation, he allows them the Liberty to thrust their noses into the tail of
all strangers when they first come into Hell, but from this duty they cannot
exempt themselves though the humor of it should be over, because the Devil
knows not how to employ the French otherwise.


M. This employment would not much please me, though, because they are so used
to it, perhaps it is no great toil to them.


P. Now I being well satisfied with this information let my points be untyed by
this Monsitur, who being pleased with that, after he had a little looked in my
face fell on his knees to my backside, and with a good grace began to nozzle
his nose into my breech. But to tell thee the truth, Marforius, I was never
more confounded, not knowing of a sudden how to wind my self out of such a
complement, for the more I shrunk up my Buttocks, so much the more earnestly he
pushed in his nose. Whereupon I resolved to end it, to let Escape a Rouzing
Fart, which made above forty Devils that were about us fall a laughing; but the
Frenchman was content rather to nose a little of the fume, than leave off
rubbing his nose in my breech, to my no small-vexation, not knowing how to get
rid of him; but fortune sent in another stranger whom the Frenchman set upon
to perform the same function; and I being delivered from this encumberance,
passed on with my companion, and the further we went the more sport we had to
see the French man go up and down to give the nose in breech to every new comer.


M. Let Us talk no more of such a Subject, but relate if you please some
seriouser thing.


P. Thou speak of Gravity, just as I am about to talk of those people who
are graver than their Pyrenean Hills. You must know then that the sight of this
Frenchman stirred up a Curiosity in me to see the Spaniards, not being able to
fancy that the occupation, or rather pains of them should be any thing
inferior, or less curious then the pains and employment the French practiced,
and endured. The Demon had no sooner sounded my thoughts, but he made me take
the way on the left hand, over against which stood a very high Gate wide open,
broken, and so ruinous, that it perfectly looked like an old tattered Ensign: At
the entrance of this Gate I had like to have broke my shins; all the Stones did
so totter, being out of their right places; on both sides lay two vast heap of
Chains, Logs, Iron Manacles, Ropes, and other such like Instruments, all black
and rusty, by which mark one might easily know that they had not been used of a
long time. The extent of this place was so great, that the Eye could not look
to the end of it; whence I imagined that this was Lucifer's own Mansion; but
one of the Devils, who was upon the Guard, took me out of this fancy, by
telling me, that this was the Spaniards Apartment, which stirred up my
curiosity to know what those heaps of Chains, and Ropes, which were thrown so
carelessly on the ground, signified; to which Question, the Devil, who was on
the Guard there, answered me in this manner; The Spaniards, who, whilst the
fortune of the house of Austria lasted, were formidable in the world, had put
the Dominion of Hell into great jealousy, that our Prince, fearing lest, as
the Spaniards were resolved to domineer over the Universe, sometimes bringing a
Kingdom into their subjection, and sometimes a Republic, so they would also,
by the same policy and ambition, subdue Hell it self, and reduce all the
Infernal Vassals to their obedience, was resolved to prevent them: But it was
not so easy for them to tyrannize over Hell, as it had succeeded to them in
Lording it over Europe. For the Devils, who are ever studying to preserve their
own Liberty, soon perceived their unbridled ambition, and brought a quick
Remedy, hampering the Spaniards in such Chains and Fetters, that they durst not
so much as attempt the least violence, although the force neither of Iron, nor
Chains, is able to take from them the Pride which they ever maintain outwardly
-- But the Princes of Europe no sooner perceived this torrent of Pride, which
flowed from Spain to the damage of the Universe, but they all united together
to lowre that Spanish Pride, which corroded with the Venom of Jealousy, the
Quiet of all Principalities: No sooner did they begin to join Forces to despoil
them of those States, which they had so over-hastily invested themselves in; no
sooner did they begin to sow Discords, by popular Revolutions, to deprive them
of those Kingdoms, which they had so tyrannically usurped from other Kings; In
fine, no sooner were the Spaniards seen languishing and dying, from proud, to
become humble, and from haughty to become wretched, being pointed at by those
very people who obeyed them at the holding up of their finger: But Lucifer
imitating the Princes of Europe (who had not only laid aside their fears, but
made them tremble in the Center of their own Country) ordered the Chains
should be taken from their necks, and the Fetters from their feet, and they
should be let loose, being secured they could never regain with all their
Policy, the Power which they had lost.


M. This seems to me rather a discourse of a good Politician, than a wicked
Devil; but what, did you not then see the Spaniards?


P. Yes, I saw them, why should I not, since I went in for that purpose? After
then the Sentinel at the door had informed me of these particulars that I have
told thee, we passed on further, and entered into a great Hall, open on all
sides, but covered over head, which Roof or Cieling was supported with many
Pillars round about it. I saw the Spaniards there stretched upon the ground,
kissing the Earth with their mouths, over whom were many Frenchmen hung by the
Arms, as if they had been upon the Rack: But that which was most curious in the
fight, was to see the French endeavor earnestly to stretch out their feet to
touch the shoulders of the Spaniards, not valuing the breaking of their own
arms to have the satisfaction of treading upon them, and the Spaniards
shrinking from them as much as they could, rubbing their bellies on the ground,
as Serpents, to avoid the trampling with the feet of their Enemies, so that I
could not discern which was the greater pain, that of the French, which trod
upon them, or that of the Spaniards, who were trodden upon. There were mingled
up and down several Italian and German Princes, and some Ambassadors from
England, from Swedeland, from Denmark, from Venice, and from Holland, and
Switzerland, who were almost burst with laughing to see such a Scene; but the
best of all was, to see them use all their craft to egg on sometimes the
Spaniards, and sometimes the French: To the French they spoke softly, in this
manner; It is a shame, that you who have seen your selves so many years ill
used by the Spaniards; that you cannot revenge your selves fully for all that
they have done against you: What, have not the French then wit enough to reduce
the Spaniards into such a calamitous condition, as the Spaniards have formerly
reduced the French? Sa, sa, take heart, you generous Frenchmen, stretch out
your legs, sprawl out your feet, endure a little more pain of your arms, lose
not this opportunity: For if the Spaniards should at this time get from under
you, they would not fail with their subtle crafts, to seek for ways to get over
you again: Then to the Spaniards, with a low voice, they discoursed thus; What
a shame is this, that you should suffer your selves to be thus trampled upon by
the French, who were formerly trod upon by the Spaniards? What, have you the
heart to see the name of the Spaniards thus vilified? What, are you able to see
that Spain, which other whiles has made all the Nations of the World to
tremble, be affrighted with the name of the single French Nation? If you would
but begin to kick at the French, which tread upon you, you would find an
hundred hands ready to help you: It concerns you to begin the work, and us to
find out means to complete it; we, who have been favorable to France, to bring
down Spain, would now be favorable to Spain to bring down France: Lose no time
then; for an inveterate distemper corrodes the bowels of them that have it: You
must either recover your lost honor, or be content to lose all you have left.
The French have already brought you to such extremities, as to ask twice for
Peace out of Charity; and if you do not do your utmost to defend your selves,
you will be forced to beg your lives as an Alms. You will find those that will
supply you with Men and Moneys, both secretly and openly; and what would you
have more?


M. Provided the Effects correspond with the Promises, every thing will go
well: But I am afraid of somewhat, whilst the other Princes, who egg on the
Spaniards and the French, very often leave them both afterward in the Suds.


P. There is no doubt, but that the Policy of other Princes will not only
roast, but kindle, the fire to roast the Spaniards in the Fat of the French;
but because these two Monarchies are so situated by nature, and the
distribution of Politic Interests, that the one cannot be diminished without
the augmentation of the other; so that all the Politic Reason of other Princes
requires them to keep these two Monarchies in an eaven balance; wherefore every
time they see one of them falling, they run immediately to lend them their hand
against the other: And, in truth, it is a curious thing to see how the English,
Venetians, Hollanders and Swisses, and the other Princes of Italy and Germany
labor to raise up the poor Spaniards; one lifts up one leg, another another;
some one arm, others another; some hold up his head, some hold him out a Rope:
In fine, some with one thing, and some with another; all endeavored to raise
up the oppressed Spaniards; but with all this they do nothing; and, to speak
truly, how can they, because they fear so much the rising Fortune of France,
that they dare not declare themselves openly in favor of the Spaniard, whereby
the help they bring him, serves to little purpose?


M. I know not how Affairs go in Hell, because I was never there, but am sure
they are otherwise transacted in Europe; Policy and Religion being so jumbled
together, that the Interest of Religion is very often obstructed, by the
Interests of Policy.


P. He that prescribed that Recipe -- must be a Fool of a Physician, and I am
angry, Marforius, that thou should talk so like a wise man of Gotham; for
how, prithee, can the discoursing of Princes and Religion agree together? since
the Religion of Princes, must ever serve, or be used as Antimony is by the
sick, and sometimes by the healthy; which when taken in small quantity, exactly
weighed, and prepared curiously, restores health to the Infirm, and confirms it
to the Healthy: But the least Grain, taken too much, without due weight and
preparation, poisons the stomach, and kills the body: So Religion, by Princes,
must needs be but little used, and very well weighed; for a little too much is
sufficient to disturb the quiet of any Principality. Nay, I will say more, that
as Antimony is not commonly given but in desperate cases: So Princes ought not
to stick too close to the Interests of Religion, but in those Occurrences, when
they cannot possibly do otherwise. Bethlem Gabor understood that prescription
exceeding well, and therefore when the French Ambassador went into Germany, to
tell him, that though Indeed it was true, that Policy required the King of France
to humble the House of Austria, and that a more opportune season could never be
found to do so, than at that time; yet the Interest of Religion did oblige the
King to go off from that League he had made with the said Gabor, to the
prejudice of the House of Austria, for fear of seeing the Catholic Religion
destroyed in those parts: To which proposal Gabor answered in these few words;
Tu Princeps, and de Religione curas? Is your Master a Monarch, and is he
scrupulous in matters of Religion?


M. This Example does not much satisfy me; for this Gabor was worse than any
Turk, and, amongst Christian Princes, there are other kinds of Principles.


P. Hear, Marforius, what I have to say to thee upon this particular; it is
more displeasing to God, when a Christian does good works, and afterward
repents the doing of them, than if he had not done them at all; he being fitter
to be excused, who has omitted doing good, but he is worthiest of punishment,
that repents of his good deeds. Now, amongst Princes, the same Reason is
current; for they had much better lay aside some Maxims of Religion, than to
embrace them a while, and repent of them afterward. When the King of France
besieged Rochel, the Spaniards, against all Maxims of Policy, solely upon those
of Religion, sent their Army to help the Most Christian King, which much
weakened their own Force, and made the Party of the Most Christian King their
Enemy stronger, which, a while after, the Spaniards well perceiving, repented
extremely what they had done, biting their Nails for rage at it. Thus they got
little with God, nothing with the King of France, and least of all with the
World, losing that blast of Fame which they thought to have gained in
Christendom, as soon as it was rumoured about, that they repented what they had
done. Of these Examples one may find a thousand; and it is certain, that
Princes ordinarily repent of all those Maxims of Religion which they make use
of sometimes, for I know not what reason. And it would be much better for them
never to embrace them, than to repent so suddenly of their so doing; losing the
favor of Heaven by their Repentance, and what they might have got by the
Interests of Policy. The French are not so simple as the Spaniards, and they
never touch the Affairs of Religion, but with the tips of their fingers.


M. But, methinks yet in the time of Bethlem Gabor, they have hugged Religion
in their arms.


P. Alas, how thou art couzened! Those Maxims of Religion served them only in
appearance, to cover some particular private Interests, which were a foot then
in France, designing to oblige the Infanta of Spain to yield to, I cannot tell
you what Marriage; without which consideration, the Maxims of Policy would have
infinitely out-stript those of Religion. The French are not so scrupulous; they
love rather never to embrace the Maxims of Religion, than embrace them, and
repent of them, as the Spaniards do. Whilst Cardinal Richlieu lived, who
perfectly understood these Rules, the Pope's Nuncio, though he often set before
him the War against Geneva, and always proposed the great Maxims of Religion,
the good Cardinal continually answered him thus; Provided the Maxims of
Religion do not ruin the Maxims of State: And in this manner he dismissed the
Nuncio, who never went further with him, because he saw him much more steered
by the Maxims of State, than by those of Religion. Maxims of Religion are
really gross Victuals, and fit for common people; but those of State are
curious bits, and only fit for Princes; to whose Tables gross Meats ought never
to be brought, but in times of great necessity, it being unfit to fill their
stomachs with that, which is only good to fill the bellies of the ruder
popularity. That such Meat is good to satiate common people, I grant, but to
nourish Princes, I deny, because the same food which serves for nutriment to
the People, would hurt Princes when they would make use of them; because, a
stomach which is accustomed to delicate Meat, is not able to bear grosser food:
In fine, the best Princes leave Maxims of Religion to Monks and Priests, as
food proportioned to their temper, and reserve for themselves Maxims of State
as food proper for Princes.


M. Before I forget, prithee tell me what pains the Germans suffer in Hell?


P. The same pains that are endured by Tantalus, which is, to be very thirsty,
without having any Wine to quench their drought; so that it is a curious thing
to observe their going up and down in Hell, to look out some place to plant
Vines in; and although they endeavor it with all possible diligence, they have
not yet, nor ever will succeed in their design; because the Devil, knowing
perfectly well, that it is natural to the Germans to esteem any place Paradise
where they find good Wine, though all the Demons in Hell were in the place;
therefore they ever find an opposition to these designs.


M. Since there are so many Lakes, surely they should do them the favor to
make them Ferry-men, rather than let them perish with thirst.


P. They would never accept that Office, because they have taken an Oath never
to be drowned but in Wine, which they will not break to die in the Water.


M. Well, follow on thy Voyage, and let us say no more of the Maxims of
Religion; Princes having more need of it than we.


P. Thou art in the right; after we had observed the French and the Spaniards,
we walked about that spacious place a little while, where we saw several
deserted, in which we met some poor Spaniards full of Lice, with bare Breeches;
and I, being full of curiosity, asked one of them his name, to which he replied
haughtily, I am called Don Lopez of Lopis; at which I was extremely astonished
to see, that neither Lice, Poverty, Misery, nor Hell could humble the Spanish
Pride; therefore I entreated him to tell me, what good that Title did him? to
which he answered, that it showed him to be a Spaniard, loving rather to be
known to be of that Country, though a Beggar, than esteemed a Frenchman, though
rich: Which Opinion being heard by a Frenchman who passed by, he said, Keep
thy Title; for that Feather of a Title will be the last thing that the French
will take away from the Spaniards; in which time, turning my Eyes from this
object, I had passed but a few steps on, when I found my self very near the
Gate, through which I had entered; whereupon, making haste to get out, I
unexpectedly heard a noise, a rumor, a screeching, a fearful cry, which said
very mournfully, O miserable people! we are lost; Oh our poor Princes! where
are you? Oh our beloved Liberty which art gone! when shall we ever recever thee
again? I believed these had been Souls new come into Hell; but a Devil himself,
who was in great pain, told me, that those who made that horrible noise, were
the Italian, and German Princes, who apprehended they should lose all, because
the French had gone on so far, that, in fine, they had set their very feet upon
the necks of the poor Spaniards, and the Ambassadors of those Princes wandered
up and down like Flies to procure Leagues, but to retard a little the immense
Victories of the French: But it was pleasanter to me to find a certain Demon
(who understood Politics well enough) seeing the said Ambassadors run sweating
up and down, cry out unto them with a loud voice, O with reverence to your
Lordships Character! you are very Fops; you should have cured your disease at
its birth, and not stayed till it was grown old, and difficult to be cured. In
the mean time, I said to my Assistant, Let us go on to dispatch our business,
and leave the care of these intanglements to the Princes, that are like to lose
by it; so mending our pace, we went out of that place, and came into a large
path, crowded with an infinite company of people, who were traveling, and
bemoaning their most bitter destiny, cursing the very Earth that had sustained
them; which made the Demons rage so much the more, that with great diligence
and care, they employed every one in his Task, and administered torments and
punishments, according to the Sentence passed upon every one for his faults:
But I, who was not to suffer there with others, but only to consider the
punishments of others, went away with the pace of a new-made Gentleman,
observing every thing minutely; and although the sight was very terrible in it
self, yet I found some pleasure in the variety of that Tragical Scene, because
they were so equally proportioned. Amongst others, I observed a great company
of naked Women, who held one another by the hand, and wringed one another hard:
behind them went an innumerable crowd of Devils, with Iron Rods in their hands,
threatening them, and forcing them to return back; at which I was much
astonished, not knowing how to find out the reason, why the Devils would not
have Women be in Hell. But the Demon that was with me, eased me of this doubt,
telling me, that they were married Women, of which kind of persons, the Devils
held there was more need of in the World, than now in Hell. To tell you the
truth, this first reason did not satisfy me, thinking it too obscure; and I
told him, I could not believe that married persons were more necessary in the
World, than in Hell; because these, who were condemned to such pains, had
incurred them by their wicked life, and the World was eased by the abatement of
that mischief; for from the diminution of wickedness arises the increase of
goodness. Then the Devil, who laughed all this while at my words, gave me this
answer; I did not tell thee, that Women were necessary in the World for the
good of it, but for the advantage of Hell, which draws a double profit from
Women's living in the World; and I Will tell thee how; first, for the custom of
bearing Horns, which is grown so common amongst the Devils, that it is now
thought a shame for any one to be without them; and because we Devils have no
Wives, who will take the pains to fill our heads with Horns, we are forced on
that account, to multiply the number of married Whores, as much as it is
possible in the World, knowing no other way how to maintain this fashion which
reigns amongst us, introduced by the fantasticalness of those Painters that
will needs have us Horned, which has occasioned our taking care, that among
the whole Female Sex the Painters Wives should afford us the greatest supply of
that sort of Animals; and now, as soon as any Woman's Liberality has planted
Horns on her Husband's forehead, a hundred Devils are ready to cut them off;
whence no Horns are ever seen upon the heads of men, though their Wives be the
greatest Whores in the World. This agreement being made between them, that the
Men should preserve the Roots, and the Devils wear the Branches. Secondly, We
are as ambitious as the Spaniards and therefore endeavor to draw the noblest
prey's into Hell, and because Women are esteemed vile, and abject Beasts,
therefore we procure with all our power their continuing in the World, by whose
means also the number of the damned is always multiplying: nor let this seem
strange which I say unto thee, O Roman! It being a very great truth, that Women
are causes of the absolute destruction of Men. How many poor Husbands are
forced to steal, that they might have the liberty to kiss their own Wives, who
will not sell Matrimonial kisses but at the weight of Gold? How many are
constrained to despair, to see their multiplicity of Children exceed the
convenience of their Fortune? and that which is worst of all, that they are
Children given to, and not begotten by them. How many men call upon the Devil
all the day, because they cannot see their Wives by night, they being engaged
by promise to their secret Friends? How many Murders are committed for Women?
How many Bankrupts are made by their Luxury? How many Altars are profaned by
their pleasure? How many Poisons are prepared by Women for their Husbands,
being counseled to it by the unbridled lusts of their Lovers? In fine; let the
Women therefore stay in the World, since it is a great truth, that one Woman
there brings a greater profit to the Demons, than a thousand can do in Hell.


M. This Devil was no fool: But let us leave these wicked Women with a
mischief, and pass on; Whither wentest thou afterward?


P. We entered into a place which was all fire, round about which were many
Devils in the shape of Satyrs; upon every one of which sat a person courted by
many Devils, which served as an Apollyon, but such an Apollyon, as was
agreeable to the quality of that place. One put certain fiery Spurs on their
feet, others blew in their ears the hissing of a Serpent; this incensed them
with Sulphur and Pitch; and another gave them Venom and Poison to eat, and
every one was mighty busy to show themselves meritorious Courtiers of those
persons on horseback in the form of Women, upon those Satyrs; and there were
millions of these persons all served in the same manner: but that which I found
most strange, was, to see them all without eyes; and my amazement was so great,
because I knew not what it signified: my thoughts this while boiled with
infinite imaginations; and I searched about for the reason of such a change: I
believed that these might be that sort of Men, who with many lascivious looks
had fallen in love in Churches, in the presence of the Sacrament of the Altar,
as is seen every day in Rome; whence I esteemed it a very suitable punishment
for such kind of persons to be depriprived of their eyes-sight. Again, I
imagined that these were such as had been curious in prying into the actions of
others, and as a Castigation fit for that, I supposed they were condemned to
have their eyes plucked out: But none of these thoughts satisfying me, I begged
a particular account of the most complaisant Demon, that I saw there, who
answered me thus; Those whom thou see us serve with so much Infernal
Magnificence, are the most Reverend Fathers of the Inquisition, to whom we are
much obliged, having with their rigorous Tyranny forbidden the Reading of the
Sacred Scriptures in the Vulgar Tongue; which is that, which most perfectly
instructs those Men, who understand it in their duty, and turns them from evil,
filling and replenishing Heaven, and dispeopling Hell; which we here being very
sensible of, have found out this invention; viz. to oblige the Popes under
other pretenses to introduce the Inquisition into the Church, and to assist the
Inquisitors continually, to serve us as Instruments to accomplish our main
design, which is the peopling Hell, and dispeopling Heaven of its Inhabitants,
which our good Friends and Companions the Fathers Inquisitors help us not a
little in, whilst they are the cause, that many thousands in the World live in
utter Ignorance by being prohibited the Reading of the Sacred Scriptures: So
that the people, not being able to know their duty, wander out of the way,
believing they live well, when they live wickedly. Besides this, the Fathers
the Inquisitors forbid the Reading of all Books, which discover the Vices of
the Ecclesiastics, which is the ground of two mischiefs, the one in obliging
the people to imagine the greatest enormities and defects of those who should
be Looking-glasses to the common people of Christendom to be Virtues; the other
in flattering the Ecclesiastics, who being safe from receiving any affront or
shame from the people, who are forbidden by a rigorous Edict, either to speak
ill, or to think ill of the wickedness of the Ecclesiastics, they remain
plunged in gluttony and lust, and an hundred thousand dissolutenesses contrary
to the Laws of the God of Heaven. In fine, the profit which the Inquisitors
bring to this place is incredible, whose eyes we therefore put out, lest they
should read that themselves which they debar others from; for they would be
sure, if they did but look into those Books which they prohibit others, to
renounce the Inquisition themselves, and perceive the error which brings so
many to Hell, and so much mischief to Christianity.


M. Truly I believe, that this restraint from Writing against, and Reading of
the Vices of the Ecclesiastics, makes them not a little proud, believing
themselves greater than they are, in despite of what they know themselves to be.


P. The Inquisition was not introduced by those Popes, who piously ruled the
Church, but by those Ecclesiastics who would live in the Church, as
Sardanapalus did in the World: whilst the Churchmen were holy, and zealous in
the Divine Service, and Edifiers of the people, there was no speech of the
Inquisition in the Church; and yet the Heresies, against which they say the
Inquisition was set up, had more vigor at that time than they have now. But,
no sooner did the Ecclesiastics begin to degenerate from their Pristine State,
nay, from the very nature of their Character, but they bethought themselves of
bringing in the Inquisition, to bridle the mouths of the people from publishing
those Vices, which they had embraced with so much licentiousness: an evident
sign that the end of those, who invented the Inquisition, has not been to
throw down Heresy, but to keep the people in awe, that they might not so much
as murmr at the impiety of the Ecclesiastics: Whereat the Religious taking
courage, do sin with so much liberty, that sin in them seems to be grown to a
natural habitude; and the poor people dare do no less than sanctify the Vices
of the Ecclesiastics, lest they should fall Victims to the cruelty of the
Inquisition. If the people had liberty to speak and to write against the
Scandals, which the Ecclesiastics commit in the face of the Church, assuredly
these things would be amended, that they might not be reproached, and trampled
upon by the people: but the Inquisitors will not endure it, wherefore I do
believe they have made an agreement with the Devil to fill up Hell with damned
Souls.


M. I have heard, that the true reason of forbidding Books, is nothing else but
an interest of the purse, and of the brain: of the brain, because by keeping
others from reading, they enclose amongst themselves that which ought to be in
common to all; by which means picking out from forbidden Books what the Labors
of deceased Authors have composed, they make use of them to enrich their own
Sermons. And I my self knew a certain Inquisitor that passed for a famous
Preacher, who extracted all the fine juice of his Sermons from some forbidden
Books, changing nothing but the names, and I know not what figures: And indeed
in the prohibited Books, the finest conceptions in the World are to be found,
to expose Vice, it being necessary to make that common, which the Inquisitors
intended a secret; and for the pecuniary interest, men are afraid of prohibited
Books, because some scrupulous persons, out of fear of Excommunication, as soon
as they hear of an Edict against any Book, carry it to the Inquisition, and the
Father Inquisitor, or his Vicar, after they have drawn all the juice our of it,
sell it at a dear rate to some stranger; finding, to color such a sale, a
hundred pretenses, which all the Inquisitors abound in.


P. If thou had ever observed, my dear Marforius, the particularities of
forbidden Books, as I have done, thou would be astonished. Do thou believe
that those Popes are zealous of the Honor of God, and that the Cardinals fear
God, or those Inquisitors, who exclaim against those Books which publish the
Vices of the Churchmen. Alas! the Popes, who have zeal in their hearts; the
Cardinals, who have Souls pure from the ordures, which corrupt the
Ecclesiastical State; and the Inquisitors, who walk in the ways of our Lord,
mock at those Satyrs, and Libels, and Histories, which correct the Vices of
others; saying, with a heart full of zeal, We must correct Vices, and so take
away from Detractours the cause of their murmuring and writing. Behold all that
honest Prelates say, when they hear talk of prohibited Books, and why so, but
because they find not their Consciences offended by those Books? The Horse, who
feels the Spurs in his sides, bounces, runs away, and throws his Rider. The
same thing falls out with the Ecclesiastics; for those who find their
Consciences pricked with the prohibited Books, leap, exclaim, run up and down,
clamor, and, one would think the Devil were at the tail of them; but those who
are not spurred in their Consciences, knowing very well that the Books do not
speak of them, having given no occasion, laugh at every thing, feigning to know
nothing, not needing to take notice of that which does not at all concern them.


M. It Is certain, the thing is just, as thou say; and I know a German Canon,
who goes crying up and down the Streets, and the Courts of Cardinals, against
all those Books, which reprove the Church-men's Vices, and not without reason,
whilst in every page of the prohibited Books, he finds the picture of his Life,
he being a Sodomite, a Simoniack, a Cutthroat, a Seducer, a Whore-master, a
Pimp, scandalous, and a sworn Enemy of his Breviary; therefore seeing he cannot
correct himself, because his nature is too much depraved and inclined to evil,
he beats his brain to smother all those Books, and those Authors, who describe
him just as he is.


P. I know what Canon thou speak of; I am acquainted with him; he lives in
Rome; but the greatest of his Vices is, that he is a great Spy.


M. Thou have hit him: it is the very same. But I pray thee let us return into
the Chamber of the Inquisitors.


P. No, I am just going out of it; for with these Kinds of People, the less you
have to do with them, the better: So that as soon as we had observed this
magnificent Inquisition, I went forward, going out at another very little door,
and so narrow, that I was fain to draw in my very breath to get out the easier;
the way, tho dark, conducted me to a much more obscure Gallery, where was a Man
walking, and mourning in certain Accents, which forced compassion; whose
despairing sorrow, made my very heart melt, and the more, because I could
discern nothing but his voice, and the motion of his body. Besides, when he
perceived me to draw near him, he burst out the louder, saying, O wretched me!
that I should ever have Damned my self for the evil actions of others! which
made me believe he was some poor Confesser; since the Confessors usually damn
themselves by taking upon them other folks sins: so I endeavored to console
him, as if he had been such a one; but he weeping more bitterly, thus answered
me; What, a Confessor! I am a miserable Bookseller, who am condemned to these
torments, for having Traded in other men's Works: Then drawing a little nearer
him, I began to call to mind who he was, and I no sooner knew him, but I began
to admire the Effects of the Divine Justice, because he was one of those
Stationers who Print and Sell the most scandalous, profane, railing, and wicked
Books, that the Devil himself could have suggested. In fine; his Shop was a
Brothel-house of the wickedest and most lascivious sort of Books.
Notwithstanding, I seemed to pity him, not to put him into higher despairs; but
he easily perceived that my compassion was but feigned; whereupon he said unto
me, What should one do? This is the usual misery of our Profession, that we
Stationers are not condemned like other men, for our own wicked works, but
suffer these Acute Torments, for the wicked works of others. He would have run
on, but a Devil stopped his mouth, by burning leaves of old Books at his nose,
which made an insufferable stink; at which I said within my self; If
Booksellers be condemned to such bitter pains, for only selling such Books,
what the Devil shall be done with the Authors who Compose them?


M. Was there no other Stationer then but this? I very much wonder at that, and
the more, because ordinarily the Booksellers and the Authors understand one
another very well; so that I should have thought they might have been
altogether.


P. I am also of that Opinion, that there were more Stationers in this place,
but no great number; for there are but few that meddle with such fort of ware,
and those most commonly such, who have a large Conscience, that is to say,
none, or an interested one; but yet there are some, who do it to serve their
Friend; but that service is never separate from interest. Then, as to Authors,
I will tell thee, that having asked the poor Stationer, if he did not know
whither so many Authors went, who blot so much Paper with their scribbles, he
made me lean my ear to an Iron wall, which was on the right side, with a little
window in it, which I no sooner drew near too, but I perceived a braying like
that which Asses make, but much louder, and more lamentable; so that I was
amazed, and wholly besides my self; and the rather, because the Devil told me,
that all these were Authors of Books; and this intelligence increased my
confusion; for, it seemed to me, that there were more Authors of Books in Hell,
than men in the whole Universe. Whilst I earnestly endeavored to thrust in my
head further, to see if I could discover any of my acquaintance; a Demon, who
kept that Gate, entreated me, that I would be pleased to come in; and I
answering him, I would: He opened the Gate, which, though not very large, I
entered in convemently, together with that other Demon who had the charge of
accompanying me. At the first I imagined that there were diverse Orders of
Authors, and by consequence, diverse punishments; therefore I sought for
Divines, Philosophers, Historians, Politicians, Mathematicians, Lawyer's,
Romancers, Casuists, and Antichristian Statesmen, in several Apartments. But
not seeing any difference, I asked the reason of the Demon, who answered me,
that amongst Authors they could not make a difference of persons, or of matter,
though the matter and the persons were different, because in Hell, Authors are
condemned, not for the Works they had Printed, but for the end that moved them
to Compose them. Then I prayed him to inform me of the end; he told me briefly;
that Authors had no other end in writing, but Interest and Ambition, which were
the very two Puries sent by Lucifer into the World, to draw thousands of Souls
into Hell; and because these two Furies did make their Nests in the breasts of
Writers, we see more of them in Hell, than of any other persons: Add to this,
that there must needs be more Writers damned, than other persons, because they
all write to make others be damned. Besides, they spend their time, some in
seeking out new conceits, inventions and speculations, and others in lies,
fancies, and impostures; whereby they have no sense left to know the pure
nature of that God, whom they feign only to adore in outward appearance.


M. I believe that Writers are damned, because they empty their brains too much
in desiring to teach others, that there remains not a dram of understanding in
them, to know their own duty, whence the most of them become vicious.


P. I believe so too: Now, whilst the Demon was informing me of these things,
I went up and down, observing the quality of those pains which these miserable
damned Authors suffered: And first, they constrained them to eat all those
Books they had made, and then, without waiting for the natural time of
digestion, they drew them all out again at their breeches. I found this
proceeding very unreasonable; and told my sentiment to one of those Devils, who
answered; I was a very fool to undertake to give Rules to Hell; adding further,
that this was a chastisement proportionable to their deserts; because, as these
Writers brought forth their Books as soon as they had begotten them in their
fancy, without ripening them in their Judgment; so it was very convenient they
should shit them out before they were maturely digested. The other punishment
was, that the Devils held certain Iron Combs, with which they did not only
comb, but tear the hands of those miserable Authors, that it forced compassion
to see and hear them cry out in despairing terms; O cursed be the day that I
ever took Pen in hand! Oh cursed be he that sold me the Ink! Oh cursed be the
Paper that I made use of! Oh cursed be those Book sellers that bought my
Manuscripts! Oh cursed be the Standish that stood upon my Desk! I wondered again
at these Curses, and said to the Demon; Methinks these damned Souls deceived
themselves, for they ought rather to curse the time taken up in their Studies,
and lost in their composure, and not the Pen and Ink, which are but the
accessory Instruments: To which the Demon answered me, That I was more out
than they, because the Authors could not curse their Studies, because they knew
very well they had never studied for them: Wherefore they would not rave
against that Occupation which they had never used: But that which most
imported, which he told me with the best grace, and I did not find to be false,
though he was a Devil, was, that it was very certain, that the greatest part of
those that write, never went to any other School but that of Imagination.


M. But tell me, did not the Devil give thee an Answer particularly to the
Currycombs with which they curried the hands?


P. He told me, that in this last Age, the Art of Writing was reduced to a
certain itch in the hands, whilst the Authors writ with their hands, but not
with their hearts, with words, and not with judgment; and therefore the Devils
studied how to take off that Itch from their hands, because their hearts and
their judgments had no guilt in the composing of so many sopperies which are
Printed in the World. Whilst the Devil was thus informing me, I did not forbear
going forward, that I might the better observe the torments of these most
miserable Authors: when I heard my self called by so doleful a voice, that I
was forced, though I did not intend it; to draw near, I knew him to be Ferrante
Pallavicino, which was nothing strange to me, because I had ever imagined, that
he having lived like an Heretic, and written like an Atheist, he could have no
other Apartment but that where Atheists and Heretics are doomed together. He
who still kept his usual nature, no sooner saw me, but delighting to vent
himself with his Friends, began to say to me; O Pasquin! how I repent me, (though
I know how little repentance signifies) for having written such large Volumes
of Satyrs. Who could ever have thought, that a man who never had any other end,
but to correct the Vices of the Ecclesiastics, and bring back the Church into
the purity of its Primitive Institutions, should be rewarded with suffering
such bitter pains? What else is found in my Books, but the contempt of Vices?
and yet the correcting them has brought me nothing but mischief. I answered
him, Those who write to correct the vices of others, need first to punish their
body severely to correct their own. St. Paul disciplined himself in the night,
and then in the day exclaimed against the vices of the people: from whence the
Church received great benefit. But what fruit can thou bring with thy
satyrizing against the vices of the Barbarini, if thou wallowest in thy
dissoluteness as Swine do in the mire? In fine, my dear Seignior Ferrante, they
who would write to purge others, had need first to purge themselves.


M. Might it please the Heavens, that all Writers were like to Pallavicino; for
he writ with a Foundation, and with Learning, whereas others write without
either of them.


P. That which I said to Pallavicino, I said to all others that heard me; it
being certain, that they had much more need of it than he: and truly I was
displeased to see him in such a place; therefore, knowing I could give him no
relief, I turned away, and had gone but a very few steps ere I found my self in
a place, which I took to be the Arsenal of Hell, seeing the Devils were so
intent in forging Instruments to torment the poor Souls which were there; and
tormented them with so much despite, that the very sight of it were sufficient
to terrify half the World. At first I imagined that this was Judas his Hell,
and the Crucifiers of Christ, not being able to imagine that there could be any
others that should deserve so great punishment: But having asked one of those
Devils which were at work, he slouted at this fancy of mine, and said to me,
What, Judas! What, Judas! These are Physicians, Chyrurgeons, Apothecaries,
Poysoners, Assassins, and Executioners, and such sort of people; against whom
we find our selves obliged to use all our strength, to revenge so many wrongs
that they have done to us. What wrongs, said I? nay, you are rather beholden to
such kind of persons, who bestowed all their industry to dispeople the World of
Mankind, to stock Hell the sooner. Look, cried he, here is a Roman come to
instruct the Devil in his own Trade! We are not angry that these Executioners
of the World do labor to empty it of Men; but we are much displeased to see
them destroyed before their time; for, it is more delightful to us to have
Souls come continually fresh and fresh into Hell. And yet the Physicians with
Prescriptions, Apothecaries with their Doses, Chyrurgeons with their Bleedings,
the Poysoners with their Doses, the Assassins with their Treacheries, and the
Executioners with their Axes, do so much, say so much, contrive so much, that
they kill more Men in a day, than we tempt in a year. It seems an incredible
thing, that one Physician is more able to dispatch a Body, than fifty Devils
are to gain a Soul. But that which most concerns us is, that we would have Men
live a little longer time, that they might so much the more multiply the number
of their sins, that Hell might also multiply the quality of their punishments;
but for all this, Physicians, Apothecaries and Chyrurgeons must have their
will, who are wont to kill folks from the Cradle. Before this great crowd of
Rascals swarmed in the World, Men lived an hundred, and two hundred years, we
enjoying all that while the pleasure of seeing them sin daily: But, since these
Devils of Physicians, Apothecaries and Chyrurgeons were introduced into the
World, Men are rarely seen to live to eighty years, they killing them so very
young. Yet they do not design directly to kill them, but to prolong their
sickness, that by the length of time they might multiply the number of their
Fees; but by seeking to spin out the disease, they destroy the Body before the
time. But hear whether we have not reason to envy the fortune of these human
slaughterers: we are all destinated to Murder; that is, we Devils the Soul, and
Doctors, Apothecaries and Chyrurgeons the Body by all ways imaginable; now we
who kill the Soul, which is the more Noble part, have nothing; and they who
kill the Body, which is the Inferior part, are paid with a liberal hand; This
would make, not only the Devils, but the very Saints mad also, to see a
Physician paid so well, that with one word kills a Prince; and we Devils bestow
so great fatigue to destroy a Soul without the least gratification. In fine, it
extremely pleases us in Hell, to torment the Souls of those, that with so many
herbs, weapons and poisons torment the bodies of Men.


M. Let Us go to other matters, Pasquin; for, the farther we get from
Physicians, the better; for they stink above ground of the odor which remains
of the Urine and Excrements which often catches the Nose.


P. That little ill flavor cost the Patients Purse a good deal of Money,
Brother. We passed then from that place into another, much more spacious, girt
round with very high walls of fire, so that it seemed impossible to get
thorough them; wherefore I had resolved only to look on the outside; so, coming
as near as I could, I began to hear more doleful, frightful, and despairing
Voices; therefore being very desirous to know the Voice of any one of them, the
better to understand the Quality of the damned, which that place was full of, I
stopped a little, and listened with all attention, yet could hear nothing but a
confusion of Voices, which cried, O that I had said over the Divine Office! O
that I had gone in good time into the Quire! O that I had not robbed the
Treasury Church! O that I had celebrated Mass with Devotion! O that I had not
writ so many false Letters to my Superiors! O that I had lived more retired in
the Cloister! O that I had never brought Whores and Catamites into my Chamber!
O that I had not Gamed with Seculars! O that I had not defrauded the
Alms-boxes! O that I had refrained from giving so many public Scandals! O that
I had not been so Mortal an Enemy to the Breviary! O that I had not had so much
hatred to Obedience! O that I had not been so ambitious of Offices! O that I
had not so often broke Lent! O that I had contented my self with the Religious
life I entered into! O that I had not busied my self with worldly Affairs! O
that I had not kept that Infamous Woman in my house, under the title of a
Niece! O that I had been more assiduous in the Cure of Souls which was given me
in charge! O that I had not sold the sacred Utensils to put into my Purse! O
that I had not transformed my self from a Religious person to a Merchant! O
that I had been more meek and humble! O that I had not been so slothful in the
service of God! O that I had not made a mock of Hell and Heaven! O that I my
Soul had been divested of worldly Passions! O that I had not done this and
that! These were all the sounds which echoed in my ears, which quickly made me
understand, that this was the Hell for Priests and Friars; so that informing my
self at large of that Demon who attended me, and he assuring me it was so, I
prayed him to do so much for me, as to help me to get in, that I might make my
boast, that I had seen the Priests and Friars tormented in Hell, who do so
torment all the People in the Universe, and, more than that, under pretense of
their good.


M. For my part, I could have bated that curiosity, and have given such a Race
of People to the Devil.


P. So one might have done, but all men cannot: However, the Demon satisfied
my curiosity; for he found a hole, which looked like that of a Sink, at which we
went in, finding never a door, which obliged me to ask him the reason of it;
and he answered me, That as the Friars went out of their Cloisters by an
outlet of their own boring, without the leave of their Superiors; so they
went into Hell without any ones perceiving them, there being only some certain
holes for Priests to go in at; to which I answered, That I wondered there were
any holes in the Mansions of Priests and Friars, since they studied nothing
else but to stop them.


M. But how could you get in at such a strait hole? were you not in danger of
sticking in the midst of it?


P. Alas! the holes that the Priests go in at, are big enough for a Horse. Now
when we were got in, I was at my wits end, because indeed I thought I should
have found nothing but Friars and Priests, or at least Priests, Friars and
Devils together all clothed alike, without any difference: And that which made
me think so, was, the uniformity I knew there was between the Religious and the
Devils; because, as the Devils study nothing else but to enrich Hell with
spoils; so these Religious do nothing but procure the stuffing of their
Cloisters with other peoples goods: Besides, I have ever heard those Women, who
used to have a commerce with any Friar, reproached with being Hackneys to the
Devil, an evident sign that the Friars are very Devils. But I found it quite
contrary to what I thought; for, the Friars, and the Priests, were in the same
Habits they had used in the World; and the Devils, who tormented them, were
dressed in the Habits of Women and Boys; which I wondered more at, than what I
had seen at first, and enquired of the Demon the reason of it, who told me, I
ought not to be scandalized to see the Religious suffer in their own Habits,
for having committed many of their Knaveries and Scandals, under the security
of the Respect which is given to that Habit, it being but just they should
suffer under those Habits, which had cloaked so great guilts and wickednesses.


M. To speak the truth indeed, without reflecting upon the Religious, who
really fear God; the Habit cloaks great Vices, and hides intolerable sins; but
what particulars did the Demons tell thee concerning their being transformed
into the shape of Women and Boys?


P. They told me, That this was done to make the Religious to endure the
infernal pains with the greater courage, and gave me this reason for it; That
the Devils, knowing the nature of the Religious inclined to do all manner of
wickedness, and suffer injuries, villainies, affronts, scorns, and torments, for
the love of Women and Boys, thought sit to metamorphize themselves into those
species, which had had the greatest praedominancy over them. Mean while I went
on visiting those miserable damned persons, to my great amazement, knowing an
infinite number of these Friars, whom I had seen in Rome, passing for so many
Macarius's and Hilarions: Particularly I observed one Cappuchin, who suffered
intolerable pains, to whom I drew near, to see if he were the same that I had
known in Rome, and found him to be the very man; who had the reputation of
eating nothing but roots of herbs, seasoned with ashes, disciplining himself
all night before a Crucifix, and spent all the day in Prayers and Orisons; and,
in fine, was esteemed a Compendium of Miracles; seeing him in that place, held
up my hands, with all those gestures usual to those who behold some wonderful
thing fallen out contrary to the course of Nature; which the Devil perceiving,
said thus unto me; O stranger! if thou did but know, of what Leaven the
Religious are molded, you would not think it so strange to see them suffer
what they so justly deserve. Hypocrisy, which is so hateful to Heaven, has
made its Nest in the Cloisters of the Religious, which never do any good, they
are not forced to, and contrary to their Sentiments, which are naturally
disposed to wickedness; but I will tell thee no more, because, under the name
of Hypocrisy, all their lewdness is comprehended, couzening the World with
Exterior Goodness, and Heaven with Interior Wickedness. To which I only
replied, That I would take an Oath I would never believe again the false
Appearances of the Religious.


M. And I will promise there the same; but I prithee tell me, whether any of
the Order of Saint Dominick was in that place?


P. Whether there were any there! Alas! there was so great a number of them,
that the Arithmeticians could not be able to count them; yet I could not
possibly know any of them, by reason of the punishment they underwent, so
different from all the rest.


M. But how so? Did every Religious Order then suffer a distinct pain?


P. Yes; and the pain of the Dominican Fathers was, that a Devil rid upon every
one of them; and it was good sport, to see those good Fathers scrambling
along-upon all four, and the Devil sitting astride them with a Whip in his Paw,
lashing their buttocks, and at the same time checking them with his Bridle
which the poor Beasts had in their mouths. I had the curiosity to ask what was
the reason, why these Fathers only were appointed such a punishment? to which
Query the Demon answered me; that these Fathers were so accustomed to lord it
over all the World, that they were prouder than all the rest of the
Fraternities put together. So that Lucifer emulating the Pride of the said
Fathers, had condemned them to be so humbled in Hell, because they had been so
exalted on Earth: And I, having begged again to know why they were so whipped on
their buttocks, and so hard bridled in their mouths; he added, that it
proceeded from the great indulgence they had given their back-sides, which had
never had any scourage of Discipline, which all other Friars are wont to have.
O! said I, this is new to me, though I am sure enough, that these Fathers have
Pride radicated in their very bones, yet I never thought that their Pride
prevailed against their Discipline. Yes, replied the Devil, because the Effect
of Discipline is to mortify the body, and these good Fathers used to strut up
and down in Cities like Peacocks, turning their breeches first to the right
hand, and afterward to the left. I, who had seen these Fathers walk up and
down in that manner a thousand times, said no more, but that his description of
them was very true. Yet I supplicated to have a further information of the
Bridles that they had in their mouths, and was answered, that they being used
to stop the mouths of all sorts of persons, by their Tyrannical Tribunal of the
Inquisition, so that it appeared to the World, as if the liberty of discourse
was banished out of Christendom, by the Authority of the holy Office, which the
said Friars held in their hands, purposely to stop all folks mouths; therefore
in Hell they are condemned to suffer the same punishment, which they make
others endure upon Earth. Besides, they deserve to have the Bridle put in their
mouths, for having tattled so much against the immaculate Conception of the
Virgin. I would not stop any longer to observe the torments of these Friars,
but went on, to remark the sufferings of others, which were of a different
nature. The Franciscans were disputing Precedence with one another; every Order
amongst them desiring to be the first; and at the same time the Cappuchins, and
the Reformed, who had been of the poor Orders, were reviling and railing at the
Conventuals, who defended themselves, by proving that their Poverty was
compelled, and fastened on their Habit, and not in their heart; and the
Recollects, who were neither of the poor, nor of the rich, were enraged against
both of them, and left not a Curse that was ever found out, unuttered against
them; but the most to be noted was, that the Devils, who still fomented this
discord, when they saw them well heated with disdain, interposed and ran in
between them, and with certain Iron Bars parted them, and ended the Fray,
saying, Remember that ye are Minorists. It Is true, the Recollects were exempted
from this punishment, but the Devils, in lieu of Bastinading them, as they did
the others, hung them up by the throats; and I, having desired to know the
reason, was answered, that they justly merited to be used like Thieves, for
having stolen so many Convents from the other Franciscans; the whilst I turned
to the other side, and saw the Augustinians, who suffered torments equal to the
Franciscans; so that I cared not to fix any longer on such Objects; and the
rather, because they were so near unto the Minimes, which are the Franciscans
of St. Paul, the last Order that came into the World.


M. How is it possible? What I are those Fathers, who are all Charity, in Hell?


P. Why, they go the surer into Hell, for having relied too much upon their
Charity, as one of those Demons told me, who was entrusted to torment those
Fathers, and their torment was to eat the flames of fire, which was a sort of
meat, that I perceived very well, was not a little nauseous to them (though they
were obliged to it) by their making such ill-favored faces, as sick men do,
that are to take a loathsome Potion; and they had reason, for the Devils used no
great Ceremony toward them, in putting such Viands in their mouths, but threw
the flames in with Pots and Kettles, without either Ladles or Spoons. I thought
at first, that the Devils had done this on a good design; to wit, to digest so
much Oil, so much crude Herbs, so much Fish ill dressed, so much unwholesom
Pulse, and so much other Lenten fare, which these Friars used to stuff their
bellies with in their Cloisters: But the Demon, which I spoke to thee of
before, told me, that amongst all the Religious Orders, these had the greatest
need of being inwardly heated, all the fire of Charity being extinguished in
their hearts, by having too much inflamed the Walls of their Cloisters with the
Device and Emblem of Charity; and so priding themselves in setting up such a
Motto, that it is set over the very doors of their Kitchins, and Privy-houses;
and at the rate they inflame their Walls with Charity, they exhaust it out of
their hearts, neither regarding the Religious, nor the Poor, driving all from
the Gates of their Cloisters; so that we have taken a resolution to enkindle
their hearts with all the warmth our fire can give them. The Demon saying
nothing further about this particularity, suffered me to go wandering on in the
Rode, where I met with nothing but Friars of all sorts, on whom I attentively
fixed my eyes, not out of any Devotion I had toward them, but only to see if I
could find any Jesuits among them, on which all my thoughts were bent; but the
more I pryed about, so much the greater was the confusion of my spirit; that,
having already seen thousands, and ten thousands of Franciscans, Augustinians,
Carmelites, Dominicans, Regular Canons; in fine, Monks and Friars, of all
kinds, notwithstanding I had not seen one Jefuite: whereupon I threw my self,
without either fear or wit, into the midst of these miserable wretches, to find
them out: At last I discovered at a great distance certain black Habits like
unto those of the Jesuits, and so I turned my feet that way, hoping to find
them in that place, but found my self much deceived; for these were the
Theatines, and the Sommaschs, who do likewise make a profession to imitate and
Ape the Jesuits; and drawing near to one of these Fathers, to inquire some news
of the Jesuits, he could tell me nothing at all; but complained after a strange
rate against those Fathers, saying, That they the Sommaschs and Theatines were
obliged to the Jesuits, for their being in Hell, seeing the most of them were
damned for following of the Jesuitical Maxims. Mean while I imagined that the
Jesuits being neither Priests nor Friars, nor of the World, nor Religious men;
that perhaps they would be placed in the middle between both: Whereupon, after
I had well observed all the Friars and Monks, and all the Religious of every
other sort and Order, I passed calmly on into the Priests Apartment, but their
number was so very great, that I was forced to stay above two hours, before I
could get in, and yet in that place there were only Mass-Priests, for the
others were intermixed with the Friars. Then I began to stare every one in the
face, and asking every one of them whether he were a Jesuit, they answered in
such a manner, as if I had injured them mightily By that Question; so, having
seen the Priests, the Canons, and the Abbots tormented (all of them) with very
sharp pains, I past to the residence of the Bishops, and the Archbishops,
having lost the very hopes of ever seeing the Jesuits; for they did always so
contemn the Bishops and Archbishops, scorning such dignities, as things
inferior to their Merits; that it could not be thought they would endure them
to be there amongst them; so that despairing that I could not see the Jesuits
in Hell, I set me down upon a Stone, beating my brains, and studying with my
self, where the Devil these Jesuits should be. Perhaps, said I, these Fathers
pawn the Souls of the dead, to guard the Treasures they have got by so many
Stratagems from the living. Perhaps by the power of the Moneys which they
possess in so great an abundance, they have bought the Inheritance of Heaven.
Perhaps the Devils leave them in the custody of the Women, who made profession
on Earth to be such civil Guardians of that Sex. Whilst I was roving thus
within my self, the Devil, who conducted me, being sensible of all, and knowing
very well the great passion that I had to see the Jesuits, could not contain
from deriding me, yet, not having the heart to see me in so much suspension,
told me, that he had found a way how to satisfy my curiosity, but it was
requisite to go very cautiously; for the seeing of the Jesuits in Hell, was
esteemed a matter of State, because the Devils kept the said Fathers there,
merely out of policy. I replied, I would do all things he esteemed necessary;
whereupon he went before me, and bid me follow him, and so we entered into a
very spacious way, which was set on both sides with great numbers of Devils in
ranks one over another, and clothed like the Guards of Kings; so that I
gathered from thence, we were going to the Palace of Lucifer, Emperor of Hell,
which was too true; for, we had gone but a very few steps further, when we came
to the Gate of the said Palace, which was guarded by a good number of
Soldiers, divided into three Companies of Guards; yet we had no difficulty in
getting in; though it is true that great Lucifer's Ushers and Grooms met us in the
Hall, and told us, that they had precise Orders, to carry no Ambassador into
their Prince, without telling him, who it was, that asked for Audience; and for
what cause they required it; and therefore the Devil, who was with me,
acquainted them with my request, which was to obtain a license from his
Infernal Majesty, to give me leave to go into the Hell of the Jesuits.


M. It would not quit the Charge of exposing ones self to the sight of so great
a Prince of Darkness, to gain a sight of these Fathers, who boast themselves to
be the Light of the World: For my part, I would e'ne have been satisfied to
hear that they were safe in the Devils Clutches.


P. The Appetites of Men are very different; I, for my part, would go willingly
into Hell, to have the pleasure of seeing one Jesuit in Purgatory. Now, when I
was introduced into the presence of Lucifer, who sat upon a mighty high
Throne, made of burning Coals, interwoven with certain flames, which threw out
sparks on all sides, like a Smiths Forge, I tendered my request to him, which he
readily heard; but asked me so many Questions, that I began a little to repent
I had ever thought of the Jesuits; discerning very plainly, that he derided my
curiosity; nevertheless he rose up, and with his own hands took three Keys
which lay under his breech, and gave them to three of the most Diabolical
Counselors, that waited about his Throne, commissioning them to conduct me to
the residence of the Jesuits, and so I was dismissed by Lucifer, without saying
any more to me, but, Go satisfy your foolish curiosity; and I immediately
began to follow those Devils who carried the Keys, who, without going out of
the Royal Palace, conveyed me through certain very deep Dens, all full of Asps
and Basilisks, from whence we past into so strait an Alley, that we could
scarce go in it one after another; in the middle of which, there was a door,
which was opened with one of the three Keys; and, at the end of this Lane,
there was another door, which was likewise opened with the second Key; and,
entering in there, we found a Drawbridge guarded by four huge Devils, to whom
one of the three Counselors spoke, commanding them by the Authority of
Lucifer, to let us go in; so they failed not instantly to let down the Bridge,
which we passed over; and, not far from thence, we found a great Gate, which
was also kept by Lucifer's Guards, shut on the outside with a great Chain,
which was also opened with the third Key, and by the Counselors own hand; who
knocked two or three times, and, at the last knock, one within came and opened
a small Wicket, through which he spoke to the Counselors, but I could not hear
what they said; but, in fine, the Gate was opened to us, and we entered in, and
after that Gate was shut again very safely: Another lesser Gate was opened,
where we were let in, attended by a dozen of Halberdiers; but two of the
Counselors stayed behind, and only one of them went along with me. We had
scarce set our feet within that place, but we began to see so prodigious a
number of Jesuits, that I could never have credited it: They all stood with
their hands and feet chained up, and with Padlocks in their mouths, that they
could not speak; nevertheless, they suffered no other torments but that of
flames, which indeed were very great, but there was not one word heard; for
those Devils, which were there to look after them, had no other form, than of
the most poisonous Serpents, so that there was a most exact silence observed. I
was so presently satisfied concerning the Jesuits, that I asked to go out, and
resolved to lose the very memory of them; therefore I knocked at the Gate, which
was opened, and we returned back in the self same manner that we came: But my
curiosity engaged me to beseech one of those Counselors, as we traveled, to
know what was the cause that made the Jesuits be kept in so strict a custody in
Hell; deprived of the very satisfaction of conversing with the other damned
Souls? To which Question, the Counselor answered me, in Political Sicknesses
it is convenient to make use of Violent Remedies, to exterminate the arising
evil, else the Wound rankling, might render the Disease incurable. Now, we who
perceived from the very first that the Jesuits appeared in the World, that they
had no other design, than aspiring to the Universal Monarchy, whence to arrive
to the end of their intention, they have not forborne trying Impossibilites,
joining the Morals, Speculatives, Rhetoricks and Politics together, to gain
upon the minds of Princes and People: and though at first fight it does appear as
if they had obtained their design; yet nevertheless, if you search into the
bottom of what they have done, you will find that these Fathers have obtained
the absolute Monarchy over all the Kingdoms of Europe, whilst they command the
Princes in counselling them, and impose Laws on the People in confessing them,
and lord it over other folks wealth, in seeming to despise their own. All these
things being perceived by our Lucifer, who watches over the free Monarchy of
Hell with an accurate Vigilance, that he may not fall into that Error which the
Princes of Europe have, and daily do fall into, who suffer themselves to be
ruled, nay, domineered over by Jesuitical Subtilties and Stratagems, has
determined to keep them thus fettered and deprived from all manner of Commerce,
that the Jesuits might not attempt to become Monarchs of Hell, like as they
have made themselves Monarchs of the World. Truly, I found my self all melted
into tears at this discourse, giving up my self to weep for the misery of the
People, or rather of Christian Princes, who are so contented to sell their own
Liberty, coming short of the wit of Hell, who know much better how to maintain
the Liberty and Authority of their Monarchy, than these Princes and People have
done theirs. In the mean time, being come back to Lucifer's Palace, the
Counselors being about to take their leaves of me, they all said to me, That
now I was returning to the World, I should remember Princes, and endeavor to
open their eyes a little better, because the Jesuits had their eyes ever open;
and watching to ruin every Monarchy, and support their own, which I promised
them I would do, so I took my leave of them, and as I passed out by the back
Gate of Lucifer's Palace, into a large Street, I heard such horrid yellings and
howlings, as would have struck terror into the most courageous heart: this
noise surprised me, because I could not imagine these to be the Jesuits; but,
as I went on a little further, I perceived, upon several Apartments, a
different Banner, which seemed to look rather like the Ensign of some Secular,
than Religious Order.


M. What were these then? and what Account did the Devil thy Guide give thee of
them?


P. They were several Societies of Men, that by Hypocrisy and Deceit, under a
Veil of Piety, had cunningly defrauded their Neighbors, and several
Tradesmen, under the pretense of honesty and fair dealing, cheated those that
used to Trade with them; and upon these wretches the Policies of Hell ordered
severe pains to be inflicted; and besides, I could easily distinguish them, by
observing the Banners of every several Company. There were Vintners and
Ale-Drawers, Mercers and Drapirs, Brewers and Bakers, Pewterers and Goldsmiths,
Grocers and Dyers, and above an hundred several Companies, as well of Retailers
as Whole-sale-men.


M. But pray tell me what order is taken with the Vintners in Hell, who torture
Men upon Earth with their Sophistications and base Wine? methinks they deserve
severer punishments than other Men.


P. Oh! the Devils know them too well, to let them escape due Chastisement;
they are a company of Rank Rascals, and are used accordingly: Nay, it has been
often debated in Hell, to have them suffer the same torments that are inflicted
upon the Physicians, Surgeons, Apothecaries and Hang-men, and to have them
turned amongst them; for in truth they are as great slaughter-men, as any of
the rest; but for some Politic Reasons it has hitherto been forborne; for
these Vintners bring advantage to Hell, and by the fumes of their bad Wine,
many Men are exasperated to commit Murders, and other Villainies, and, by that
means, send Griss to the Mill; therefore, for these good services, they are
allotted an Infernal Habitation to themselves, being very numerous.


M. But did you not go in, and see some other Tradesmen, as well as the
Vintners, and how they were employed?


P. O yes! the Devils had prepared work enough for them, as you shall hear. The
Mercers and Drap^rs were compelled to fold and unfold Artificial flakes of fire
continually. The Brewers were purboiled in their own Coppers, instead of Malt.
The Bakers were thrown into heated Ovens, and taken out again piping hot, but
not so well savored as their new-baked Loves used to be. The Pewterers and
Goldsmiths had their share of torment also, for all their false Allays of
Copper, Lead, and other Metals, being separated from the true Gold, Silver and
Pewter, were melted and poured down their throats scalding hot, to cool their
covetous thirst after unlawful gain. The Grocers were kept as relishing
Pickles, and delicious Sawces, hasht and cookt up by the experienced Demons,
and choicely preserved as Rarities and Ragousts for Lucifer's own Table: But,
amongst the variety of Tradesmen, I was the most of all amazed to behold the
Dyers, who being thrown into their own Caldrons of variety of Colors, came out
such motly creatures, that the Devils themselves knew not what to make of them;
this very Trade had its different punishment; and every particular man had his
torments suitable to the Cheats he had used in his Vocation.


M. Truly, my old friend, thou have given me a notable Account of the Devil's
proceedings against wicked men in the other World; but go on and tell me what
happened afterward in thy Voyage.


P. Whilst I was advising with the Demon my Comrade, which way to take, I
heard a buzzing noise, as if some great house had been on fire; every body ran
about in confusion, and some leaped down three or four steps to get out the
sooner; so I followed the Crowd, and the Devil my Companion with me, but
neither of us knew whither we were going; but running with the multitude, and
pressing in the throng, he met one of his Fellow-Devils, and asked him what was
the matter; who answered him, that Don Mario, was just now come to Hell, which
made every one run to see him make his entrance, and give him a kind reception:
When I heard this news, I rejoiced, and said within my self, Ha! ha! the Popes
Nephews are not far from this place, since Don Mario is come hither, expecting
to meet them: So I ran with all possible speed, lest I should lose such an
opportunity; but I was absolutely confounded to see and observe the mighty
honors which were done to the said Don Mario; for it appeared to be a Solemn
Triumph, whilst Lucifer himself went out to meet him, and vouchsafed to conduct
him also, into the Apartment of other kinsmen of the Popes, which were all
courted by so great a number of Devils, that I dare truly say, there was in
that one Apartment more of them, than in all the rest of Hell. This
extraordinary honor which I saw done to Don Mario, and to the other Nephews of
Popes, and the Myriads of Devils that I saw so busied to serve them, moved me
to the curiosity of Asking a Demon, who cried out with a louder Voice than any
else, Long live the Nepotismo: What was the reason of all this? who answered me
thus; That the Devils had much more reason to give greater services to
Relations of Popes, than to the rest of the whole World; that they might not
sin by Ingratitude, because the Nephews of the Popes were the cause of so many
Souls dying in despair.


M. What did he mean by this? the point seems to me a little too speculative.


P. Not so much as you think; and I am of the opinion he had reason enough; for
indeed, to speak the truth, the Nephews of the Popes do torment Prelates,
Religious men, Priests, Friars, Nuns, Nobles and Plebeans, with Grievances,
with Violences, with spightful actions, with taking Offices from the best
deserving, to give them to the best Chapmen; and with a hundred thousand of
such kind of tricks, by which they reduce the greatest part of Christians to
despair, and by that drawing much profit to Hell, who therefore assist, and
honor the Nephews to inflame them the more to Persecution, now instantly after
I had seen Don Mario in Hell, I began to think of returning back to Rome, being
certain I should find much more quiet there; whereupon I told my Sentiment to
the Demon who had bin allotted me for my Companion, who made me fall I cannot
tell you how, into a profound sleep, which when I wakened out of after hours, I
found my self in Rome where thou seeft me. Behold then in what manner my
decease and revival has happened; but as I have made thee a relation of the
affairs in the other World, do you now give me some account of what has passed
at Rome, since my departure.


M. What relish can thou have in hearing discourses of this World, after
having seen such great things in Hell? Thou ought to be content with the
knowledge of things unknown to all, without searching into such as are
notoriously manifest to the very scum of the People. There is nothing at
present done at Rome, that is not public throughout the Universe.


P. This is a disease which is now so gangrened that it is past all cure; but
for me who am just come from so distant a Country, every thing is new, for in
that place below, the voices from here above do not penetrate.


M. I could tell thee a great many things, my dear Pasquin, if the time would
permit me, but it growing now late it would be well for us to retire, to avoid
those accidents which are apt to befall such as wander up and down in the night,
besides, thou, being just now come from such a fa^ Country, should be glad
to take some rest.


P. But tell me something however; How did the Election of the New Pope take?


M. Truly, as we have had hitherto very just reason to blame the Vices of some;
now we may, for an Universal Consolation, praise the Virtues of others, it
being the office and part of a good Christian to praise goodness, and blame
wickedness. If the Roman people have groaned for these 12 years under the
miseries that Alexander the Seventh, and the Family of Chigi has plunged them
into; now they may enjoy their full felicity acquired by the Election of
Clement the Ninth, and the introduction of the Family of Rospigliosi into Rome.
For it is most certain, that the Papacy, for the safety of Christendom, and the
benefit of the Roman people, could not have fallen into any other hands, but of
Cardinal Rospigliosi's, who therefore was pleased with great reason to invest
himself with the name of Clement, to show, that all the Zeal of his Soul should
be levelled to govern that people with Clemency, who had been lorded over till
this hour with Unmerciful Tyrannies of others The first dawnings of his Papacy
shined forth in discharging the Oppressed people of so many Taxes, and in
placing Justice upon the Throne, from whence she had been driven, during the
most wicked Government of the wretched Ministers of Alexander: And it is clearly
seen, that the Operation of the Holy Spirit directed in the Election of this
Person, since he was scarce created Pope, when the languishing strength of his
body, afflicted with a thousand indispositions, began to recover a confirmed
health; insomuch as that when he was a Cardinal, and had but very little labor
and toil, he was hardly able to walk; now he is so indefatigable in all
business, that he feeds as it were on troubles and pains, verifying in himself,
that holy saying of the Evangelist, Bonus Pastor animam suam dat pro Ovibus
suis, The good Shepherd lays down his life for his Sheep.


P. O Marforio! it is the end is to be praised; for Alexander also began in this
manner, and yet in a very short time, from a Shepherd of Souls, he became the
Hangman and Executioner of the people, leaving Rome in a worse state than it
was left by Nero.


M. The Corruption of Alexander did not come from himself, for he was of a
nature almost incorruptible, at least experimented pure, in his own manners and
dealings, for a very long time; but it was derived, and came from the perverse
nature of his Kindred, who never in their lives showed so much as an
inclination of doing good; but this reason signifies nothing in the particular
of Clement the Ninth; for he has not introduced a Don Mario into Rome, clothed
with a thousand Humane Imperfections; but a Don Camillo, endowed with Angelical
Virtues, a Don Camillo, who generously strips himself of what is his own, to
bestow it on the Poor; not a Don Mario, who Tyrannically spoils the Poor to
clothe himself: He has not introduced a Cardinal Chigi, an ignorant young man,
unexpert in all Affairs of Government; but a Cardinal Julius Rospigliosi, a
person of infinite worth, and a Capacity balanced to maintain the Quality of a
Favorite Nephew, having by the height of prudence, and persuasion of his
Uncle, renounced the Title of Cardinal Padrone, declaring he would much rather
serve than domineer. He has not introduced a Don Augustine, who, as soon as he
came into Rome, set himself to abuse and deal hardly with the Roman Nobility;
but a Don Vicenzo, who contemning the ease, sloth and solaces of Rome, has
esteemed it a greater Glory to go meet with Death from the Infidels, than to
enjoy in the Court that Vanicy's idle breath which the Nephews of other Popes
did so delight in. In fine, from this Papacy there is nothing to be expected
but universal happiness and good, the Pope and the Nephews both extremely
endeavoring it.


P. God be praised! It is fit truly that a great Tempest should be succeeded by
a great Calm; the people then is contented with this Pope.


M. Most infinitely contented, and the Prelates also; tho it is true, that
amongst these there are some Malcontents may be found; for, it is the great
misery of Rome, that there are more prelates, than Dignities to be dispensed; I
speak of considerable Dignities; and every one believe themselves most
meritorious, without any exception, whence it is impossible to satisfy one,
without disgusting another: yet the Pope nevertheless with the highest
prudence, strives to oblige some with Favors, others with good words, and all
his Kindred do the same, being every one of them of sweet and complaisant
dispositions.


P. This is one of the greatest happinesses that could come to Rome, being
continually in time past, ill treated both in word and actions.


M. Amongst other things, the Nephews do not appear to be so greedy of Usurping
over the Pope, as the other Nephews to this day have been, which whether they
feared to have lost him, or whether they feared, that being much frequented by
others, their inward corruptions, by that means, should come to be revealed.
They kept him hid, as it were, in such a strange manner, that he was with much
difficulty permitted to give Audiences to public Ministers: But this reason
does not prevail now at this present time, whilst the Pope, knowing himself to
be truly the Universal Father in despite of the^ wicked Heretics that deny
it, has given express order unto all his Family even to the meanest, that they
should introduce every person that will come into the public Audience, which
he gives once a week, receiving every one with a paternal affection, who praise
God as they return to their houses, that has vouchsafed to give them a Pope,
who both deserves, and worthily bears the name of Universal Father.


P. Really I do not know now the other Popes could pretend to the Title of
Universal Father, if they made themselves so only in particular to their
Nephews. Let us therefore give thanks to the Lord our God, who has been
pleased to give Christianity an Universal Father; but how treats he with the
Crowned Heads, and other Princes?


M. With the very same difinterestedness, which he used whilst he was a
Cardinal, walking in a very even path, to give no Jealousy either to one body
or another; so that every one sees themselves obliged to confess with truth,
that he is the Universal Father. He is extremely inclined to the Peace and
Tranquillity of Christendom; whence he uses all means imaginable to make Peace
again between France and Spain; and every day recommends unto the public
Ministers their laboring and striving with their utmost Industry to preserve a
good Union and Correspondency betwixt those Princes; his Pastoral Zeal is known
by the Ardour that he shows in succouring the Venetians, who so long a time
have fought with so great Glory against the common Enemy of the Church of
Christ; nay, not being content to succor them with the Patrimony of St. Peter
given by himself, he solicits the Princes of Christendom daily with reiterated
Entreaties, who can do no less, seeing so great an Example in the Pope, but
open their treasures, and assist that Republic liberally, who is as the
Bulwork of the Freedom of the Christian Church. In fine, the Heretics
themselves confess, that this Pope came from Heaven, not being soely Elected by
Men; his ways being directed altogether toward the Honor of God.


P. What. does he then show himself so wholly intent on the public good? But
what say his Relations then? are not they jealous, that what he spends for the
service of the public good, diminishes the advancement of their particular
Family?


M. The Kindred of the Pope cannot indeed complain against him; neither can the
Pope complain against his Kindred; for they are of a nature easy to be
contented, having not hitherto showed themselves greedy, although many
opportunities have been offered unto them; though always before the Nephews of
the Popes have ever showed as if it were the temperature of their Nature. And
Pope Clement also loves his Nephews as much as one ought to love the Body; and
the Church as much as one ought to love the Soul; which, to speak plainly,
shows his heart is much more set upon the good and advantage of the Church,
than that of his Kindred; he concedes those Emoluments to his Nephews, and
furnishes them with those profits which proceed from those Dignities and
Offices which the Church by Ancient Custom did use to dispense to the Kindred
of the Popes, but he will not suffer them to burden the people at all; neither
are they the least inclined to it, and most particularly Don Camillo, who is so
generous, that he had rather die poor, and leave a good name, than rich with an
ill fame behind him.


P. The Chigi were not so scrupulous, especially Don Mario's Lordship.


M. Let Us speak no more of the graces of Don Mario; for I tell thee, the
Government of the Chigi's was the Government of the Devils, and that of the
Rospigliosi's a Government of Angels; the Rospigliosi's are delighted in
studying the common good of the people, whereas the Chigi's grew fat with their
blood and destruction. If the Nephews of other Popes had been content, as the
Rospigliosi's are, to have enjoyed the usual Rents of those Offices and Charges
which are fitting in all respects for the Popes Nephews, without tyrannizing
over the miserable people, by so many Taxes imposed upon them, the Church
undoubtedly would have been much more peopled with Catholics; and Heresy
would have been destroyed by the very Heretics. And there would not either
have been so many infamous Manuscripts kept in Rome, nor so many Satirical
Books printed.


P. But on the mention of Books, prithee is there any new ones come out since I
was seen here?


M. If I would name all the Books, and all the Pamphlets which have come to
light lately, there would be certainly such a vast Catalogue of Books, as would
swell into a Volume bigger than the Book of Martyrs.


P. Who the Devil shites all these Scriblers? and where do they inhabit?


M. I know not that; but it is certain, that as soon as any Gentleman that is a
stranger comes into Rome, an innumerable company of black Coats, out at the
elbows, come about him, all striving to fasten upon him their satirical and
infamous Manuscripts, which they sell at good penny-worths, applying all their
wits to feed their bodies, though to the damnation of their souls; and, because
the most part of strangers of Quality that come to Rome are Heretics, they, by
this means, return back into their own Countries loaded with Manuscripts, and
they impart them to Booksellers who are their Friends, who finally as Enemies
to the Church of Rome, make no scruple to Print what the Romans themselves are
not ashamed to write. But the greatest shame of all is, that the very Heretics
are more scrupulous than the Catholics themselves, the Catholics writing such
very infamous things, that they blush to read them.


P. I know not what to say to it, but pray God to pardon those who give the
occasion.


M. It Is the Corruption of the Age in which we live, whilst men have such
depraved Gusts, that they know not, or rather will not read any other works but
Satyrs, as wicked as they are infamous, and those who have no other way of
living, but by belying either themselves, or at least their own Consciences,
writing any thing that will delight the Men of the Age.


P. But how comes Rome only to be the Mother of all these Satirical Books? Is
it because the Romans have less Conscience, or more leisure than other people?
For my part I know not what to make of it.


M. It Is because they are more sly and cunning than others; for these things
require twice the wit and subtilty of others: And yet if thou did know how
much also others writ, thou would not lay all the blame on the Romans: for in
France and England it self, but the two last years there have been Printed
above seventy Books all Satirical, against the chief of that Kingdom, and some
of them so filthy, that they nauseate the Reader; though it is very true, that the
French have a peculiar dexterity in knowing how to Jest with Satyrism, taking
it absolutely for a kind of Gallantry of wit, and the greatest revenge is to
scorn it. Of Spain then I say nothing, because Satyrs there run as the
Posthorses; in every corner there is one to be had; but the worst is, that
there are no Satyrs so sharp as those which come from a Spanish Pen, by reason
that that Nation being very pious and devout, when they be corrupted, they
become venom and poison, because the corruption of the best is ever the worst.


P. If this be so, then we need not wonder that the Romans are so very skilful
in Composing Satyrs; for they can be good or bad according to Time, Place or
Occasion.


M. For my part, I believe the Romans do not write out of malice, but out of
pure necessity, and stab out of revenge; for, it is too true, that the most part
of those who sell Manuscripts in Rome, are certain necessitous Priests, and
certain discontented Courtiers, these being spurred on by revenge, and the
others by want; and because the Julio, which is given them for saying Mass, is
not sufficient to live upon, they give themselves up to doing things, which
perhaps are contrary to their very nature; and therefore every thing they do
looks supernatural.


P. But what Books are come out since the time that I have seen thee? name me
one.


M. There is the Putanismo as jolly in the invention, as it is foul and
infamous in its matter, and which lashes the Court most, where it was made and
composed. Moreover, there is Mercury turned Post-boy, and whipping and lashing
very hard. There is also the Monarchy of Spain in its Rise and Declension,
which is a very pleasant Treatise in form of Comedy, set off with a curious
Prologue, which smites the Spaniards hip and thigh: Yet, to speak the truth,
they may make some good use of it, though the Author was none of their Friends.
Moreover, there is the Model of the Jesuitical Government, with an Instruction
to Princes of the manner by which the Jesuits govern themselves to advance
their Society to a perfect Monarchy, which touches them to the quick;
especially an Amphibological and Persuasive Letter of a Jesuit to a Gentleman
his Disciple, with the Gentleman Disciples Answer to his Master the Jesuits
Letter, The Cabinet of Princes, consisting of four Concerts, that snip and
piece every thing as the toy takes them. Then the Speaking Animals is also to
be seen, a very rigorous piece, that sufficiently shows it was produced by some
learned head who speaks not like an Animal, though he treats and handles all like
Beasts, as if there was never another Man but himself. There are sundry
Relations from several Princes Courts, which Treatises seem licked over with
Honey, but have Gall in their Entrails.


P. Alas! all these are small pieces, the Manuscripts of which I have often
seen.


M. May be so; but there is also the Cardinalismo, which is divided into three
Volumes; and, for my part, I believe there never was any thing seen which was
more disjoynted without beginning or end, without reason or foundation, only a
mere heap of Lies and Railing.


P. It was not then done by the Author of the Nepotismo; for that was not so
abominable.


M. The style was like enough to it, both being but ill Composed, and to say
truth, groundless; yet nevertheless the Nepotismo has something that sparkles
at the first sight, but as for the Cardinalismo, it is not possible to relate
the absurdities that are in it; and I know not how the Devil any Man can be
found, that will take the pains to read it, being so far from reason, and
carrying a Lie in every sentence of it. Were it a plain Satyr, it might pass,
but the mischief is, that it corrupts all History, turning and bringing it into
a formal Satyrism.


P. Is it not like the Just Balances of Cardinals, which is full of a thousand
filthy impurities?


M. The Just Balances, though Satirical, has something agreeable in them,
because they are a sort of guessing or divination of what they say; but the
Cardinalismo praises those Cardinals it ought to blame, and blames those it
ought to praise, giving and taking Offices and Dignities at its own pleasure.
In fine, if it was said of the other, that there were as many Sentences as
there were Words, of this it may be said, there are as many Fooleries as there
are Words.


P. It will then have a great Effect upon inquisitive Men reading it, it will
spoil the humor of reading such kind of Books; but is there no more?


M. There is the Conclaves of all the Popes, which stinks extremely, but
History makes it so; and though they be but fragments of things long since past
at Rome, yet being now all gathered together, they very much move the curiosity
at this time of many persons to read them. But above all, there is a little
exquisite piece that much pleases me, which is called The Counts Defense of the
Rights of Princes, where a Marquess is feigned speaking Satyrically against the
Chief Potentates of Italy, and all Europe; and the Count refuting the
Marquiss's Arguments, maintains the Princes; all which is contained in Eight
Dialogues. In the first is discoursed the Advantages that Spies bring unto
Princes: In the second is discoursed all the concerns of the Duke of Crequi,
Ambassador of his Most Christian Majesty, his Negotiations and Transactions in
Rome, and of the heads he published touching his Pretensions: In the third is
discoursed the Interests about Portugal, showing how the Pope is obliged by
Political Reasons to admit them the Nominations of their Churches: In the
fourth the King of England's Marriage with the Infanta of Portugal is
discoursed of: In the fifth is discoursed the Peace made by the Emperor with
the Turks: In the sixth the King of Spain is praised for yielding the
Precedence of his Ambassadors, to the Ambassadors of the Most Christian King,
with the Reasons for it: In the seventh the Prudence of the King of France is
discoursed in buying the Signiory of the Duke of Lorain, showing that he did no
body any Injury: And in the eighth it is proved, that the Venetians did not do
ill but well, to continue the War against the Turk.


P. The piece ought to be profitable, treating of Noble Subjects, and adapted
to satisfy curiosity.


M. There is nothing better, Composed, and more Political, but those who are
pricked do not approve it, yet they cannot forbear to read it, finding Honey
mixed amongst the Stings.


P. When Satyrs are well Composed, the very Stings themselves are sweet.


M. I believe at the present they are beginning to leave off Satyrising, at
least against Rome; for it is certain, if they do not cease now, they will never
cease at all.


P. But why will thou have this happen at present? what reason induces thee to
believe so?


M. Because we are now in the Age of Clemency, and Christian Religion is ruled
by a Head who is all Clement in effect, much more then in the name of it.


P. Truly there is nothing that humbles, and brings back the most strayed
persons to Agreement, so well as Clemency: Therefore if the Chief Bishop will
practice that, as thou say he does, he will gain much more than many others
have done who have used Violence.


P. God pardon those who have so envenomed the Pens of others, that they have
been very often extreme cruel against that Mother who feeds them. The good
Religious Men cannot suffer any injury from the pricks and stings which are
given to wicked ones. They who write have no design to offend those
Ecclesiastics, who live soberly and holily, and with the greatest Edification
possible toward the people, of which sort there is an infinite number, as
there is likewise an infinite number also of those, who forgetting the
Obligation due to their Vows, rebel against their very Superiors; but the good
Religious cannot possibly fear receiving any detriment in their own
Reputations, by the Satyrs against others, though they should have come from Hell
it self. God has left us the example of poor Lazarus, and the rich Glutton
before our Eyes, that we might sly from the rich Glutton, and follow Lazarus,
who was set before us that we might follow his steps: Therefore it is necessary
sometimes to expose those that are addicted to Vice, to put them in mind of
their duty; but this does not reflect upon good Men, but on the contrary, makes
their Virtues more estimable.


P. The truth is, were there no distinction made in the Church between the good
and the bad, the virtuous and the vicious, between vile corrupted Popes, and
those that are not so, between Cardinals deserving that high Charge, and those
that merit a Halter, between truly devout and hypocritical Christians, the
Church must of necessity soon fall to ruin, should we extol those, who by
their wicked examples rather scandalize their Neighbors, than endeavor to
preserve the honor and reverence due to Religion? Should we attribute to such
men the praises they only deserve, who sweat and labor, and undergo a thousand
hardships, not only to sanctify themselves, but to beget a respect and awe to
Religion it self? It would be a thing impious and inhumane, if the lazy and
negligent Minister may pretend to a recompense equal to the pious and
laborious; what have they to do but to study to become like the others? It Is
better therefore to publish the Vices of lewd men, that either they being made
ashamed, may turn from their wicked courses, and enter into the paths of
Virtue; or at least that by this means the holiness of the just may shine
brighter.


M. The mischief is, that those wretches finding a sting in their Consciences,
wince and kick at reproof, like a Horse that has a Nettle clapped under his Tail,
or a skittish Jade when he feels the Spur.


P. Well bred Horses that go on readily in their way, are never disquieted with
Spurs, though the Horsemen ride with them never so close to their sides.


M. It Is very true indeed, that many do abstain from doing ill, rather for fear
of being reproached by the World, than any true love of God.


P. Perhaps there will be no more necessity of pricking and spurring to provoke
ill people to do well, and turn from the ways of wickedness, not to wrong the
Clemency that thou speak of, which I also highly commend, as a most
necessary Expedient in this Age, where we see the nature of Men scorns and
disdains in their very Souls the Violences of others.


M. The Head ever governs all the other Members, insomuch that whilst the
Church had virtuous and holy Popes, and zealous of the Salvation of the People,
the other Religious also were so many Examples of Virtue, whence we ought to
hope that God having been pleased to bless us at this time by sending his
Church a Pope enriched with so many Virtues, who, like a Pelican, tears out
his own bowels, for the love of his people, the other Prelates and Religious
who are Members of the Church will be animated unto good, and by the Example of
the Head, who is so good, will edify the people, and do their duties in all
virtuous and holy works; so all Satyrism will cease, and all Pens will be
employed with the utmost Abilities to magnify those good and religious
Ecclesiastics, which they formerly reviled for being wicked.


P. Then we shall not need to talk any longer, my dear Marforio, but turn our
Eves from those wicked Objects, promising unto God for the time to come, to
praise those good Religious so much the heartilier, for having formerly blamed
the bad ones.


FINIS.
map of europe EUROPEA Descriptio Nova Impenjis Annae SEILE 1663
Ro^Vanohan sculp



