MORAL DISCOURSES AND ESSAYS, UPON Several Select Subjects.

Written, By T.C. Esquire.

Non praestant Philosophi, quae Multum loquuntur, tamen praestant, quod
loquuntur, quod honesta mente concipiunt. Seneca de Beata Vita. Pudet dicere;
Honesta colimus, quantum vacat. Ibid. Ep. 75. LONDON, Printed by S.G. for
Charles Adams, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Sign of the Talbot, near
Saint Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet. 1655

PROOEMIUM.
THey are thought to have a very hard, but have indeed, perhaps, an eas^e
Task, that are to treat of Subjects, wherein many Excellent Pens having gone
before, may seem to have anticipated all that can be pertinently spoken: It is,
I confess, in some measure true of those which will handle Ar^s and Sciences,
from whom some new discovery is justly expected; Neither will their Modern
Terms absolve them from the Censure of affecting to write somewhat, though to
no purpose, if they deliver nothing new in substance. From an Essay or Moral
Discourse, we are to require nothing, that was never harped on by any Orpheus;
For the Theory of Morality is a path so trodden with throngs of Authors, that
perhaps Solomon himself, if he were now alive, would find it hard to say
something in this kind, which might be as new to us, as Gunpowder and the
Lodestone once were.

From it therefore we are to expect only matter well digested, with such a
trimming and fur^ushing of the Argument, that ^he Reader may be tempted, like
some Gentlemen, as it were to buy that Horse in Smithfield, which himself
lately sold in a Country Fair, Such an Art of new compounding the same notions
in variety of Expression, that the Herbalist shall have much ado to discern
his own Simples.

The Consideration hereof has encouraged me to publish these Essays, most of
them written upon Themes very popular, Whereby, though I may well despair to
purchase the name of a^ Author, Yet I may seem to b^ a digestor of what I have
rea^ in this kind, and without assu^ming to inform any man's Iudge^ment, may
serve in some sort t^ clear his Notions, or at least entertain his Passe-times;
which as it is not a work of much mo^ment, so I am confident, it is a^ useful
as many larger Volume which have been published (...) our Age so fertile of
aborti^^ Births

THE TABLE.
I. Of Favor and Eminency in Court or State. 1 II. Of faithful Ministers to
unthankefull Princes, 8 III. Of Fame, 18 IV. Of Reputation, 21 V. Of Valor in
Princes, 26 VI. Of History, 38 VII. Of Education, 51 VIII. Of Traveling, and
the qualifications unto it, 66 IX. Of Religious Fear, 75 X. Of Church
Discipline, 82 XI. Of Coelibacy, or single Life, 88 XII. Of Duties Matrimonial,
and Conjugall Love. 92 XIII. Of Flattery. 99 XIV. Of Beauty, 106 XV. Of Craft,
111 XVI. Of Kindness, Courtesy, and Civility, 116 XVII. Of Youth and Old Age,
119 XVIII. Of Honor, 124 XIX. Of Learning, 127 XX. Of Peace, 131 XXI. Of
Conscience, 134 XXII. Of Frugality, 136 XXIII. Of Active, and Passive Valor,
140 XXIV. Of Clemency, 144 XXV. Of Magnanimity, 168 XXVI. Taci^^nity, 173
XXVII. Of Temperance, 177 XXVIII. Of Gratitude. 182
ERRATA.
FOl. 24. l. 12. for expert, read exposed. l. 12. may disband. f. 29. l. 1, 2.
r. expected. f. 34. l. 18. r. siege of Pavie. f. 70. l. 20. for, in France, r.
in ^ Trance f. 106. l. 8. For, rather then augment, r. rather augment. f. 165.
l. 10. for, being such as, r. such as. f. 169. l. 16. for pers^cutes, r
prosecutes. f. 18 ^. l. 16. for dare not affirm, r. dare affirm.

I. Of Favor and Eminency in Court or State.
HE that stands by, and observes the supple Addresses, and sedulous
applications of the Court, how greedily wise men sell their liberties, and
sacrifice their time unto it, with what patience they undergo attendance, more
grievous then pilgrimage, must needs imagine that to be a sacred mystery, which
deserves such superstition; nor can he expect less than the Philosophers
stone, where he sees so many furnaces set on work, and such rare Alchymists
engaged.

He that marks the pomp and splendour of eminent men, the solemnity of their
visits, the exactness of their ceremonies, and l^stre of their Equipage,
cannot but be enamoured of so rare a scene, wherein each person acts a part of
greatness, and every day seems to be festival.

He that examines the Grandeurs of Moecenas, the lofty flights of Favorites
and chief Ministers; how they manage the reins of the Commonwealth, whilst
Princes only sit in the saddle; how they give Laws to the people, signals to
the soldiers, example to all; how all their virtues are magnified and
multiplied, and even their errors with veneration concealed, with what ease
they trample upon their adversaries, and prefer all their dependants, how can
he, refrain from d^awing at so fair a Lottery, or escape those delicious
charms, which would almost delude a Stoic, to mistake them for his summum
bonum.

But, alas, these are only outsides, to amuse the ignorant, these stately
scutheons serve but to hide a dead corpse, and these excellent odours to
perfume a sepulcher: The factions wherewith every Court and State is
perpetually pregnant, The Envy and Emulation, which though not so loud, is yet
perhaps fiercer then open war; The spies, which (like Eunuchs) are set upon all
men's actions, and behaviors, to observe and report them to jealous Powers; The
keen and postilent slanders and censures, by which even innocence is ensnared,
or at best, perpetually alarmed, These are not presently discovered, and
indeed, fit it were, they should be concealed, lest we avoid Courts as persons
in debt do prisons, and dread greatness like infection.

It falls not within the compass of every ones notice to observe how Grandees
make a prey of inferiors, like fry in a fish pond; and how the inferiors
again, though emulating each other, yet with a secret spleen conspire
unanimously against the Favorite, like little beagles to pursue the Royal
Stagge.

All are not sensible of the slippery estate of great men; with what slender
props those magnificent structures are supported, How brittle and fungous their
greatness is, they being exposed, besides infinite other uncertainties, even
to the saciety of their masters, who commonly delight in nothing more, than by
changing their Minions and servants, to exercise the wantonness of
Sovereignty; were but this duly considered, I am persuaded men would rather
content themselves with the freehold of a Cottage, than grasp at Palace^, where
they are but tenants at will.

Few have the wisdom to foresee, how hard it is in greatness to pursue honest,
and safe maxims, what resolution is required for the Potent to be innocent,
what Providence to be so accounted; what sordid interests they are forced to
espouse, and by what insensible degrees they are brought at last to swallow
those actions and compliances, without chewing, which at first, they looked
upon with loathing; But alas, proceed they must, and in their stations apply
themselves to serve the designs of their masters, for Princes will not endure
that their Ministers shall dispute their pleasures. When it was proposed by
Henry the third of France, to Grillon Captain of his Guard, that he, as the
fittest instrument, should dispatch the Duke of Guise, the honest, but blunt
soldier freely professed, that he was ready, if commanded, to fight with the
Duke; But to murder him un^onvicted, would not stand with his honor, being
born a Gentleman, and professing Arms; which answer coming from one that was a
sworn enemy to the interests of the house of Lorrain, deserves to be recorded
to his everlasting praise; Yet though Grillon, that refused, was the worthier
man, Lognac, who greedily accepted the employment, seems to have been the wiser
Courtier; The one, exposing himself to all the hazards of misconstrued virtue,
the other, endearing himself to his Prince, by the pledges of guilt and odium,
the greatest engagements of future confidence. For it was observed of Seianus,
that his favor could not be purchased without some notable crime. If this were
sufficiently weighed, such, I presume, as love virtue would not so precipitate
themselves into public affairs, where interest is seldom preserved without a
shipwreck of conscience.

But besides, as the snares, hazards, and anxieties of great men are
innumerable, so their Eclipses are fatal, and their falls desperate; They are
always surprised with ruin, and their defeat is like that of Legions, when
they are cut in pieces before they can rally or make head. Private men often
times fall upon their legs, and find friends to relieve, or at least pity
them. Even Bankrout Merchants are daily seen to rise again, like Phoenixes out
of their own dust: But with Courtiers and Statesmen, there are no degrees of
misfortune; Their best comfort is not to survive their destinies, and their
greatest misery is, when they outlive themselves, to see their families buried
in their ruins, and all the advantages of their honor and fortune, turned
against them, like an Army dissipated with the fury of its own Canon. Whilst
they find themselves forsaken of all those alliances which they had, with so
much wisdom, contracted, imagining to have laid a foundation of everlasting
greatness, whilst their best friends shun them most, and those that were
raised by their countenance, dare not own any love or honor to their persons,
lest they be likewise invol^ed ^n their crimes; whilst their innocence is as it
were proscribed, and impeachments find such favor in their regard, that their
own servants are encouraged to betray them; Their enemies triumph over them,
and all their ^ontemporaries think to exercise their charity in affording them
a kind of insolent pity; The people which probably hated, but feared them
before, are now privileged to curse them, and the Prince himself, in whose
service perhaps they bleed, uses them as the skreen of envy, and hoping with
their ruin to gratify many, and please all, becomes inexorable.

In fine, they have no sanctuary to protect them, having long since forfeited
their innocence, the sweet retrea^ of oppressed virtue: Were our gay spirits
herein awakened, they would not so court danger as they daily do, but would
rather learn to hug themselves in a mediocrity of fortune.

II. Of faithful Ministers to unthankful Princes.
It is no new thing to see the greatest virtue and merit mis-construed, and
persecuted, even by those that owe i^ most favor and protection. History is
full both of the fatal rewards of worthy service^, and tragical resentments of
oppressed innocence. Even Henry the fourth of France, notwithstanding the
absoluteness of his power, and clearness of his fame, was observed hardly to
brook any, that might seem to share with him in his Laurels; The piety and
wisdom of King David himself seems to be scarce exempt from such jealousy in
the behalf of his kinsman Ioab, though covered with the speciou^ (...)
seasonable pretense of a Royal and exemplary Justice.

Whether it be, that excess of desert turns at last to a kind of demerit,
whilst Princes apprehend, that they cannot sufficiently requite it without
impoverishing themselves; Or whether sovereigns are apt to look upon the luster
of their subjects actions, as an Eclipse of their own; Or lastly, whether they
think their Authority endangered by those whose eminent* Virtues have drawn the
eyes of the people, or hearts of the soldiers toward them, so that nothing
seems to restrain them, but their modesty, which in the great, is ever justly
suspected; It is indeed but too evident, that Monarchs more willingly pardon
great injuries, than great services; That they as ill endure the name of a
Benefactour, as of a Rival; And by the example of Galba, can least of all brook
such as may seem to challenge the merit of their establishment. He seems too
potent a subject that has trod upon a diadem, and possibly he that has once
renounced a kingdom, may yet upon second thoughts repent of his moderation.

Machiavel could invent but two sorts of remedies for so imminent a mischief;
The first and more excellent, he faith, is to yield to the torrent, by
assuming no honors, arrogating no triumphs, entertaining small retinue;
Finally, by taking all occasions to slight their own achievements, that so
all glory may flow to the Prince, as to its Oceans, without the interruption of
Mils or Dams; But since Virtue being the disease, Loyalty seldom proves the
cure: His next and safer counsel is, not to trust too much to innocence, merit,
or present appearances, but to be as jealous as their masters, like Ravens, to
smell Gun-pouder at a distance, to lie perdieu for their own safety; And upon
the first discovery, to be beforehand with danger, to make use of the utmost
advantages they are trusted with, to assure themselves of timely retreats and
confederacies, that preventing fraud with fraud, and repelling force with
force, they may be in a condition not only to stand upon their guards, but take
revenge of their masters ingratitude, and perhaps if need be, set up for
themselves.

Truly, if we look upon the Counsel of this great Politic with the eyes of
nature, above all things concerned in its own welfare, it seems to be a
friendly whisper, an admonition full of prudence, and favorable to virtue; it
teaches men to determine resolutely of their affairs, to cut off parboyled
fear, and frozen delays, to hope even in despair, and to prevent preventions.
Thus we read of Getulicus, that warned through the numerous examples of his
masters rigor, by a kind of prudent disloialty, he secured himself, and of all
Seianus his dependents, alone survived so bloody a scene. Thus Agrippina,
observing a change in the countenance of Claudi^s toward her, scarce thought
her self alive till he was dead.

Surely such unworthy practices are a foul reproach even to moral virtue, much
more an infinite scandal to Religion, especially Christian, with the bare
profession whereof they cannot consist. Germanicus, albeit a Heathen, was a
better proficient in true wisdom, who being at once exasperated by the
undeserved malice of his Uncle, and tempted both by the loud applause of the
people, and entire obedience of the Legions, yet chose rather to expect the
Empire with danger, than with safety to possess it, and preferred the envy of
virtue before the security of a crime.

But what shall we think of great Bellisarius, disgraced, deprived not only of
liberty, but even of light, without conviction of the least crime, even by that
great Lawgiver Justinian, whom his single virtue had rendered almost as great a
Conqueror as Julius Caesar? What shall we say of the great Captain Gonsalv^,
for feigned crimes in default of real, neglected and ruined by the same
Ferdinand, the foundation of whose greatness was laid in his sweat and valor,
not to say, his overmuch Loyalty, which tempted him even to break his faith for
the service of his Prince? Or what shall we account of the Duke of Alva, who
though he found feet to trample upon the weakness of unhappy Flemmings, yet
had not a heel to lift up against the just power of an unjust master? What
shall we think of these and many others, that have chosen rather to be
innocent, than great or safe? Shall we believe they wanted either wisdom to
discover, or courage to resent the cruelty of their Sovereigns? Or, shall we
not distinguish their integrity, even with rubrical Characters, from the
treason^ and insolences of Sylla, Catiline, Narses, Bourbon, Guise,
Wallestein, etc. who suffered themselves to be enforced by odious necessity*
inveigled with wicked caution, or with treacherous opportunity debauched.

III. Of Fame.
THough the Stoics are to be much commended for their excellent Ideas of
Virtue, their generous contempt of the body, and indifference in outward
things, yet they seem with too much ostentation to undervalue Fame, even
decrying vanity with a kind of vainglory. Certainly there is no reason why
Virtue should altogether sleigth its own echo, or such as profess the study
of Immortality, despise that, which in surviving its subject, and outrunning
time, has at least some feature of Immortality.

It seems rather an heroical device of that noble Brederode, who lived at the
beginning of the Low Country war, and worthy to be added to the dignity and
antiquity of his coat of Arms, God preserve my soul and my honor; it expressed
a lively endearment of his renown, since he thought it only worthy to be
mentioned with eternal happiness; it proved, that he had Virtue in the highest
veneration, since he stooped even to kiss the hem of her garment.

I confess, where Fame and Virtue are inconsistent, we are obliged, as it
were, to save the V^ss^l from shipwreck, by lightning the fraught; But this is
he severest touchstone of Philosophy, neither has conscience a worthier
servant than he, who is content to espouse her, even with Infamy.

The Scriptures are so elegant in describing the infamy of the wicked, as if
they meant to aggravate it beyond any earthly misery, so establishing it, as a
kind of unfeigned Purgatory between this world and hell, by these and the like
Characters, the memory of sinners shall rot; And again, in the next generation,
let his name be extinct; from the latter of which places it is observable, that
they then immediately proceed to blot that name out of the Book of life which
they have first raced out of the Register of Fame.

And yet methinks, though Fame may be desired as a concomitant of more
important blessings, surely of it self, as Fame, it seems neither odious nor
amiable, but the most indifferent of outward things: When I read the last scene
and final exit of Anthony of Vendosme, King of Navarre, who being mortally
wounded at the assault of Rouen, by him, with infinite fury and bloodshed, then
taken and sacked, refused the ease and decency of a horse-litter to view his
lamentable Conquest in a posture of triumph, and with this silly, or rather
barbarous satisfaction, immediately breathed out his benumbed and inconsiderate
soul. I would fain imagine him already senseless, and so not guilty of such
sinful Pageantry: But, alas, how many are there, who in the midst of guilt and
reproach, to gratify their childish consciences, can listen to the rattle of
applause? nay, how many are they, that to purchase popularity, have sold their
peace both outward and inward, like that other Frenchman, who freely hazarded
and lost his life, to recover his feather. Virtuous fame, I confess, may be
honestly wished, but to gape for it, is a beggarly and sottish ambition: For as
it is no more than worth finding, so it is utterly lost with overseeking. Both
Virtue therefore, and Prudence, require that our pursuit of it be moderate and
careless, like his that rides a hunting to take the air; if h^ spring and
catch a Partridge, it is well, but though he miss of Game, he has ye^
obtained his end, which was the exercise of his body, and preservation of his
health.

Truly we shall find the less encouragement to court this seeming beauty,
when we consider how light and prostitute ^he is, and with how little choice
she admits her Gallants; All person^ and actions that are good or great, are
promiscuously entertained, yet the great much rather than the good: Virtues she
registers indeed in Quarto, but splendid crimes are recorded in Folio; Nay, if
we remember how corrupt and injurious ^he often proves (as being prompted by
success) in loading oppressed Justice with Invectives, and dawbing prosperous
Vices with Panegyricks, we may perhaps be rather tempted to disdain than bare
neglect.

Wherefore the motives which incline wise men to value their fame, are not
those shadows and dreams of an earthly immortality, nor yet the transportations
of affected honor, (for Virtue is no sensual or ticklish quality) but the real
advantage it yields of improving their generous designs to public benefit.

They find that the Infamous are to some like infected persons and lepers,
whom common Providence command^ us to shun, to others like light women, whose
company the aw of censure obliges us not to frequent, and to all, like such as
disgracefully stammer or squint, whom we hear with impatience, and see with as
much aversation, as we do an Eclipse, which by tradition we believe to hurt
the eyesight; that there is neither vigor in their precepts, nor virtue in
their examples; since the merit of their virtues being swallowed up in the
scandal of their evil manners, they seem to put on the odious vizard of
hypocrisy, and to do well, in them, at best, is imputed but to an escape of
Custom. They see that even obscure persons where they might perhaps speak with
advantge, yield rather to the modesty of secure and harmless silence. Again
they observe, that such as have once purchased an undoubted fame, are
afterward heard like Orators, and obeyed like Magistrates; so that the only
danger i^, lest their Errors should get the reputation of an axiom, and their
Imperfections pass for current Virtue; As King Alphonsus of Arragon, being
naturally wry-necked, soon begat in his Courtiers a general affectation of the
Princes posture; That their discourses seem Apothegmes, and their manners are
cited like the purity of Primitive practice; Finally, that upon their reproofs,
not only private amendments, but public reformations ensue. Great reason
therefore they conceive to endear and vindicate their fame, the aid whereof
does so much further, and the want obstruct the design of Virtue.

And yet perhaps those that are perfect in Philosophy, may seem so much already
to have surmounted fame, that they no longer need it, having cimented and
incorporated it with their manners: However, to Novices it is a necessary
incentive and guide; these like coals, not yet sufficiently kindled, must be
blown with bellows, and like young swimmers upheld, though with a bladder; To
such it is like the Drum or Trumpet to raw soldiers, or the Reveille to lazy
Sentinels. They use it as marks-men do their Aims; nay, they swallow it as
hungry Fishes do fresh worms. Neither ought we to discourage or despise the
hopes of such auspicious, though tender plants; For albeit the Learned indeed
determine that Virtue can have no worthy End without her self, yet surely these
are Cacumina Philosophiae, rather to be wished than expected; Lik^ imaginary
lines, described to fignifie the fantastic motions of heavenly Orbs; or the
Element of fire, imagined to subsist without fuel.

Should we confine our Virtue to these narrow limits, we must at once dash out
the names of all those Worthies, whomglory has enflamed, or emulation
provoked, and then let us consider how thin the Register of fame would be; It
would be hard to name any splendid action, especially amongs^ Heathens, wherein
Honor did not give the Biasse. To conclude, though Virtue cannot be too much
exalted* yet being thus abstracted, it is in danger to resolve into mere
Metaphysics.

IV. Of Reputation.
AS upright and good men ough^ not to contemn their fame, so neither should the
wise and eminent neglect their Reputation, there being nothing more available
to the greatest persons in their greatest actions, than to ride in its
triumphal Chariot; wholly to steer by it, is perhaps beneath them, but to carry
it along with them, is but to sail with Wind and Tide, and should be, if not
their study, yet their care, at l^ast to keep it always in their view, as a
Seaman does hi^ Compass. For as Arts and Sciences have certain simulachra or
shadows, which though in themselves suppositious and feigned, yet serve to real
purposes, and help to demonstrate exc^llent Truths; so in Policy it self, the
trifle called Reputation, though but a blast of the peoples breath, proves
sometimes so considerable, that scarce any Art or Conduct can supply its
defect; Wisdom therefore which weighs all things in the scale of Advantage,
will not so undervalue it, because it is vain, as not to cherish it, since it
is useful.

It is observable of money it self, the price of all things, that it was
invented only for supply of Credit, ease of Commerce, and abridgement of
tedious barter; that it is only valued for being every where current: And
indeed, since a very slender fortune would perhaps satisfy nature and ordinary
convenience, Poverty it self were not poor if it were not attended with
obscurity and neglect; neither can a wise man find other advantage in wealth,
than to afford him the wing of Reputation.

Reputation is (as it were) sinews to the weak, and eloquence to the dumb; It
removes obstructions, and answers objections before they are made; Harbingers
are not more necess^ry to Accommodate the Great, nor Pioneers to the Marche^ of
Armies in enclosed Countries; It is the right hand of Action.

To pass by Merchants, who in a manner breath no other Air, than that of their
Credit; I appeal on the one side to all the principal Actors on the Scene of
this world, if it have not afforded them success without hazard or difficulty;
If it have not yielded them advantage beyond hope or foresight; If it have not
been to them like a porta^le Bridge, or as a Bridge of Boats lying always ready
to transfort them over Rivers strongly guarded, and no where Fortable; On the
other side, I ask the unfortunate, and such as have shipwrackt in their
honors, if the want of it do not often oppress them beyond any weakness of
their own, or strength of their enemies.

In the affairs of war, how often have we seen the wariest Generals rather choose
to precipitate themselves upon the Rock of unequal hope, than languish in a
posture of inglorious safety, yea, though they naturally feared and abhorred
the Critical events of battle, as discreet men do great game at Di^^ yet lest
by declining the combat, ^ should appear they were not able to protect their
party, they have easily complied with the necessity of hazarding the sum of
their affairs, to maintain the Reputation of their Arms. neith^^ commonly are
they less jealous of pe^sonal honor, from which they mudraw the very breath
of their fortune^ for it being once eclipsed, they are (...) expert, that every
blast of ill succe^^ should disband their Troops, which having little
confidence or aw of the^ General, are only cemented by so^i^t and example; Upon
which account Kaetherine de M^dicis, perhaps wisely granted large terms to the
Protestant after the death of the Constable an^ Duke of Guise; Since though
the^ wanted not Captains of equal wisdom and experience, yet they found not an^
of Reputation sufficient to beget a universal and unquestionable obedience.

Again, how frequently may we observe Commanders, great indeed in courage, but
little or not overmuch fa^oured by fortune; as Eumenes, Sertorius, and even
Marius himself among the Ancients; In latter times, Peter Strozzi, the Admiral
of Chastillon, William Prince of Orange, Francis the first, Henry the Great of
France, and others, who having, even in the dissipation of their Armies,
preserved the entirenesse of their names, have suddenly arrested the precipice
of their fortunes, and revived their withered Laurels, nay, some of them have
at last built as it were one goodly Vessel, with the floating planks of many
shipwracks.

Neither is Reputation more necessary in Camps, then in Courts and Councels;
nay perhaps, Armies being still alarmed by the common enemy, preserved by one
common interest, diverted with continual action or duty, and tamed with Martial
Discipline, swell not with such constant billows, nor seem so much to want the
government of an eminent Pilot; Whereas in S^ates, the approaches of faction
are so strong, the Mines so subtle, and br^aches so saultable, that to prevent
or curb the insolency of Conspirators spiratours, Wisdom, Valor, and even
Majesty, have sometimes proved too weak, without the seasonable support of
Reputation, which being the Atlas of Authority, has a predominancy above power
it self, and can like Tiberius, steer a Senate with its eye.

Upon it depends the very essence of Magistracy, since it is most certain, That
the Scepters of Princes wax and wane with their honors, and that scandal or
contempt has still made way for their ruins, and in it consists the vigor
and luster of great achievements, for through its influence, Caesar, like a
Basilisk, could kill his adversaries with his mere looks, and Germanicus reduce
his revolting Legions with a bare harangue.

Of Valor in Princes.
IT is clear, that R^putation highly condu^es to the safety and luster of a
Crown; That it delivers Princes from the perpetual thra'ldome and nonage of
factious times, which (to use the Language of Lewis the eleventh) keeps them in
their Pages Trunks, even after they have beards; That it renders them of Kings
at the mercy of others, Lords at their own discretion. But this Rep^tation is
not easily nor presently acq^ired; For though we find among the Romans
Lucullus, and in l^tter ages, the Marquess Spinola, who through maturity of
Judgment, and vast Theory, becam^ Generals as soon as soldiers, therein
imitating Princes, whose Prerogative it is to be born Leaders of Armies, yet
others must ^xpect to ascend the steep Mount of honor by many and difficult
st^ps; N^y, Sovereigns themselves, if they will, indeed, raise a lofty
Reputation, m^st f^^st lay their foundation in honest Fame, and beginning with
the early and diligent practice of private Virtues, orderly proceed at last to
signaliz^ themselves by public ^tchievments.

To be great in A^thority, they must first be great in Virtue: They must be
vigilant and industrious, for greatness is the Captive of diligence; They must
be patient and constant, that they prove not the Pageants of Fortune; They must
be temperate, and of proof both against Luxury and Passion, for such as will
indeed conq^er, must first practice upon themselves.

But truly, of all heroic habits, there is none that swells so big and suddenly
with Reputation, as Valor; Whether it be, because it acts upon a more open
Scene, and produces more immediate and visible effects; Or rather, because our
servile and unthankful natures are apt to be more deeply affected with terrible
then favorable objects; for even those that would trample upon the meekness
of Henry the sixth, will crouch to the roughness of Henry the ^ighth.

It was a wise reflection, even beyond the years of Charles the ninth, who upon
his deathbed expressed full satisfaction, That he lest a brother to succeed
him, from the Reputation of whose approved manhood, much might be expressed to
allay the tumors of a distempered State, rather then any cradle of his own,
whose nonage and impotency would certainly revive and imbolden factions; But
the event answered not the prudence and merit of his hopes; for that brother
imagining that he had already supererogated and got the start of honor in his
youth, fancied, that to continue still in Armor, was but the life of a
Tortoise enchassed in his shell, and thought it was now high time to ease his
shoulders from the weight of a C^irass^: In fine, became as unsatiable in
L^xury, as he had once been greedy of Conquest; whereby he fell into the
contempt and rivalry of his ^ubject^, who thinking that ease had melted and
softened him to a gelly, and mistaking his sloth for a deep Lethargy, had
learned to undervalue that man, whose childhood they had feared, and were by
his long patience encouraged to accumulate their injuries, till, at last,
despair extorted from him a resentment, pe^nicious first to his enemies, but at
last to himself.

In ancient times. Kings were nothing else but Crowned Captains; Their Laurels
were their Diadems, and their Swords their Scepters; They accounted the danger
of their lives a small hazard, and only relished that Sovereignty which they
had themselves achieved, like Venison of their own hunting; By such vigorous
policies, they exalted their Thrones above the reach of creeping faction, which
d^lights rather in cheats and theifts then brave robberies, and commonly aims
no higher then Burglary; The only Seditions they feared, were the mu^ini^s and
revolts of their Legions, when they wanted Pay, or disliked their Winter
Quarters.

B^t in latter ages, policy varying, or rather manhood declining, Majesty has
left the field, and betaken it self to Garrison; It dwells no longer in Tents,
but in Courts and Cabinets; Princes, they say, must not now appear in Armor,
lest they hazard that Reputation which indeed they never had; It seems more
honorable for them to act by their Lieutenants, I wish it prove as safe and
prosperous: Philip the second could fill Europe with the noise and terror of
his vast Expeditions, himself scarce budging from Madrid, but he conq^ered
accordingly, and his Victori^s were but like the encroachments of the Sea,
which what it gains in one place, is observed to lose in another* Certainly
there is odds on Cyrus and Alexanders side against Croesus and Darius; Neither
is it easy to secure the tame Autho^ity of Chil^erick from the aspiring genius
of Charles Martel.

This eminent advantage redounds to Princes by their continual pres^nce in the
Camp, That into some it infuseth glory, to others it insinuates shame; It
aff^cts all with emulation; That it sec^r ^s them from Competitours in honor,
and forestals the treacherous hopes of ambition; Lastly, that it teaches
en^mies to despair of any but dear and bloody Victory: for if the Romans
accounted that Town or Fortress in a manner won, upon the walls whereof they
had once planted a standard, knowing that the soldiers would not desist from
their beloved Eagles; How much more invincible must their courage be, that
fight in view of Sovereigns, who undergoing equal hazzards, stand ready to
reward their merit, or punish their cowardice? Nay, their bare countenance is,
to generous spirits, an ornament above any recompense, and their mere neglect a
terror beyond the sentence of a Court Martial.

The sovereign use of Princely Valor is to chain and muzzle the fierceness of
such as, resembling Bears and other beasts of prey, know no restraint of
mischief, but their impotency, to be like a fiery bit in their mouths, whom the
gentle Snaffold of Authority cannot hold; It either is or should be but justice
in a larger Volume and bigger Character, differing from it not re, but modo and
gradu. Truly it is but an hard-favoured, rugged, and un-courtly Virtue,
destitute of all those graces and charms which are wont to captivate our
affections; Its face is fuller of skars, then old age of wrinkles, and its
presence like the surprisal of Ghosts and Hobgoblings; its voice is as the
sound of Thunder; doleful cries and confused noises are but its whispers; its
^mbergreece is dirt and sweat; its perfumes are Gunpowder and Carrion.

And yet in the midst of these determents it has likewise certain subtle
enchantments, by which it attracts even love; Those that would sain accuse, are
by a secret influence compelled to flatter it; so that it is become more
popular, then Faction or Liberty it self. It is indeed a kind of general
V^r^ue, with its luster supplying the obscurity of many others, and quitting
enormous Vices: For it has been observed, that valiant Prince^, be their
private manners or public governments never so obnoxious, yet at worst, escape
universal obloq^y.

And whereas the extremes of other Virtues in stead of improving their kinds,
degenerate, only R^shn^s^, which is but the transportation and fr^^zy of the
Valiant, if it be not secure from blame, is safe from reproach, and subject to
be no oth^rwise discommend^d, than the best and liveliest parts in Comedies,
when they are over-act^d in tone or gesture. Whilst it is fortunate, it is
Canonized by the Vulgar, and ev^n wise men put on their spectacles to discern
it from its Virtue: Victory in its trouzes becomes a Giant, and men are as much
taken wi^h its real exploits, as children with the tales of Garagantu^ and
Bevis: B^t if it sink with the weight of its enterprises, it is yet by some
excused, by others pardoned, generally pitied; and since it seldom survives
its misfortune, it has a stately Funeral, and Princely Dirges.

Most remarkable it is, that when Francis the first was defea^ed and taken
prisoner at the siege of Paris, by him begun with more confidence than counsel,
and continued with greater obstinacy than wisdom; yet in regard he had
acquitted himself like a c^uragious Prince, many of his chiefest Gentlemen that
escaped the slaughter, enamoured wi^h the beauty of so glorious a Captivity,
though they might have fled, chose rather to go with their Prince to Madrid,
than return with their liberty to Paris, willingly mistaking hi^ prison for a
flourishing Court: I commend not their Prudence; to languish with him was but a
silly Relief, a treacherous Loialty to seal his Captivity with their own^
neither do I allow of their magnanimity, for the truly stout only lament their
losses in repairing them; But I admire their Devotion to Majestic Valor* in
real duty exceeding the affec^^tion of fond Lovers.

It is therefore great wisdom in Princes to build their Authority upon their
Valor, as being a firm and popular Basis, the fr^sh^st and most fragrant
flower in their Garlands: Only they should consider, that rashness is but
Alchymy, and has none but Vulgar and Imaginary honor, as loathsome as Knight
Errandry. That as it produces sometimes the most notable Eff^cts, so it often
meets with signal and fatal Affronts, yet with this scandalous difference, that
it se^ms to owe its a^chievements to Fortune, its miscarriages to Desert.

Upon the account of this giddy Virtue it wa^, that Henry the Great of France
went often times himself upon the Forlorn Hop: To speak in the Duke of Parmas
Language, he could not content himself with the Dignity of a King and General,
but aff^cted and usurped the Office of a Scout-master, and a Captain of Light
Horse, giving the arrogance of the Spaniards subject to scoff at him, and say,
He did them much Honor in coming to view the Order of their Army, that he
might learn how to range his own; He should rather have remembered that notable
Epigram of his Predecessor, It is high time, said he, to quit this dangerous
Post, and no longer upon these unequal terms to stake a double Henry against a
Carolus.

Princes therefore may learn to be good husbands of their Valor, to reserve
it only for honorable and important Action, to avoid the cheapnesse of
picqueering, and making a little war, like the Tories and Bandit^; Unless they
desire to imitate the fierce and ill-tempered youth of Sebastian of Portugal,
who observing a tempest, would usually put to Sea in a Shallop, that he might
seem to daunt the Elements, and show himself unconcerned, when even the
Mariners themselves were afraid. Whilst they needlessly engage themselves
amongst swords and shot, if they enhaunce the reputation of their courage, yet
they wound the same of their wisdom; nay, they seem Valiant rather out of
ignorance, than contempt of danger, and perhaps resemble (as extremes are apt
to meet) the distressed Valor of a Coward, who is said to wink and fight. But
if arguments from nature and discretion will not yet convince them, let them at
least consider, that in their untimely deaths, all the designs of their
projected greatness commonly vanish, their Garlands presently wither, their
enemies insult, their heirs are often exposed to a dang^rous nonage, and their
Countries to a kind of Interregnum; For wise and virtuous Governors are the
happy Intelligences of the world, and the persons of excellent Princes are the
precious stakes of Common-weal^hs.

VI. Of History.
WE are not sufficiently sensibl^ how much we owe to the Historian, who having
no other end then the good of mankind, and innocent fame, has by his noble
industry furnished us with so many lively patterns of heroic Virtues, like
baits to allure us, and with such eminent examples of Gods Justice, like
Sea-marks to warn us; has bestrid the Tombs of our Ancestors, and rescued
their names from Oblivion and Dust; has ex^lted flitting time to a kind of
immortality, and digested barbarous Tradition into useful K^owled^e.

There is not a greater B^nefactour to true Knowledge, then the Historian, who
does not amuse us with Airy Notions, or feed us with tea^ms of Art, but directs
us to the study of Men and Manners, affording us a Looking-glass for our
Actions to dress them by, and ^nabling us to find that wisdom in Books,
which else perhaps we must purchase of dear Experience. We will therefore call
a Historian Virtues Secretary, or the Worlds Recorder, and History it self we
will define to be the Art or Faculty of Recording and Describing human Actions
and Affairs, with discreet Choice, with clear Integrity and perfect Knowledge.

First, with discreet Choice; for there must be in History a certain Prudence
to discern what Actions or Affairs deserve Recording, wherein the information
and instruction of the Reader is to be our Aim and Compass. It should not be
li^e an abrupt Gazette, or Sea-mans Journal, it should not give way to the
endl^sse impertinency of r^lating common accidents in nature, the fondness of
marking idle Prophecies, and childish Omens, nor the superstition of observing
Critical Events, or raising a grave and moral descant from a silly plainsong,
these being the weeds that choke many of our fruitfullest Histories. And
therefore here in we should imitate his Wisdom, ( Tacitus Annal. l. 3.) that
determined to pass by all such actions as were not notable either for Honesty
or Infamy, as knowing, the end of writing Histories to be, That our Virtues may
survive our Persons; and that wicked m^n may stand in some aw, if not o^
present times, yet of posterity, especially the great and eminent, who perhaps
might use History in stead of Astrology, to read their own Fortunes.

2. With clear Integrity; For a Historian ought, of all men, to be sincere and
unbyass^d, since his works are designed for future Age^, who wanting other
means of information, must take his single testimony for undoubted Truth. A
little falsehood is enough to disguise and leven a large s^ory; and by reason of
the Sovereign influence it has upon human faith, the best of moral certainties
give Reputation to those Errors which could not hope to receive the like
countenance from any present Authority. We see in matters of Religion, Errors
have not so sure a Buckler as the corruption of Ecclesiastical story, for
Heresy dreads the name of Innovation, but triumphs, if it have but color, to
vie Antiquity with Truth; Neither will Schism value to be cut off from the
present Church, whilst it may pretend and boast its conformity with Primitive
times. Historians therefore should be men of such presumed sincerity, that
their bare assumptions may justly challen^^ belief. But, alas, how many of them
are bribed into fulsome Panegyricks, awed into sordid Concealments, or
exasperated into Libellous Invectives? It were not to be endured, if partial
story did not, for the most part* carry its brand in its forehead, whereby it
passes not current without the grain of allowance, and is read with as much
prejudice as it was written, to make the scales even.

3. Perfect Knowledge; For the vending of Rumor for History, is as bold a
cheat as the selling of Copper or Alchymy for fine Silver; And indeed, it is
injurious to expect that the Reader should take that for granted, which is but
a non liquet to the Author. To Knowledge are opposed Ignorance and Conjecture;
Ignorance is an invincible defect, like natural lamenesse, or a dead palsy;
Conjecture is many times but the Crutch of Ignorance, and like an eye of Glass
or Crystal, yet sometimes it consists in wise Argument, and rational
Inference, and so becomes a seasonable supplement to imperfect knowledge.
Wherefore, ^o long as it is probable and weighty, it deserves not to be wholly
ex^l^ded, though not too frequently admitted.

History, as an Art, r^quires Method; And as an Art of R^gistry and
Description* it implies a Style: Method consists in p^rfect Chronology, and in
a comely series of relati^g Affairs in their due time and order, so digesting,
and dis-entangling the variety of the matter, that to the Readers eye it may be
strait and transparent, rather like a good perspective, then a rude Land-skip.
One thing must, like a Harbinger, make way for another; Counsel must precede
Resolution, Resolution Action, and Action Event; That there be no precipitating
or interfering, and that great and wise Agents be not immediately brought to
handy strokes, like Clowns in a Match at Cudgels: This is so necess^ry, that
without it the writing of History is no better then discord in Music, or the
jangling of the Bells. Style consists in the Aptness of Connection, Gravity of
Compos^re, and Care of delivering matters with the same seriousn^sse and
solemnity wherewith they were acted, free from the Incongruity or D^formity of
common talk, the Gaudery of D^clamations, and Levity of Romancs.

Now if we examine our Historians by these severe limits, we shall scarce find
any so able, so diligent, or indeed so sincere; Since all must write, either of
other Times and Countries, or of their own; If of their own, they are in danger
to prove, not Historians, but P^nsioners, and Malcontents; They either will
not or dare not write all truth, or, at least, not all the truth: If of others,
they are exposed to so much darkness, and want of fitting materials, a^ no
Wisdom or Dexterity can supply, whil^t they borrow their Truth from Tradition,
and their Intelligence from rumor; well may they quest aloud, but can have no
clear sent at so great a distance.

But perfection is no where to b^ found, neither in our Virtues, nor Arts; And
therefore if Historians be charged with Imperfection, they may well answer,
that their Defects are not greater then those of Philos^phers, Schoolmen,
Lawyers, and other famous Professors, who yet pass current amongst us, and
look big; nay, they may allege, that they are more exact then their subject
(the lives and actions of men) deserves: For in them there is such irregularity
of Manners, such shifting of Scenes, such interfering of Counsels, such a Chaos
of Events, as would confound Ord^r, and puzzle even Method it self to
dis-entangle them, being fitter matter for Comoediane, then Historians, to be
personated, then recorded.

Yet diverse excellent Registers time has produced, who pardoning them the
Painters fault, of making the Picture, like indeed, but much fairer and
handsomer then the face, may pass for sufficient Authors; And since, where
the subject will not bear defining, a description serves the turn, These
commendable Writers, Comparatis comparandis, deserves to wear the name and
badge of Historians.

Of these, Cornelius Tacitus seems to lead the Vann, though some have imagined
him to differ from a Historian, as descant does from plain-Song; He recites
none but weighty matters, and those weightily; He peirces the Cabinet like
Lightning, and where he gives way to Conjecture, he does it so wisely, that
those who could never have made his discoveries, must yet consent to his
Reasons: His style is as quick as thought, and his words not long eno^gh for
his matter* It Is strange to s^e a History so truss^d up: His Conceptions keep
pace with the mysteries of State, and subtilties of Court; nay, it is well, if
he observe no more then was meant, and make not those times and persons more
politic than they were. To read him understandingly, would make an exquisite
Statesman, if it did not first req^ire a Statesman, understandingly to read
him. I know not whether to prefer, his Annals, or Histories, since, in effect,
they are both short Annals in brevity of Language, and both in fulness^ of
matter large H^stories.

Livy, though not so compact, is not of less^ weight or depth; An Author as
full of Majesty as the Senate; so ample and copious, that to such as have read
Livy, scarce any History or Affairs can be new: He d^livers the story of times,
when Civility and Policy, both the Arts of War, and Laws of Peace, exceedingly
fl^^r^sh d. And truly they have lost nothing by his Recording; If he seem a
little partial or fond of his subject, pardon and impute it to the love of his
Country, which indeed abounded with persons, for Virtue so eminent, that some
degree of flattery seems even justifiable in their behalf, neither could they
be worthily commended, without a kind of Hyperbole.

Caesar's Commentaries are as a Grammar for soldiers; With so much judgm^nt he
gives an account of his own Expeditions, that it were almost as easy to
imitate his Sword as his Pen; with such modesty and wise ingenuity he relates
his own great Actions (always speaking in the third person) that his Reader
finds those Virtues and Abilities in him, which himself would seem to sl^ight
and cover, as with a Mask, not willing to be the Trumpetter o^ his own fame.
This is a hist^^y indeed, as pure as the Fountain, nothing of lamenesse or
disguiz^ in it; for the materials were such as needed no ornament, but only
good adjustment; and therefore the A^thour so^ght no other Eloquence, then
Simplicity, no beauty, but naked truth, which was ready at his hand, being,
without other information, wholly derived from his own breast.

Sall^st treads fast upon their heels; His weighty Argument and composed Style
resemble a still stream in a deep Chanel, and show, to what perfection the Art
of writing was grown in his Age.

To forget Plutarch, were to affront Virtue, his choice of excellent Theme^ his
Characters of noble persons, whereby he has even Canonized them, his wise and
accurate comparisons of Grecian and Roman Worthies, equallize him with the
best Writers. As none that converses with the Stoics, can continue an Epicure,
so neither can any, not void of Ingenuity, read the life of Cat^ in Plutarch,
without being transformed into that Idea. He that will know much History with
little study* let him turn to Plutarch.

Florus is so trim an Epitomist, that it is pity he wrote not more, or more
largely; For Ann^ls are but Pigmy-Histories, and render us rather not ignorant,
then intelligent; their chief use is, to read them before History, as
Preparatives, or after History, as Recapitulations; but the pleasure is more
then the profit, they being rather Land-skip^, then Mapps.

Amongst modern Authors, Philip de Commines is famous; His Memoires are so
exact, and withal so natural, that it appears, he was a great Agent in the
affairs he treats of; Truth and Ingenuity are so much beholden to him, that he
seems more tender to them, then to his own honor; for in discovering the
policies then used, he makes himself a kind of Interloper, and leaves the
Reader to judge, whether he served C^arls or Lewis more faithfully.

The History of the Council of Trent cannot be enough extolled, for judgment.
learning, and moderation; It is as straight as the flight of Arrows* as
transparent as the light: This Author, whilst he only recites, confutes, and
has the Vigor of a Satyr, without the Spleen or Aggravation; The Pope cannot
justly accuse, yet will never absolve him; for to some persons, nothing is so
terrible, or offensive, as truth.

Thuanus is as an Atlas of History; so orderly, and withal so large, that his
industry and vast intelligence would pass for a miracle, if it did not appear,
that where it was needful, he wisely supplied his own defects, by calling in
foreign aid.

What Encomium can I give to D' Avila? who in his notable History of the Civil
Wars of France, has done so much right, both to Italians and Frenchmen; To
those by his ^minent Ability, to these by his singular exactness and Fidelity;
Others find enough to do, in representing the affairs of their own Countries,
to dive into foreign interests, is indeed a work, which deserves the activity of
a Trans-Alpine wit.

I know, I have passed by very many Authors, of no less worth, then those I
mention; but to treat of them all, were to write a History my self: I once more
conclude, we ought to enshrine the memories of such Hi^torians.

VII. Of Education.
AMongst the many miscarriages of our times, there seems not to be any of
greater importance, then the errors committed in the Education of Youth; which
yet, having taken root by Custom, are hard to be removed. If we understood the
value of good Education, what Vices it prevents, what Manners it plants,
Parents would not be so indifferent in the discharge of a duty, which imports
their Children more, then all the fortunes they can leave them.

There is no nature so fierce, no not that of wild Beasts, but it may be tamed,
if endeavored in Youth; no inclination so violent, but it may be checked,
before it take head, and be fortified with habit, all vices being yet as
curable, as flesh wounds, whilst they are green; but as we grow old, our faults
learn to prescribe; then if the Parent reproves, he is answered with snarling
and resistance, if the friend go to perrwade, he makes himself an enemy. The
Ghostly Father has a fine time to wear out his lungs with invectives. Alas,
good precepts work upon well-disposed minds; but a vicious person is a
prejudicate Auditor, and has so sick a palate, that he can relish nothing that
is good or wholesome: One early and seasonable reproof shall prevent, what a
hundred Sermons cannot reform, When men have contracted so much rust, that they
are past all remedies, but the Law, And, indeed, are fitter to be made
examples, then hear precepts.

But not to shoot at random, the errors, I observe in our vulgar breeding, are
these.

First, I conceive, in outward accomplishments, we study too early and greedily
to advance our Youth, and, by such outsides, they commonly are valued; but, as
for just and sober principles, the love of Virtue, and restraints of
Conscience, these goodly and fruitful plants we neglect to cherish in them;
Hence it happens, that our best hopes are freedom from enormous^ vices, and a
kind of female (...) but the foot steps of that masculine worth, which was in
our Ancestors, are even worn out, we have little Nobility left us, save that of
the pedigree, neither are the seeds of knowledge so ^ertile in a^, as in many
He^thens, who lived by the light of Reason, and principl^s of Philosophy.

Some indeed there are, that judiciously observe the diff^rence, betwixt a sure
foundation, and a curious paper-building, or painted Balconey^, but then,
perhaps, they either think, by flacking the reigns of Authority, to decoy and
flatter their youth into Duty, or else, by an over-austerity, will needs
precipitat^ it into perfection, and cut down tall Vices, like great Trees, with
one stroke of the Hatchet, or make Virtues spring, like Mandrakes; both of
these are erroneous, for Virtue is the issue of Discipline and Time.

Our Education, in respect of Arts and Professions, seems much like the
methodical Travels of the Germans in France, which they say, consists in riding
a certain tour or Circuit. For first, Children are put to school at a venture,
where they are exposed to the fury of Pedants, and like Galley-slaves,
condemned to the Oar, till dull experience proves them unfit for learning, and
perhaps renders them incapable of other course. When they have learned to
construe Latin, though possibly, not to understand it, they are either
directed to some Trade, wherein that little which they have learned is useless,
and soon forgotten; or else they are sent to Universities, Innes of Court, and
beyond the Se^s, there to surfeit as fatally of liberty. as starved stomachs do
of plenty. Thus ^kipping all degrees and methods, of Children, they become men
at a stride; And it is well, if they prove not Senators.

I know it is easy sometimes for fools to censure, what the wis^st men can
hardly reform. And withal I am not ignorant, that much has been written upon
this subject, and by m^n whose wits and abilities, I dare not so much as
emulate; yet in a matter of so great and public importance, I hope, I shall
not be too severely blamed, if I adventure likewise in a short Essay, to offer
some expedients of redress, to those many mischiefs, which proceed from
erroneous Education.

First then, as the Husbandman with much observation proves the nature of the
soil, before he resolve what grain he will commit unto it, And as the
Architector d^signes several sorts of wood, for several uses in building: so
let not Parents destine their Children to courses, without a diligent sc^utiny
and examination of their Genius. Like some z^alous, or covetous Catholics,
who, before their innocent Daughters know what belongs to a vow, bury them, as
it were, alive, in Monasteries. Experience daily teaches us, that such as are
not apt for liberal Arts, yet many times prove able M^rchants or mechanics,
And those, that would never be spruce Courtiers, prov^ dogged Swisses. An
aspiring Genius will contemn mean Professions, airy souls were not designed for
sedentary employments, nor excess of melancholy for action; He may prove an
excellent Mathematician, that would never be good Lawyer, for that depends upon
the strength of Imagination, this of Reason. Great Logicians are often times but
ill Orators; For the one requires a strong, the other a fine and Courtly wit;
some have solid judgememt, some vast memory, some excel in elocution, some in
dexterity of the Pen, some have quickness of dispatch, some invincible
industry. Every Creature is said to have its peculiar virtue, in some kind or
other; but the vast bulk of learning, and general abilities, are not to be
grasped at, save by such wits, as are almost as rare as the Phoenix or Unicorn.

Secondly, therefore, let every Genius be directed solely or chiefly to those
studies and employments, to which nature first designed them; for that eye
which is intent and fixed, sees clearly, whereas variety of objects dazzles;
That water, running in one great Chanel, makes a navigable River, which being
divided into little streams, they all prove no better then ditches. I conceive,
if this Rule were practiced, Youth would not be so routed and defeated in what
they undertake, as now they are, whilst they attempt those Arts and Sciences,
which are both for quantity too vast, and for quality, improper for them, like
Horsemen, commanded forthy to win passes, and take sconces. Whatsoever the
stomach digests not, proves but crudity; and variety of imperfect notions,
serves only to puff men up with arrogance, and ostentation, and produces at
best but learned ignorance, or confident errors. Whereas by this means, every
one would thrive in his way, and the Commonwealth of Learning, which consists
in perfect societies of all Arts, would exceedingly flourish. The Jesuits,
chiefly by pursuing this wise and accurate method, have advanced literature,
enlarged their own same, and ^xalted their Colleges, to the envy of all
Universities.

Thirdly, let not superficial Ornaments be so much regarded, as solid
foundations, and let not the substance be placed in those things, which were
meant only for glosses and shadows. For though all acco^plishments may be
commended and desired, yet not all equally, nor alike in all. It were methinks,
but vain ambition in a Gentleman, that should strive to excel the Danoing
master, in exactness of Dan^ing; or the Va^^^ing School^, in a^tivity of body;
wher^in, if by his indiscreet diligence, and long practice, he should arrive at
perf^ction, he were yet in danger, sometimes to resemble Nero, descending from
the imperial Throne, to play his part in a consort of Music, and expecting the
applause of the people, for his well singing upon the Stage. The Spartans were
so sev^re in their Philosophy, that they rejected many of those Arts, which are
so precious in our times, as the Canke^s of Virtue, and underminers of Liberty,
framing men's minds, rather to the pomp of vicious pleasures, then the
simplicity of virtuous exercises. Their censure herein may perhaps be too
rigid, yet we should remember the debt we owe to public, and to posterity, and
not resemble our Virginia Planters, whose poverty forces them to plant nothing
but Tobacco and other Commodities of present vent; we should use a more
excellent Husbandry, like those that bend their designs to set up
manufactures, to settle Trade, to establish policy, and turn a Colony in^o a
Commonwealth, by such well-grounded and durable Arts, that future times may
reap the ben^fit of our industry We should therefore prize virtue and innocence
in youth, far above all outward Ornaments, and eve^ above learning it self; for
a Commonwealth has much more need of honest, then wise Citizens, and one good
man is worth a Myriade of great wits.

Fourthly, We should endeavor to season Youth with Ingenuity, and stir up the
seeds of emulation, that they may no longer act like pressed Soldiers, but
Volunteers. That duty may be their delight, and knowledge the subject of their
pride; incentives far more powerful, than terror or restraint; for what can
probably be expected from those that go to school, as if they went to
Bridewell, and at best, love book^ no better then a Turn-spit does his Wheel?

Fifthly, There should be a North-west passage found, for the attaining of the
Latin Tongue, that we need not use such a tedious ambages, as is, in effect,
more barbarous, then the tying of the Horses tail to the Plough; nor instead of
a journey, which might be dispatched in few days, wander, like the Children of
Israel, forty years in the Wilderness. For in learning Language, which yet is
but the gate or avenue of art and knowledge, we not only lavish our time, but
waste that stock of industry, which nature endued us with, for higher and
nobler designs; so as being harrassed with this drudgery, we have little
vigor left us to attempt Philosophy or humane Learning. And let no man object,
that our early years are not capable of such improvements. For why should we
doubt, but that Mathematics, History, and even morality, in some degree, may
be insinuated to us very young, since Children are so soon put (...) make use
of Invention, their strong^st fac^l^y, and which, indeed, as yet is but too
slender and barren? Half that time and diligence which they trifle away in
Epistles and Themes, (exercises, miserably patched up of childish matter, and
stolen phrases) would yield another manner of fruit, if it were employed in
translating to and fro, the best moral Authors, whereby not only the Language
would soon grow familiar, but the style would imprint it self, and perhaps, the
spirit and Idea remain with them. Neither do I see, why they should converse so
much with the poets at that Age, when they read them, with so much difficulty,
and so little relish, unless there be a design, in perplexing the Scholar, to
amuse his Parents. and lengthen the employment. As for Greek, though it seems
to be in some proportion necessary to the perfection of the Latin Tongue, yet
I am sure, to many that learn it, it is of little use, especially being taught
as it is, by halves, as if it were learned on purpose to be forgotten.
Certainly, were the Rules of the Latin Tongue discreetly abridged, and no
other Language spoken in public Schools, it could not require much more time
or industry, then the F^ench and other Tongues, which commonly cost those that
are least pregnant, no more to gain, even the perfect speech of them, then the
leisure or passe-time of two or three years.

Sixthly, The learned and able Professors of Arts and Sciences, should endeavor
to render them more clear and Mathematical, by vindicating them from many of
those uncertainties and intricacies wherewith they are now entangled, that our
knowledge be no longer buil^ upon such Hypotheses, as are more easily admitted,
then consented to or proved; so that many of our found^tions being blown away
with one blast of denial, we are as far to seek, ^s if we had never studi^d,
And being once beaten from Aristotle, stand as mute, as an ignorant Catholic
would do, if he could be driven from his impregnable Citadel the Church. Why
should Scholars in disputation, give such false fire, wrangle about mere
notions, and fight with their own shadows? why should Sciences be encumbered
with such a throng of distinctions, wher^by Sophistry is maintained, and truth
concealed, like a true Diamond, in a heap of counterfeit Jewel^? why should we
acquiesce in Authori^y, which, though most necessary to Law and Gospel, is the
bane of Arts, and a ne plus ultra to knowledge? Some I confess, have very
auspiciously begun a Reformation in this behalf; but it is in the embrio, and
will require a College of the most learned to finish it; indeed it is almost
like the translation of the Bible, work fitter for national Synods, the private
men.

S^venthly, Those persons to whose direction and conduct youth is committed,
should not be taken at random, but with the same prudence and choice, wherewith
we elect our Magistrates or Delegates; their profession should not be made the
last refuge of such men, as despair, or are bafled in better preferments, but
should be accounted* as indeed it is, most honorable. And the^ should know,
how much, both the pr^sent age expects from their Fidelity, and future times
from their Virtue, as well by due regard to their persons, as encouragement of
their labors; but, alas, our Age so abounds in loathsome pedantry, that as the
contempt of the Calling discourages many worthy men from professing it, so the
contemptibleness of the ^ersons, yet brings the Calling into greater contempt.

Lastly, There should not be wanting encouragements and rewards, proportionable
to the number and merits of ^arned and excellent men, And wise Governors
should study to distribute them, not by chance, but true desert: The end of
planting Nurseries, is seasonably to convert them into Orchards, otherwise the
Planter is commonly a loser by them. Where therefore there is no recompense
expected, men will rather content themselves with easy and thrifty ignorance,
And he will in time be a learned Priest, that has his breviary by heart.
Hence, I fear, it partly happens That such amongst us as have free fortunes,
and can live of their own, account themselves, ^s justly exempt from study, and
ingenious industry, as in some Countries Gentlemen are from paying Taxes: for
all our Virtues are fostered by necessity, or fed with expectation; no
knowledge or excellency is without its arrogance and ambition, which renders it
impatient to be hearded with the vulgar, being conscious of its own desert.
That wise Emperor Charles the fifth, in his excellent Legacy of politic
instructions to his Son Philip, advising him to purchase the service of able
men, at any rates, tells him, he must by all means seek them out; for as their
Virtue teaches them Modesty, so even that Modesty has its Pride, and looks
that Preferment should court it. Indeed the want of seasonable and convenient
advancements, for great wits and spirits, drives them often times to seek it by
indirect means, and possibly has been the hidden spark, that has in all ages,
kindled notable flames in the world.

VIII. Of Traveling, and the qualifications unto it.
I Confess, I am not of the humor of the age I live in, which takes it for
granted, that such as travel not, have scarce lib^^al education, so that their
lameness can be no way supplied or out* grown. I conceive, Wisdom to be none of
those Merchandises, for which we trafick only in far Countries, nor do I take
good manners to be of so vast a b^lk, that they require the fraught of a Ship
or Bark; If change of Climates and Meridians were sufficient alone to produce
those excellencies we aim a^, what abilities might we not exp^ct in our
public M^ssengers, and weekly Posts? certainly, there are as wise men, and
every way as accompl^shed, that never fo^sook their native Countries, as those
that have traversed the known world.

I rather incline to their Stoical opinion, who believe, that notwithstanding
those goodly glosses and appearances, which fond Custom has put upon this
method of breeding, yet the goodness of the fruit scarce answers the fairness
of its blossoms, but that, on the contrary, it is the Sep-mother of Learning,
the Imposture of Virtue, and a vast prodigality of Time; for it is observable
of many novices, when they travel, that at best they do but spend their
curiosity, in gazing upon sensible Objects, Towns, Palaces, Bridges, and the
like, as if they were only sent for silly spies, to view the situation of the
^ountry.

B^t since the prejudice of times in this behalf is such, that to disp^te
against it, is in danger to be accounted, rather Heresy then good Philosophy,
I will endeavor to offer some preparatives by way of caution, that Youth may
travel with more benefit, or less mischief.

Let then the grounds of true Religion be first imprinted in early Youth, with
such lively Characters, as will not easily be defaced, for Travelers seldom
meet with those that catechize them; many objects indeed they shall have to
distract, and alienate, but few or none to persuade, or encourage them, in
pious duties; so that if they have not a stock, to subsist in time of dear^h,
they may soon perish, being so remote from the nurture of Parents, and
destitute of friendly admonitions, in Countri^s^ where a different worship
being establshed, they are constrained either to forsake, their Religion, or
forget their piety.

Let them have civil and liberal Education, to shame neither their friends, nor
themselves, for else they will seem to travel, like Barbarians into Greece, not
so much to learn the Arts and Ornaments of other Countries, as to discover the
Nakedness of their own.

Let them be untainted with Vices, which in traveling increase like snowballs.
Above all, let them be armed with Temperance, and free from the habit of
Wine-bibbing, else the novelty of delicious fruits and pleasant Wines in
Southern Climates, will debauch them, to the hazard of their health and wits;
and for reputation, make them seem swine in the eyes of such civil and
well-governed people, as those amongst whom they shall live; neither will any
caution preserve them virtuous, where Incontinency is boldly professed, and Lust
is become, not a Custom only, but a Diet.

Let them be endued with understanding, and natural parts, at least more th^n
vulgar; for traveling is a Trade, not to be set up, nor driven, without a
reasonable stock, neither do we endeavor to enamel or polish the common Flint,
but reserve our labor for Metalls and Jewels, as only worthy of such Art.

Let them be competently furnished with humane learning, and at least
matriculated in Philosophy; for though traveling may perhaps build, yet
certainly it lays no foundations: There are methods and degrees of breeding;
And no man ever at once vaulted into perfection. The knowledge of terms, and
things, must, in good order, precede the study of men, else it will resemble
those that learn Languages, only by the ear, without Rules, who may, indeed,
speak intelligibly, but scarce elegantly, and their want of Orthography shall
always discover their lameness.

Let them not be so much strangers to Story and Mapps, that when they first see
France, they shall think, they discover America, and be so surprised with the
novelty of objects, as if they saw not men but theaters, and when they changed
stations, sifted scenes; for then their time will be wasted in vain amusements,
and they will not have traveled, but dreamed, As Children when they first come
to London, are lost in the street^, As mere Country people admire the gaudy
signs before every shop, and are in France, when they see Westminster or the
Exchange.

Let them stay, till they have gotten some habit of discretion, and experience
in conversation; for they must know how to stand upon their Guard, and support
themselves; they can rely upon no man's tenderness, to consider their youth,
and pardon the errors of Childhood. All their blots will be hit, all their
forfeitures will be taken, since to men of prudent behavior, it is commonly a
great privilege to be strangers, but to indiscreet persons, a greater
prejudice.

Let them, (if possible) be perfect Latinists, not only for pen, but speech,
for that, in traveling, is as current coin in Trade, and somewhat more
necessary, in this respect, that it cannot so readily be supplied by way of
Barter; The Loadstone has made all the world, in effect, one continent, and
the Latin Tongue ciments, at least, all the learned world, as it were, into
one Nation. Without it, Travelers are, for some time, such silly mutes, that
it rests in the Companies charity, to think that they have Reason.

These are the principal cautions, which readily offer themselves unto me, and
which I recommend to all young Travelers: from these they may expect much
security and benefit; Yet, since we first learn to swim with Corks and
Bladders, And it seems, too unsafe, to trust so unfixed an age, only to its own
conduct, methinks a provident Father should not easily be drawn to venture his
Son abroad, without a discreet Tutor or Governor, who is so needful to supply
the Authority of a Parent, and the familiarity and assistance of a friend, that
the best that can be found, is to be purchased at any Rates; I will therefore
briefly describe, what such a Governor, either is, or should be; some
qualities and conditions in him are absolutely necessary, others very expedient.

Necessary is sobriety of life and manners, to give his Pupil none, but good
example, which will add vigor to all his Counsels and reproofs; Prudence, to
sit like a wary Pylot at the Helm, and foresee inconveniences, before they
fall; Urbanity and gentleness of speech and behavior, to be the ha^binger of
persuasion; for counsels roughly given, are received with prejudice. And
lastly, Gravity to preserve and redeem (if need be) both his Person and Office
from contempt or neglect; very expedient is abundance of learning, especially
humane, that, daily insinuating the best notions, by way of discourse, his
conversation may at once unite the pleasure of entertainment, with the benefit
of an Academy; An Age not superannuated, nor much unequal to that of his Pupil,
lest it deprive him of that diligence, or complaisance, which belongs to his
Office; Decent and manly behavior, because his Scholar will be apt to imitate
him; To have traveled himself before, That he may instruct his Pupil from his
own experience, And being skilful in Languages, supply his defects.

To traveling, especially so attended, belongs a plentiful and honorable
allowance of expense, without which, we do but travel on foot, and in Quirpo.
Indeed, too much expense is the Mother of idleness, vanity, and folly; But
discreet plenty should be afforded to every one that pretends to travel for his
advantage, that he may keep pace with Gentlemen, and men of parts, may be in an
Equipage, capable of their acquaintance and civilities and not confined to
Chamber Garnie, or a poor Pe^sion, where he shall probably converse with none,
but persons ignorant of good manners, and of all things which a Traveller
should be most ambitious to know or learn; For young men are supposed to
travel, not that they may save money, but gain knowledge; If they be sent forth
without competent maintenance, This is not to travel, but shift, which they
would better do in their own Country, than in foreign parts; where their hands
are bound, and their tongues tied, having neither language nor credit to help
themselves. Money is to Travelers, as Wings to Birds, they have no other
friend, or passe-port, nothing else that can recommend or address them to
society; for they must buy their acquiantance, almost, as they do that which
they eat or wear, and by discreet prodigality, woe acceptance, since they are
not welcome upon ordinary terms, And whosoever lodges a stranger, makes account
he has a booty, wherein, though the wary and prudent frustrate their
expectation, yet they cannot prevent their hopes, nor alter their prejudices.

Thus furnished and qualified, young men may, indeed, travel the more safely,
perhaps profitably; otherwise to send them abroad, at least without many of
these furtherances and cautions, is to employ them upon a very hazardous, but
unprofi^able adventure, and too much resembles the exposing of Infants, to be
nursed, like Romulus, by Wolves and Bears.

IX. Of Religious Fear.
HOw little do they understand the nature of true Piety, that cannot
distinguish the terrors of Sinful guilt, from the just apprehensions of a
Religious soul, but look upon fear, as the fatal Omen of an evil conscience*
which is the only symptom of spiritual life? The Surgeon having no other
proof, that the cure is not desperate, then quickness of sense.

There is a confidence, grounded upon the precipitated admission of those
things for certain truths* the soundness whereof we are afraid to examine:
Happy are they, that seasonably discover the rottenness of such foundations,
and apply themselves to lay sure ones. There is a faith, more d^bious then the
Sect of the Scepticks, It will not believe its senses, nor the Demonstrations
of the Mathematics; Experience gives it small satisfaction, because it as much
suspects the experiment, as the thing experimented: Such an uncertainty of
Med^ums, such an Imperfection of Organs it imagines, that every Object seems to
it a delusion. It self least of all it trusts, knowing what an impostor dwells
in its own breast: And these cautions work so powerfully, that they render it
indefatigable in the pursuit of happiness. So that this fear, (though sometimes
it may seem to fight with its own shadow) is a safe and fruitful fear,
recompensing the Anxieties of a moment, with eternal security.

But say some* We ought to rest only upon the love of God; We, that are Elect
and redeemed Fear we leave for Reprobates, who having no sense of Gods love to
them, receive no impressions, but those of terror, and are like sl^ves,
condemned, as it were, to the Galleys of Fear. An Argument, certainly full of
sweetness, If it did not tend wholly to undermine duty, and reduce the Power of
Religion into Airy Speculation; If it did not teach men to be so unmannerly at
their Devotions, that their Prayers prove commonly but contempts: should the
Heathen, (who profoundly adore the workmanship of their own hands,) see their
Irreverence, They would with some color be apt to confirm themselves in their
Idolatrous surmise, That it is better to have visible, than invisible Deities.

Fear is as a bridle to the Conscience; That soul which has no fear, is like a
Ship, that carries all it sails, but has no ballasts, If it could escape
over-setting in the Sea, yet it is sure to split upon the Rocks: We do not more
need the zeal of generous Love, then the caution of well advised Fear.

I acknowledge those Acts of Piety to be the most excellent, that proceed
purely from the Ingenuity of love; But these are certainly the least for
number, The greatest are such, as derive themselves from a principle, mixed of
necessity and choice. Love indeed makes the purest Holocausts, yet are not the
Sacrifices of innocent fear to be undervalued; I am persuaded, Fear has
resisted, as many, and as strong temptations, as Love.

But who is so Chemical* that he can extract, who so Metaphysical, that he can
abstract love from fear? Fear is as the Lees of Love, which it can never work
out in this life, nor will it ever be purged of those Crudities, till it
ferment into perfect Charity. Love is no bondage indeed, but a nonage it is,
and a filiation, which for the present, differs little from the condition of a
Servant.

A lively Emblem of this truth, we shall find in friendship; What a Critic is
it of words? What a searcher into thoughts? what a spy upon our actions, and
manners? How does every omission beget a kind of guilt? How are true friends
more sensible and fearful of unkindness then wounds, of giving then receiving?
And this is the Estate of all Virtuous or real Amity; A relation,
notwithstanding, which prima facie, seems to consist wholly in Confidence.

A yet nearer, and more sublime Idea of our Love to God, is natural Conscience,
That, by whose light and aid, Philosophers achieved such Miracles of Virtue
and self-conquest. What a Curb was this in the mouths of good Heathens? What a
restraint, far beyond any sense of Honor, or fear of punishment? How did it
suppress the passions, and smother the thoughts, that they durst not so much as
dream extravagantly? And yet what society to good men, so sweet as solitude? He
that is not clear in his own sight, where should he establish his Confidence,
where shall he contract a firm league? Howbeit this is certain, that true
Philosophy enjoynes every man, to be his own AEacus and Minos.

But that it may yet further appear, how love and fear are mixed and
interwoven, Every days experience proclaims it; For whence comes the Misers
love of his money, but from fear of poverty? wherein consists the Enjoyment of
health, but in security from sickness? And how could miserable life be so
precious, even to unfortunate men, If they did not rather fear the approach of
death, then love or relish those dregs of their lives?

Now therefore, since God is greater than our Consciences, more intimate than
any friend, more precious than life, What an awe must we have of his presence,
what a horror of his absence? What prostration to him can be accounted
superstition? what Zeal, Will Worship? what ambition can we entertain, but that
of humility? what emulation, but that of reverence? who can be morigerous
enough in his duty, who circumspect enough in his behavior, what repentance is
sufficient to pacify, what prayers to entreat, what addresses to adore him?

What signify those precepts of awe an reverence, so frequently repeated, as
well in the Gospel, as under the Law? The numerous Catalogues of such, as with
speedy vengeance have paid the forfeiture both of Impiety and saucy Devotion?
Those Characters of his wrath, with so much terror recorded, under the notions
of a jealous God, a consuming fire? What meant that transcendent Devotion of
primitive Christians, which some (I presume, that they may not be obliged to
imitate it) scarce commend? Their watchings and fastings? their self-revenge
and violence done even to nature? What do they all teach us? but this, That God
will be served with industrious fear, and not with lazy love?

But, if any yet seem to doubt, let him reflect upon himself, How he has
complied, not with the rigor of the Law, but the latitude of the Gospel; What
he has deserved at the hands of God, and what will certainly befall him,
without an Ocean of mercy, He shall then find far greater ground of distrust,
then of confidence, If not, yet let him not acquiesce in an insufficient
trial, but rather suspect his experience, then deny so great a truth.

X. Of Church Discipline.
HE that compares the present Maxims of some blind Z^lots, with the wisdom and
moderation of ancient Laws, will find it a strange Method, to root out
Superstition by decrying Devotion, To prevent Heresy, by introducing an
instability of Truths, and a bijearrery of Religions, to meet with
will worship, in the Abolition of all Duty, and to batter Babylon by erecting
Babel.

Certainly, our Age is not so regular, that it needs no restraint, Our manners
are not so exact, that they will admit no censures, Our piety has not so high
a Calenture, that it had need lose so much blood: God preserve our Religion
from a Lethargy, and a Consumption, we shall deal well enough with the
Pl^urisie.

Religion is like a curious Watch, soon out of frame, And Discipline is as the
case that preserves it; Religion is like the Apple of the eye, tender and
obnoxious to every dust, And Discipline is as the eyelid that shelters it.

I see not, why any should hate Discipline, but such as resolve to abuse their
liberty; There is no enemy to Laws, but the lawless, and such as think they
have more interest in their punishments, than their protections, or hope, that
in a general medley and Chaos of disorder, their evil manners will pass
unreproved, nay uncontroled, For what restraint is left for those sins, which
stand in awe, neither of justice nor shame?

Not of Justice, For how wickedly do many live, even to the reproach of that
holy faith which they profess, and yet either satisfy, or delude the Law? How
many sorts of Impieties are there, whereby Conscience is wasted? As legal, or
subtle oppressions, secret malice, neglect of all good Duties, and even
Apostasy it self, which yet de^ie public Justice, and can certainly fear
nothing, but a Court of Admonition to reprove, and brand their Enormities.
Justice cannot take hold of them, without such extreme rigours, as will in its
execution expose it to Arbitrary Power, and make it rather a snare to
Innocence, then restraints of mischief. Not of shame, For in a general
disorder, none is censured, And whilst every one is scandalous, no man is
scandalized.

The sarcedotal, and Apostolical Offices indeed, are ceased, But the
Evangelicall function still survives, Nor are those ordinary jurisdictions
lost, which the Apostles held, not as Apostles, but Bishops, whereof none ever
seemed to have so much need, as this latter and perilous Age, which is
prophetically entitled to such a Catalogue of enormous sins, as the simplicity
of primitive times was scarcely acquainted with: We are indeed to expect no
miracles, But shall we submit to no Government? because we cannot have Moses,
shall we admit of no Magistrates?

Long lay the primitive Christians under the grievous yoke of Heathenish
Tyranny, enjoying neither toleration, nor connivence; They had then no Laws,
but of their own admission, No Governors, but of their own permission; They
lived rather by Examples then Laws: It was then but necessary, there should be
extraordinary, to supply the defect of ordinary powers; Now that Christians are
our Magistrates, It may justly be expected, that what was planted by Miracles,
should be cherished by Laws: But no persecuted Church can be in so deplorable
a condition, as that which wants Apostles, and rejects Pastors.

The Church is not so limited to forms and methods, but that she has still a
latitude left her to act according to her Emergent necessities, and frame to
her self such constitutions, as self-preservation requires, and the example of
all societies will justify; I cannot see, why civil property should be secured
and empaled with the best Laws, that wisdom and experience can devise, And yet
Christ's Vineyard should be left without a hedge, The Army of Martyrs like
disbanded Troops, and Christians like a multitude of people, that has entered
into no society.

B^t perhaps the Magistrate is jealous of his Sovereignty, And fears, lest the
spiritual jurisdiction should reign in men's hearts, to the supplanting of
secular O^edience; I confess, this fear is not wholly void of color, yet is it
not a just fear; For Church Discipline is in it self so innocent and passive,
that it seems too wise a Providence, wholly to deprive the Church of spiritual
Arms, lest she should usurp temporal.

Truly, as the Civil Sword protects the Church, so again, the Church being
armed with convenient Discipline, may add much force and vigor to the Civil
Powers, and even protect its own Protector; By planting in men's hearts the awe
of Religion, which is the main pill^r of obedience; By advancing Virtue in
those free habits which exceed mere D^ties, and prevent Justice with charity;
By weeding out such errors, as humane Authority would have much ado to pluck
up, And checking those vices in their source, the course of whose torrent,
Laws are not able to oppose.

We admit indeed of a moderate sway, in matters purely Ecclesiastical, But we
do not embrace their violent Coertions, that would seem to engrose all truth,
and make it Heresy to doubt, where they define; That would ^ain save Christ
his pains in propagating or defending the Gospel. The true Church deals with
shame, not with Tortures, with Censures, not with Gibbets; The largest Power
she pretends, is to sequester from her Communion; Now, if Schismatics will
allow themselves the Power of separating, when they please, why should they
repine, if she banish from her society* such as even judge themselves unworthy
of it? Wine will naturally sever it self from its lees.

M^thinks, They of all men, should not except against this gentle severity, who
by not submitting to her Authority, seal their own banishment, It being a
M^xim, to which, I pre^ume, none of them will dissent; That such as withdraw
obedience, renounce protection; If therefore they desired her Communion, they
should not so harden themselves against her just and wholesome Decrees.

Wholesome Decrees, I call all such, as being either warranted, or not forbidden
in Scripture, tend either to the advancement of Piety, the sole end of our
Creation, or to the increase of Charity, the band of Perfection; or to the
Establishment of Peace and Unity, without which, neither Charity, nor Piety can
long subsist.

XI. Of Coelibacy, or single Life.
CAElibacy is a state of Abstinence, both from the unlawful and lawful Bed.
From Continency it differs, For that is not properly a state of life, but a
habit of the Mind; And again from Chastity, For that is not confined to
abstince, but ex^ends to lawful and regular Use.

An Angelical Estate it is, And seems to share in honor with Martyrdom, For it
bids defiance to Lust, It plucks up Avarice and Ambition, by the Root; It is
not content to obey the Commands of the Gospel, but pursues even its Counsels
and intimations, And that it may not miss of happiness, aims at Eminency.

There is not a greater testimony of Pious Prudence^ ^For, whereas most men, by
giving Hostages to the World, create to themselves such difficulties, that they
must needs either fall dangerously, or stand doubtfully, The single man is like
a Ship, which having no charge, but its ballast, sails swiftly, and securely,
in those Seas, where stronger Vess^ls, that are full fraught, hazard to founder
and overset.

The Ancients esteemed no greater hinderance of heroic achievements then
Marriage, They thought, he could not serve his Country, as he ought, that must
likewise serve a Family; but would always float betwixt Virtue and Nature, and
apply himself to public Interest, but by halves; Hence it was thought a
Qu^stion worthy the Roman Senate, Whether a Proconsul, going to the Government
of his Province, should be permitted to carry his Wife with him.

Howbeit, All cannot receive this Doctrine, only such, as have received from
above the Power of receiving it: For Coelibacy suits with none but excellent
Minds; such as compass it with violence, and invade it ^^th the rashness of
their Vows, foil an^ ensnare themselves.

But far more pernicious is that licentious error, or rather practice, that
opposes Coelibacy only to Wedlock, allowing it the latitude of using any, but
lawful freedom.

This is at once to frustrate and cancel both Coelibacy and Matrimony, To
supplant the Remedy, and cherish the disease* It resembles the checking of a
River, in its proper Chanel, to make a deluge, in the bordering Plains.

But let not our Age, (whose glory it is, to fight against Religion, with her
own Arms) mistake this Argument, for a kind of universal dispensation; It is
not easy ^n^eed, yet possible; It is not necessary, yet very profitable; It is
but a help to devotion, yet helps would not be slighted, where all is but too
little, and we can never be sure enough. No man is excused without trial,
Neither can he answer it, to Virtue or Conscience, that might probably have
obtained, if he had not neglected it.

B^t what talk I of helps to Devotion, or Perfection in Virtue? A Mediocrity
will serve turn, A discreet Religion that can cut the thread, and just turn the
s^ales; No plucking out of eyes, I beseech you, no cutting off of hands, but a
method of practical Divinity, as short and easy, as flesh and blood can
contrive; And good reason, For then at least, we are not in danger of
will worship, the hideous bugbear of so devou^ and Orthodox an Age, as our^.

XII. Of Duties Matrimonial, and Conjugall Love.
HAving briefly treated of single Life, It remains now to take a survey of
Conjugall. The first concerns few, and those esteemed but a kind of Anchorites,
and looked upon as the Schismatics of humane Society; The second is of a
general extent, And whatsoever is said upon that subject, seems to touch
Mankind: Give me leave therefore to offer somewhat by way of Essay only
(without Argument or reproof) in relation to Duties, so vast and public as
those of Matrimony; And let not any marvail, That being neither in Act, nor
Contemplation, as yet a Husband, I am so busy to thrust my self into the
Charge, and instruct the married; For I conceive, That as a third Party,
uninteressed, I were the fitter, if need required, to interpose; However, since
I undertake to state no Controversies, but deliver Truths, generally received,
and favorable alike to both sides, My forwardness in this kind, if it deserve
no commendation, can procure no just offense.

The Duties then betwixt man and wife are considered, as common to both, or
peculiar and proper to either: common to both, And so they owe reciprocally,
each to the other;

1 To make their Union an Act of prudent choice, not of chance, fondness, or
mere Avarice; For it is no wonder that should miscarry, which was misconceived,
Or that bitterness should be in the event, where folly was in the Design.

2 Communication of Virtuous knowledge, and spiritual Commerce. We cannot but
desire to promote the happiness of those we love, And that Passion should be so
much the more fervent, by how much its end is more excellent; wherefore such as
delight in each others welfare here on earth, cannot but far more earnestly
covet to meet in Heaven.

3 Mutual Fidelity; For falsehood of affection, dissolves the Bond of Matrimony,
And those that transgress the limits of lawful love, are already, before God,
in a State of nullity; We may say of them, like St. Paul, upon another account,
They have apostated from the faith, and are worse then Infidels.

4 Quiet Conversation and complianc^, without public jarrs, or secret grudges;
If any discords happen, yet they ought to be little and short, that by a sweet
and ingenuous return of friendship, they may rather quicken, then discompose
the Harmony*

5 Communion and Constancy, in good and evil Fortunes; To joy and sorrow,
thrive and wither, live and die together, since they are involved in each
others sufferings, and have espoused, not persons only, but Conditions, even
Afflictions and Infirmities.

6 An entire affection to, and care of their common issue, whereby Conjugall
love is increased and intended, like reflected heat; Indeed, what greater
re-enforcement of affection can there be? since faithful friends despair in
any thing so lively to express or testify their love and respect to deceased
Parents, as in the endearment of their surviving Children.

Peculiar Duties are either of ^he Man to his Wife, or the Woman to her
Hus^band: The Husband owes his Wife.

1 By his freedom and Complaisance in her society, as much, as in him lies, to
gratify her just and kind expectations, improve the comforts of her life, and
sweeten her solitudes, lest she have cause to think her self in the condition
of a Widow, even whilst she is married; For since, whilst she was free, and
might have refused, her love to his Person, bribed or swayed her, to submit to
his yoke, He were very ungrateful to neglect her that chose him; If elective
Princes oppress, they have no excuse, since they violate not only the Rights,
but even the good will of their Electours.

2 Tend^rness to her errors, and a kind of equal jurisdiction, not assuming
the Authority of a censoriou^ Paedagogue, not p^tting her to the wrack of
observancy, not expecting so much regard, as discreet Wives, of their own
accord allow.

3 Confidence in her Virtue, and honest freedom in her Actions and behavior;
For jealousy is like a perpetual alarm, Herein most unjust, That it bind^ its
Criminal to prove the Negative, And arraigns her for a Crime, whereof, being
once charged, she can never purge her self.

4 Communication of Counsels and secrets, so far at least, as will consist with
Justice to others, and by his own Prudence; For he that locks up his bosom from
his Wife, especially in matters of Common Interest, questions her fidelity, or,
at best, condemns her discretion.

5 An Equal use of temporal Blessings; Indeed a Wife is not like a Steward, or
Receiver, Neither ought any Action of Account to lie against her, who sharing
with her Husband in Wealth and Poverty, may not be presumed prodigal of her own
Interest, and improvident for her Children.

6 A sober and careful Managery of his Estate, without sinful imbezelling, or
sloathful impayring that Weal^h, which is but half his own; For what delight
can there be in a declining fortune? What feeming fondness can repair suc^ a
real injury? The Wife may well pity or indulge, but cannot truly affect a
Husband, from whose Luxury, she apprehends, or feels her own ruin; let him
pretend what love he will, if she do no^ distrust, she has too much cause to
disdain it. The Wife ows her Husband,

1 Serenity of undoubted Virtue, able of it self to prevent suspicion, or
confute jealousy; And this indeed is rather presumed, then prescribed, ^ince
he that examines the Chastity of Women, ^mpeaches it, And has already
strangled their Innocence, before he have proved their Guilt.

2 Singular Modesty, and simplicity of behavior, as the necessary Handmaid of
honor: For though, unchastity be the fouler sin, against God and her self, Yet
the scandal of Impudence i^ far the greater wrong to her Husband.

3 Sincere Love and endearement, the perfection of Matrimonial union; This
would tame the roughest Satyr, and molli^ie the fiercest Scythian, This would
reclaim the most dissolute, and wean the most extravagant; Where it prevails
not, it is a sign there remains no trace of Virtue, or tincture of Ingenuity
in that soul; In all traverses of fortun^, or distempers of mind, this will
teach her Husband, to court his ease and relief in her Company, and retire to
her, as to a Sanctuary; No kindness will he think worthy of her kindness, No
return equal to her merits; She shall reign in his affections, as a perpetual
Mistress.

4 If not a Confidence in his Prudence, Yet in most cases a submission to his
Judgment, not disputing his Authority, nor f^rcing him to assert it; For such
Controversies are ever unseasonably moved, The power of Wives consisting in the
generous love of their Husbands, who, if they be not barbarous, will even
strain Compliance with them, And preventing their reasonable desires, will of
their own Accord, know, That to insult over their Wives, is to unman themselves.

5 Discretion, if need be, to keep secrets; That by her Imbecility, she force
not her Husband, to the unhappy choice of unkind reservedness, or indiscreet
confidence, of standing in her behalf upon his Guard, or betraying his own
affairs and prudence.

And lastly, Frugality; whereby her Hu^band shall find, that to trust her
liberally, is his best and most honorable thrift, And being encouraged by her
approved Mesnage, securely refer his domestic Affairs to her Charge and
Government.

XIII. Of Flattery.
I Have always pitied the misfortune of the great and beautiful, whom either
the fondness of Custom, the treachery of others, or their own imbecility, has
rendered so obnoxious to cheap and Mercenary Tongues, that they seldom hear
tr^th form any but their Confessors; It seems, indeed, a kind of homage to
their Quality and S^xe; But the friendship of it resembles his favor that is
strangled in silk.

Yet so sensual a Quality is Pride, that it had rather be smoothered in a
Feather-B^d, then accept of hard Lodging, which would hurt its tender Limbs; It
refus^s nothing that is pleasant, But the bitte^ Potion will not down, The
Palate disgusts it, the Stomach loathes it, and the Belly fears griping; Indeed,
the manners of great Men are commonly so proud and ulcerate, that they will not
endure the Probe, Their actions are like that virulent scab, which they call
the Noli me tangere.

Truth agrees with none but the Innocent, And Reproof complies only with those,
whose lives, (if they be not bl^meless) yet are not ripe and rank with
scandal: They fear not the Censures of others, that are Catoes to themselves,
And such have great reason to slight the Attestations of foreign applause, as
have the satisfaction of a Witness without exception within them. The Birth of
Flattery bears date from the Fall of Adam, It is our nakedness, which this
officious Vice would seem to hide with its charitable Fig Leaves; They are the
wrinkles of ou^ withered beauty, which require this sedulous Handmaid to help
us lay on the fucus: When Women began to paint, Men were encouraged to cajole,
And ever since Greatness has declined to look day in the face, appearing only,
like Masquer^ in twilight, Copper-lace has been in fashion; Whils^ Ladies
were vertuou^, plain-dealing was not rejected, as barbarous, And whilst Princes
were upright, honest freedom was not proscribed as seditious; Parasites prove,
of late, as necess^ry to them, as Cooks, their sins seeming to be but dry
Venison, without the sauce of the Court.

And as gnats ever swarm in unwholsom Airs, so through the corruption of the
times, are sycophants spawn^d and multiplied among us; Nay, They are become so
busy and familiar, that the Traveller can scarce keep them out of his eyes; No
Virtue or sagacity is free from their attempts, For like the Wolves in Germany,
by daily preying upon Carcasses, they come at last to venture upon living men,
And have learned of Satan, still to tempt, though with little hope of succes^.

They find, no question, That, as we say of Towns and Forts, There is none,
which may not be either won by Assault, or taken by Approach, or reduced by
Famine; so all men prove either soluble or malleable to flattery; That not only
Princes may be soothed in their Titles, Ladies in their Features, and Soldiers
in their Exploits, But Philosophers in their goo^ly B^ards, Friars in their
meritorious Cowles, and Prelates in their Reverend Miter^.

It is true, That one address does not ^it them all; For, neither do we bait
Salmons as we do Gudgeo^s, nor hunt the politic Fox, like the nimble Stagge;
some can swallow a lump of downright p^ayse, (which (as we say of hard and
dri^ Cheese) would choke the very Dawes) without mincing or chewing; Others
will not endure to be courted in broad Scotch, nor scarce in good old British,
Yet they cannot resist the Charms of Italian; For others, Language will not
suffice, without the help of Arts and Sciences, The figures of Rhetoric, the
gravity of Ethics, the subtilty of the Schools, and Authority even of the
Gospel, to serve them like Henry the first of France, reported to be poisoned
with consecrated Wine.

Indeed Flattery is no Profession for the unlearned, Novices must not think to
practice upon this Scene, nor Asses to tune this Harp; For gross commendation
is like Sugar unrefined, fitter for Clysters, than Sawces, And loud Panegyricks
are always either despised, or susp^cted; Tiberius, as he feared plaindealing,
so he hated broad flattery, And when Dolabella moved, That he might be
received in triumph, at his return from Campania, deeply resented the
bitterness of the scoff; So jealous are the guilty, And so difficult it is to
flatter those, that censure themselves.

Sycophants therefore, if they would not run the hazard of infamous discovery,
must understand not only Languages and Arts, but Passions, Prejudices, and (as
they speak at Court) blind sides, (in one word) Persons; (A precious and pious
Quality indeed, that diverts us from contemplating and lamenting our own foul
sins, to study and serve the execrable Vices of other men) They will not
therefore content themselves with specificial knowledge, but descend to
individu^ms, They pry, and seek o^t the Vain, to sooth them, The Ulcers of
Discontent, to rub and exasperate them, The Coals of Faction, to blow them, The
greedy and Covetous, to tempt and feed them, The Ambitious, to inflame them;
They find compliance for the humorous and Froward, Faith for Travelers,
Prostration for Insolency, and a fools Paradise for Self-love; They must know
how to stalk with the glory and confidence of Cethegus, the phlegm of Lentulus,
the pedigree of Cornelius, the reproach of Autronius, and the necessities of
Pis^; For I take Flattery not to be that common and harmless faculty of good
Language and plausible address, But a Diabolical A^t of holding Intelligence
with natural corruption, and accomodating it self to our Vices, whatsoever they
be.

Certainly, as it is said of com^on liars, That they had need have vast
memories; so much more may we affirm of the busy Flatterer, That he deserves
not only a peircing wit, a demure carriage, and a tongue that never stammers,
But brows of brass, and cheeks that have forgotten to blush; The temper of a
Sto^ck, The patience of a Mule, The feet of a fawning Spagnel, and knees of an
humble Camel, The Religion of a mere Politic, and no more soul, than a bare
Vegetable.

XIV. Of Beauty.
I Am not ravished with natural Vermilion, so easily counterfeited by Art, or
imitated by Artists; Yet neither am I so severe a Stoic, as wholly to contemn
it, Methinks, as our unadvised Philosophers, laboring, with their profound
exorcismes, to cast out the fear of death, rather than augment its terrors; so
some men, by decrying beauty, with pedantick gravity, enhance its Reputation,
or increase their appetites, whose ^ick palats are apt to long for M^shrooms,
and other meats, forbidden them by the Physician.

With some men, indeed, Beauty has the force of Witchcraft, They are
transported with it, as if they had renounced their Reason. Many emin^nt
person^, (especially such as professed Arms,) have been servilely addicted to
it, not disdaining, or forbearing to lay their honors and interests at its
feet, Thus, Vasques a prudent Spaniard, and great Captain, deferred the assault
of Leyden, after he had by battery, and other pressures, in a tedious siege,
rendered it almost incapable of further defense, purely at the instance of a
Mistress, native of that Town, And so gave his active enemy time and
opportunity to relieve it, whereby his M^sters affairs in those Provinces, were
infinitely prejudiced, if not ruined, choosing rather, to incur the Censure of
the severest Majesty, than the displeasure of unkind Beauty; Thus, the great
Crequi often times would not stick to boast, That he was, indeed, a Gentleman, by
the service of his Prince, but a Knight, by that of Ladies; But what example
can parallel that of Anthony* who apparently sacrifised the Empire of the
world, to the entertainment of his Cleopatra.

Truly, I am astonished, and much scandalized at that solemn, yet silly
pageantry, which they call the courting of the Dames; It much resembles their
more commendable employment, that endeavor to charm the Bees with the harmony
of a Kettle, and has as much of superstition, as the Christening and hallowing
of Steeples and Bells; It seems to be too much in jest, to be indeed in
earnest, And, if those that so much profes^ it, do not buffoone, we are to
pity their more innocent, and less affected folly; Charity bids us hope, that
it is only the mist of Knight-Errandry, whose fantastic blindness is apt to
mistake Wind-mills, for Enchanted forts.

Wisdom easily discovers the imbecility of this passion, which renders the
lives and actions of men, not at all more serious, and but little, more
ingen^ous then a Puppet-play; Yet he is two blind, that sees not a kind of
Excellency, or finds not real and solid Charms in Beauty, especially where it
is seconded with lovely Modesty, and true Honor; For then it becoms, as it
were the Roman Eagle, and imperial banner of Virtue; since where they are
united, they multiply, like Ciphers added to Figure^.

The discourse of beauty points perpendicularly at Women, who have so engrossed
its perfection, that they brook not to hear of any Rival, except the Angels; so
as to slight beauty, is in effect to slight Women, who being wholly excused,
and partly excluded from heroic Actions, yet triumph in their passive
Excellencies, whereby, if they do not equal, yet they parallel the brave^t men;
In passive excellencies, indeed, yet not merely passive; For what Trophies are
more memorable than Beauties?

Certainly, It was not given them in vain; It is the Royal stamp and
impression, for which, at least, they are valued, as excellent Medalls; with
this badge of their order, as with a religious habit, they travel every where,
like secure Pilgrims, And Violence offered them, is like breach of the Law of
Nations; Nay, it not only preserves them from injuries and neglects, but
recommends them to all the advantages and prerogatives of life; And therefore
wi^h much reason, they are of nothing so impatient, as that their beauty should
be once questioned; It is as high a Treason, as to scan the title of a
Sovereign, As bold an Heresy, as to dispute the infallibility of the Pope.

But men have also their beauties, As a generous Mine, A face promising
somewhat more than vulgar, proper Taille, and C^urtly Gesture; These are
beauties indeed, but not beauty which is peculiar to Women, and consists rather
in delicacy, then solidity; in finenesse then substance.

The Beauty of men is their honor, not that of Pomp and titles, but real
worth, The Uniformity of their lives, and symmetry of their Actions, In one
word, the Idea of their Virtues, great Excellencies indeed, if they were not
apter than those of Women, to be corrupted with Flattery, blasted with
Arrogance, and counterfeited with Craft.

XV. Of Craf^.
CRaft is a kind of honorable knavery, Or the art of halting betwixt honesty
and wisdom, to each of which, it highly pretends, but is in both, equally lame
and defective; For it has nothing stable or solid, It stands upon no Basis, It
owns no Principles, all its motions are excentrick, and it is but a trick of
shifting and living extempore, like those that are put to seek their fortunes.

True Prudence, whose practice is regular, and whose end is Virtue, is scarce
to be found; and therefore this Courtly imposture cannot but pass current, in
so corrupt an age as ours, when the highest aim of men's actions is to save
their Credits, and their best Religion, to sin demurely; When no man thinks
himself guilty, till he be apprehended, Nor imagines any offense, but where he
must do penance. Who is he, that dares call the crafty man knave? None I
presume, but himself; Others indeed may shrewdly suspect, But it is no less
charity to believe, then prudence to speak warily, They are, I hope, no
Recusants that go to Church, no Bastards, that were born in Marriage.

But alas, This is as a secret Vermin, knawing the very root of Honesty, And
is such Leven in all our actions, as turn^ the sweetest milk, into the
soureness of a Rennet, It poisons virtue at the spring head, by infusing that
Italian Maxim, That all Heroic habits have their birth from D^sign, and their
nourishment from Ambition.

This is the disguise, that renders those Actions plausible, which if naked and
uncouched, would not be patdonable, This is the dress, which favors
deformity, and the boot which hides the crookedness of the Leg; For whilst
Hypocrisy p^lliates sin, Craft shelter^ Hypocrisy, which would otherwise be
more obnoxious, then sin it self, since wicked men live as cowardly, as the
wild Irish are said to make war, And would every day be cut in pieces, if
they had not the retreat of a Bogge.

This is that Mock-Authority, which gives a counterfeit passe-port to all our
Vices, And affords a safety to guilt, beyond the security of the innocent;
which by its false marches, and continual traverses, leads the Laws a Dance,
and even harasses the Magistrate, with the frequency of its Alarms, The only
good it has, is this, That it proclaims the necessity of a Resurrection, when
simplicity shall triumph over Craft.

Truly, Nothing does so fatally evidence the declining of our Manners, as to
see Craft in such Reputation, being exalted with all the Panegyricks due to
wisdom; As if we were to be trained up to Virtue, like the Lacedaemonian
Children to the Wars, In whom the dexterity of Stealing, and impudence of
Lying were held presages of heroic Spirits; Craft, which dares not look
others, nor its own Conscience, in the face, which fears the light, and hates
the dark, is become the currentest Coin in our Mints.

Methinks, Though commonly it pass without detection, yet where it is once
unmasked, it should appear so much the more ugly; Though it be too wise to
incur mischief* yet shame should lite upon it, If it escape the halter, it
should get a brand in the shoulder, And, if it be permitted to live, should,
with Perkin Warbeck, be stripped of its Majesty, and confined to the Kitchen; The
more secure it is, the more hateful it should be, And, like the Arts of
administering Poison, be accounted the treason of society; For thus ingratitude,
whilst it escapes the Law, is stigmatized with reproach, equal to the greatest
of Felonies.

Yet, let it pass, It may shift for a while, But for the most part, it owes an
account, even in this life; Often times its imbecility betrays it, But seldom
it outlives the countermine of a greater subtilty than its own; In the mean
time, let it enjoy its self-hatred, and delight (if it can) in those
perplexities and terrors, wherewith it is perpetually alarmed; whilst, to
prevent discoveries, All its behavior is no better then palliation, Its whole
life is but one continued Apology.

O how miserably is it entangled, that it can scarce turn honest, if it would*
In other, even the greatest enormities, it is sufficient, frankly, and
penitently to confess, and forsake them; But Craft, beginning then only to be a
Crime, when it is discovered, cannot reform its Vice, without abandoning it
self to reproach and danger: Wherefore it is obliged, as it were, by the Law of
Nature, in its own defense, to multiply falshood^, wherein it becoms, at last
so bold, that it proves a prey to Civil Laws, and a lively Monument of Divine
Justice, which triumphs in nothing more, than in bringing the sins of the
Cabinet, to the punishments of the Scaffold.

XVI. Of Kindness, Courtesy, and Civility.
IT is strange to observe, How these three Ornaments of Conversation, (which
indeed, have some common lineaments of resemblance, though no perfect likeness)
are in vulgar speech, (the bane of propriety) wont to be confounded; But it is
yet stranger to consider, how they are apt (at least some of them) to pass for
that Angelical habit of friendship, Amongst themselves, they are easily
distinguished, Betwixt them and it, there is no proportion.

Amongst themselves, Criticisme will show us, That they differ in their Genus
and Properties; For kindness must be referred to Indoles, Courtesy to
Facultas, Civility to Aptitudo, The first, Innata, the second Induta, the third
Imbuta, In their Objects, For the proper Object^ of kindness, are our natural
relations and near alliances, of Courtesy, our Acquaintance, especially
Infer^ors, of Civility, strangers. In their Subjects, For that of Kindness is
the thoughts, that of Courtesy the speeches, and that of Civility the
Addresse^. And, lastly, in their Ends and Effects, For Kindnes^ tends to beget
Confidence, Courtesi^ Obligation, and Civility Respect. As for friendship, they
do not differ from it, but are subordinate to it, Nay, at its appearance, they
Vanish like little Stars at Daybreak. In the Infusion, and tincture, they are
there, but no^ in the gros^ substance, For Friendship, though i^ seems to be a
sacred Compound of all Virtues and Graces, Yet is it without any mixture, or
loss of its entireness and simplicity.

However, In our dregs of times, which have, in effect, left us only the name
and husk of Friendship, these are esteemed great Amities, And are, I fear, the
best we have; Indeed, we could, by no means want them, for they serve turn in
default of better ^lment, to patch up a kind of Society, and entertain Commerce.

Kindness is a sweet familiar of life, Most necessary, even to uphold the
fabric of the World, for the Communication of earthly Comforts, and mutual
aid, depend upon it; Without it, we are but a kind of serpents stinging or
hissing at each other; It is the harbinger of Familiarity, and likeliest to
prove the seed of Friendship.

Courtesy is a faculty of great advan^ag^, And a Commodity of as nimble Vent,
as any in the shop; It bespeaks Acceptance, it bribes Good will, and prevails,
beyond Importunity. It renders our Equals, Inferiors, Our servants, Vassals;
Falsehood uses it, as harlots do Vermilion, for it has a singular Gloss; But
even such disguises are but needful, where faces are so rough-hewen* For take
off the Mask, and their appears a General difformity, a ceasing o^
hospitality, an interfering in all our Actions and discourses.

What shall I say of Civility? It distinguishes us from the Wildest of Will
Beasts, For nothing is so salvage, as un^civil men; Pity it is, That reason
should be cast away upon them; Let them rather live, like Satyrs, in the Vast
Woods and deserts, and feed like Swin, Each in his own trough: It is wonder,
Mankind does not spue, or work them out, as Wine does lees and dregs; For,
where Civility is not, there is Barbarism, and a Privation of all that is
moral.

XVII. Of Youth and Old Age.
Whatever prejudice the foolish and sensual-conceive of Old Age, it is the
Academy of Wisdom, the Diadem of life, the Porch of Immortality.

Youth is composed of Vanity and Fren^y, Weak in Judgment, yet impatient of
Counsel, Obnoxious to censure, yet incapable of reproof; Studious of subtle
Arts, before solid Knowledge; Greedy rather of eloquence, then Wisdom; Busied
with Circular imaginations, Prostitute to Pleasure: Justice it measures by
Power, and resolves, That whatsoever it can do, it may; Its bounty consists in
Profuseness, rather casting away, then conferring benefits; Even its Valor i^
more furious then resolute, so that it charges boldly, but is lost in retreats;
Indeed, what true Virtue can it have, that knows no Moderation?

Young men may well be prompt and acute, For, by Reason of the heat and
Moy^uire wherein they a^ound, Imagination is strong in them; And in Memory they
most exc^ll, Whereby, they have means to supply their own imperfections, with
foreign knowledge; B^t their Experience is so narrow, and their Reason so
unfixed, that they cannot ye^ Arrive at Wisdom and Constancy, the fruits and
effects of Maturer Age.

Old men, perhaps, may be irresolute and so forfeit those. Opportunit^es o^
great Actions and Events, which Younger men would probably have improved, And
this, chiefly appears in the Profession of Arms, Wh^re, in regard fortune
presides, Bold and Vigorous Attempts are commonly favored, and caution may be
as prejudicial as rashnes^; Wherefore the Politics, indeed, prefer the
Chevalery of young Commanders, assisted by A^cient C^unsellors, before the
Prudence of Old Captains, though seconded by youthful Officers: yet let not
Youth too much triumph in this shadow of advantage; For even such gayety
proceeds, for the most part, from want of foresight, and ignorance of dangers,
whereas the Omissions of Old Age are but the Effects of deep Providence, and
Various experience, endeavoring to reduce all things to Reason or Rule, and
disdaining to leave ought to the blindness of mere Chance.

However, Admit this to be a defect Essential to Old Age, Yet it is supplied
with many exce^lent Virtues, which not only rescue it from Contempt, but
render, even its imperfections, Venerable.

It is, indeed, that recollected Estate of true Wisdom, wherein commonly we
begin to live, and from whence we may reasonably date the time of our being, as
Charles the Fifth was wont to reckon his Age, only from the day of his
Retreat. It is a seasonable interval of perfect leisure, wherein the soul,
being no longer biassed and diverted with present amusements, seriously
reflects upon things Past, and diligently prepares her self for things to come;
Till then, she was wholly laid aside, the Body kept her, as it were under
hatches, and she lived, but like slender Coals raked up in vast Embers. Now,
being delivered from her bondage, she appears in Equipage, like worthy
Citizens, recalled from banishment, to be invested with Supreme Authority. We
now begin to value others, and ourselves, not by sleight Appearances, but by
such intrinsecal habits as are only valuable* We have now learned to retire to
the Sanctuary within us, neither expecting good, nor fearing evil, from any
Creature but our selves. We now decline those Airy speculations, which are,
indeed, but the Itch of the Mind, And paring off the Excrescencies of
unfruitful knowledge, reduce all our Theory into Practice. What further can be
added to the just merits of Old Age, whose Actions are Uniform, and its
Passions regular, whose Virtues are perfect, and, even its errors secure. It
Understands clearly, Distinguishes rightly, Concludes, as it were, Infallibly,
and, (which Crown^ all) lives conformably?

Such indeed is Old Age, in upright and regenerate souls; B^t as general
Councils, where they reform not the Church, establish its corruptions, and
infect it with Canonical Heresy; so an Old sinner becomes incorrigible; His
Vices are Manners, and his Evil Customs, Nature. He sins untempted, like evil
Angels, and retains a Will, even beyond the power or Lust of Offending; He
needs no other mix^ure or Change of Elements, for he is already a Clod of the
Impurest Earth, rotten and sordid, beyond the stench of Sepulchers, or
putrefaction of Worms. Lastly, he remains the fatal Pyramide of Gods Justice;
who, because the sins of Mankind were ^ultiplyed, in Mercy, shortened our Days;
For, with God, it is most just, That, such as have hardened themselves, like
Pharaoh, should, like him, be hardened, And those, that forgate God, when they
were Young, should defy him, when they are Old.

XVIII. Of Honor.
IF we might fancy a Generation of Angels, who in propagating would lose
nothing of their Primitive Excellency, but continue their Purity in their race,
It were, indeed, no Vanity, to be proud of such a Pedigree: But, since men
entaile only their Lands, and not their Virtues, Since the children of Heroes,
degenerate, like Southern fruits transplanted into colder climates, Since (as
if the world decayed) Giants beget Dwarfs, I see not why Tantalus should any
longer vaunt himself the son of Jupiter.

Bu^, alas, not only the Chanel of honor is Muddy, the very fountain is
brackish; to assign reward and dignity only to merit, is indeed the proper
subject of a declamation, but it speaks rather Vtopian then good English.

Some rise by undermining the innocence, and betraying the confidence of
others, for the great are ever heaving, like Moales: some arrive at Honors by
serving the Pride and other irregular Passions of the Great, Or (which is much
like) by loathsome flattery, For flattery is Prides Prostitute. And some are as
mere Creatures of favor, as Flies of Sunshine, The very Cubbs of fortune, as
blind as their damme; For Sovereigns delight sometimes to coin such men for
Medals, as have no stamp of merit in themselves.

The most General, most sure, and perhaps most innocent means of invading
honor, is by sluggish purchase, and the infinite desert of money; No dignity
Secular or Sacred is ashamed to stoop to it; It creates Cardinals at Rome, it
dubbs Knights at Malta, Nay it admits even Senators at Venice; Of such honors
we may say, as some Gentlemen of their Perriwigs, or Ladies of their
Complexions, They are, indeed, their own, since they Paid for them.

How few are they, that purchase Honor by desert? And if any will endeavor it,
They must cut their way through the Rock, they must past the Pikes of Malice;
For the sons of favor prove indeed the Envy of many, But those of merit are an
eye-soar to all.

Wisely indeed, and Morally did the Sage Heathens decree, That the Passage to
the Temple of Honor, should be thorough that of Virtue; But this was only a
Philosophy Lecture, and a kind of Hieroglyphick.

To Conclude, The Honor of our times is but like the Honor of the Scene, And,
if duly examined, proves, at best to be but ancient wealth.

XIX. Of Learning.
When I consider, how true Learning improves every faculty of the Soul, how it
refines the Understanding, and reforms the Mind; In fine, how it makes almost
as vast a difference betwixt men and men, as betwixt Men and Animals* and yet
withal Observe, what slender homage is performed to the Gown, And what silly
advantages most men reap from their Studies; mine ears cannot but tingle at
that unhappy, yet true Proverb: Physicians get the wealth, and Lawyers the
Honor, whilst Philosophy walks in Quirpo.

Surely, It was otherwise of Old; When seven Cities bandied for the honor of
Homers nativity, When the Wisdom of Socrates was attested by Oracle, When
Philosophers were Princes Peers, at least their Co-adjutors and Suffragans,
substituted, like great Clerks, to supply the non-residence of Cardinals; When
the Consulship of Rome was the daily Guerdon of Eloquence.

But, indeed, the Cause of this difference is too apparent, such only were then
accounted Learned, as lived more learnedly then they spoke or dictated; And
those were thought illiterate, though never so prompt and subtle, whose halting
Practices betrayed the lameness of their Minds; Sophistry was not yet in
Credit, nor any of those Superficial Arts, which prove abortive of Wisdom, and
fruitful only of Ostentation; There were not many that had Confidence to usurp
a title so envious as Philosophy, such as then wore the Venerable Gown, having
purchased fame by degrees and Methods, and so attaind to Maturity, needed no
other Characters of Honor, then those that were written in their foreheads.

Whereas the Learned of our Age are so far from challenging reverence or true
applause, that they even fall into contempt, and are become the only persons
in Comoedies; They may well pretend to Learning, but their behavior proclaims
them strangers to liberal Science; Though their tougues speak Greek, yet their
manners savor of the Barbarian.

Much, I confess, they peruse, but indeed read little; Variety of imperfect
Notions rendering their Judgment a mere Chaos, and their Memories no better
then a kind of Alphabetical Ind^x; You would imagine them to have dwelt rather
in Caves then Colleges or Cities, For the Commonwealth has not more
unprofitable Members then they.

And yet, methinks, I could afford to r^cant, or at least qualify my
invectives; Certain it is, That no Age has more abounded with learned men,
then the Present, which by Gourmandizing books, is now Crop-sick of knowledge;
Those Arts and Sciences, which were almost like terra incognita to our
Ancestors, have been in latter times, exactly surveyed, and are described, as
it were, in Vulgar Mappes; Those Notions which were then locked up, like Jewels
in a few breasts, are now grown, as Common as the Elements; But, alas, Even
Moathes have eaten Folio's; It is one thing, I conceive, to have Learning, and
another to be Learned; All lay Claim to Art as Intercommoners, but few as
Proprietors.

Some select Persons, I know, there are, worthy the Noble Order, whose badge
they wear; But their handful is too much over-ballanced by multitudes of such,
as use the decency of the Long Robe, only to palliate their Nakedness, and
patronize their folly; In the mean time, they are promiscuously branded with
the Vulgar, which has Lea^n^d to call every little Mountebanck a Doctor. With
the Vulgar indeed, For with the Judicious, Diamonds do not so diff^r from
flints, nor Bat^ from Eagles, as men tru^ly Learned from Pedante.

XX. Of Peace.
AS Rest is the End of Natural, so is Peace of Civil Motions, Though, whilst
the former, proceeding from Necessary Agents, are commonly regular, The latter,
being governed by Voluntary, prove very Excentrick.

The Motion of N^tural Bodies is mostly from outward Causes, Whereby Philosophy
has so often miscarried of its perpetuity: Bodies Politic have a principle
wholly intrinsecal to them ( viz.) The restless spirits of men, The everlasting
mutinies of our Lusts.

And these Lusts are the Causes of War, both immediately, by dividing the souls
of men, and mediately, by provoking the Justice of God, to make lust its own
Executioner, So that the Only true foundation of Peace is Innocence and
Obedience; For why should he exp^ct peace with m^n, that is an O^tlaw to the
God of Peace?

But, methinks, I speak, as in Plato's Commonweal^h, P^blike Reformation is
indeed glorious, but difficult and dangerous in its misconceptions: For
Minerals inflame, and gentle Physic operates little; He had need be very
Eloquent that allays tumults with persuasion, Wisemen therefore study inward
Peace, as the only haven, that d^fies Shipwreck; seeing that the best they are
to expect from without, is but a kind of truce or Intermission, A short space,
for Champions, by consent, to take breath, Perhaps, no actual sickness, Yet a
crasie conftitution.

If any solid and durable Peace there can be, We are to expect it from the
Piety and prudence of Good Magistrate^, the Guardians of Public Peace, and
Tutelary Angels of Commonwealths, Their Justice must enliven, Their vigilance
preserve, Their Power and Authority vindicate it.

A just Magistrate, then, will content himself, with the just bounds of his
Prerogative, and lawful limits of his Empire: He will do the work of Peace even
(...) War, and p^^fer one Olive Branch before many Laurels. He will remember*
that great Oppressions not only cause Seditions, but seem almost to justify
them; and that mighty Conquerors commonly resemble such, as in swallowing, what
they digest not, are rather stuffed then nourished.

The Vigilant Prince will consider, That sucking Vices, fostered by his
connivence, will soon grow tall and National abuses; That Lurking practices,
unprevented, prove Open broils; And that a careless Monarch resembles a rich
Travellor, sleeping securely in the Company of Thieves.

The wise Emperor will value his Reputation, as his Scepter; He will rather
choose to reign by Lenity and Love, yet so as to have Aw in the reserve, Though
he never draw his sword, yet his hand will be always upon the hilts, That the
subtle and turbulent may despair to surprise him; For unarmed Powers are
already half deposed; But few will be so hardy, as once to attempt Authority,
seconded with Courage, and assisted with Counsel.

XXI. Of Conscience.
THe Crown of Jerusalem, though, indeed, it was but a phautastick Diadem, is
observed to have had more pretenders to it, than great and solid Empires;
scance any Prince, that did not assume the Title, that did not use its Arms to
fill his Scutcheon: Since none could possess, each resolved to challenge it, as
knowing, that therein he should not give jealousy to his Neighbors, nor stir
up any Rival. Truly, when I consider the throng of those, that entitle
themselves to Conscience, even such, as have scarce any color of Conquest or
alliance to it, I should greatly marvail, if I did not withal remember, how
easy and natural it is to claim, where there is scarce any true property, And
how fit she is to be every man's Prostitute, that is no man's Spouse.

That indeed is a cheerful Religion, which s^rves our temporal ends, which
Courts our Appetites, and whereof, we are, as it were, our own Carvers: Surely
it suits with the best policy, to comply with Conscience in appearance, that it
may bring us real advantages, to humor it in professions and formalities, that
it may serve us in the main. But who can away with Cynical Piety, with the
crabbed Doctrines of Self-denial, with such a Law, as enterferes with all that
is dearest to us, and is as cross to our projects and interests, as if our
enemies had invented it to countermine us?

Who would not be content with the King of Spain, to hold the Realm of Naples,
by the yearly tribute of four thousand Crowns, and a white Palfrey? Who so bad
a Catholic, that he will not come to Confession, where he is sure to purchase
plenary absolution? Who would not, with Lewis the 11th, carry an Agnus of Lead
in his Cap, under shelter whereof he may, when occasion requires, break his
promise to man, or Oath to God, without further disp^nsation, or satisfacation?

Alas,* How cheap is Conscience grown, amongst the Grandees of the World? They
all ask it Judas his Question, Quid mihi dabitis? What fruit may we expect from
thee? What advancement of our Affairs? What color for our unwarrantabl^
Actions? What Cloak for our Ambitions? Will it stalk to our Desig^es? Will it
make way, or give way to our Interests? Thus Piety is grown to be the greatest
intrigu^ of State, Any error or crime must be committed, rather than this mask
unveiled: There is nothing so politic as Conscience, if we may believe
History, especially that of these latter ^imes.

XXII. Of Frugality.
IT seems to be an Argument, alone sufficient to persuade thrift, that without
it, no man is rich or happy; For Luxury, as it tends to ruin at last, so, in
the mean time, it exposes to all the pressures of a declining Estate, and
interlards, as it were, Riot with Poverty, since he that has not a fortune
equal to his expense, is already in the condition of a poor man.

And this Argument, ab incommodo, has the greater force, in regard, nothing is
more familiar, then for men of Noble Blood, eminent abilities, active spirit^,
and aspiring thoughts, to endeavor somewhat worthy of themselves, wherein they
could not have failed, if they had not, by their own or Ancestors improvidence,
been as it were dismounted; For when they offer to soar, they find, that
though they have the courage of an Eagle, yet their wings are but like the
wings of a Batt; Which misfortune is most observable in Princes, whose
Ex-chequers being once emptied by profuse Gifts, and vain Pomp, not only their
laurels, but their Coronets, and even their Olive-branches wither, their
Authority is ham-strung, and of Princes, they soon become Pensioners.

But let us withal consider, That the Riotous are no better than Vermin, born
to consume and devour, Drones, which making no Honey themselves, eat up that
which the industry of the Bees has gathered; For though some will object, that
vast expense serves to quicken commerce, and with some equality distribute
wealth; Yet it were too bold a Paradox to maintain, That the Commonwealth has
need of Vice to support it.

Let us remember, that for a man to sacrifice his Estate to his present
Appetite, savours of the mere Epicure, and is a more then brutish improvidence,
That it has less excuse, then the profaneness of Esau, which would plead
extremity of hunger; Indeed, how can he be thought to contemplate eternity,
that neglects posterity, and looks not beyond an instant of time?

Certainly, There is much Philosophy, nay Divinity in true thrift; It is the
equiballance of the soul betwixt Lust and Avarice; For thrift is not only
consistent with, but near of kin to Liberality, preserving it both from vice
and misfortune; since it is seldom seen, That Families are ruined with
Hospitality, or Treasuries exhausted with Bounty.

When I consider all those works of Piety, Charity, and Magnificence, which
continue amongst us, as everlasting Monuments, more honorable than the
Trophies of Conquest; When I ask my self, who built our Churches? Who founded
our Hospitalls? Who endowed our Colleges? I easily answer, it was not the
dissolute spend, th^ift, who can enjoy nothing but what he consumes; It was not
the penurious niggard, who would, if it were possible, carry his Coffers with
him into another World; It was the honest Mesnager, whom God had blessed with
largeness of heart, capable of pious and generous designs, with abundance of
wisdom, to contrive, with amplitude of fortune, to accomplish the same.

The virtue of Frugality dwells not in the hand, but in the mind; Else we must
ascribe much Virtue to our Iron Chests; Parsimony therefore is a foul
imposture; For though it want not its pretense, The exorbitancies and mischiefs
of Luxury having furnished it with a long and decent Cloak, Yet surely it
proceeds but from that Atheistical wisdom which distrusting providence, would
prevent it; And is, at best, but the doughness of an abortive soul.

XXIII. Of Active, and Passive Valor.
THough Patience be, in our Age, accounted a Virtue, fon none but Eunuchs,
Women, and Stoics, Yet he that compares it with that vulgar valor, which the
world so highly extolls, shall find it far more estimable, more eligible:
Valor may be the heavier Iron, but Patience is the truer Steel*

Indeed the Valor of our times seems to be the most irregular of all the
Virtues, subject to much Intemperance, and Transportation, Very apt to
degenerate into Rashness and Insolency. Patience is a Quality composed of
Religion and Reason, Free from the Neighborhood of Vice.

Valor resembles the leaves and blossoms of the Tree, most agreeable, indeed
to the fight, but flourishing only in Summer; Patience is like the root or sap,
which though secret, and concealed to the eye, yet keeps it alive in Winter,
and preserves it from the injuries of Winds and Blasts.

Valor is so much seated in the Liver and Veins, Tha sometimes it appears to
have more of Complexion then Virtue. Patience dwells in the upper ^egion of the
soul, and has no Commerce with the blood or humors of the body.

Valor is exposed to many surprisals, and is observed to have its gayeties and
intermissions, It is not always at hand, nor always useful, For it rusts in
peace. But Patience is an Armory, always ready, always necessary, We have not
greater use of the Elements, than of it.

Alas! Who can fight against his destiny? Or what will it avail men to dare,
when they are called to Suffer? When we come to grapple with death, or close
with afflictions, more grievous than it, A dram of Patience is then worth an
ounce of Valor: Valor like a stone Wall is broken with obstinate resistance,
whilst Patience, like a Rampart of Mud, damps the violence by yielding.

Valor is a Virtue, that has cost the World dear, Mankind is thought to have
paid for it, more than it is worth; It carries, like Sylla, wrath and ruin in
its countenance, And no Comet has had so fatal an influence, upon humane
affairs, Witness the subversions of Governments, and Corruptions of manners,
which it daily and every where effects, introducing for Justice and Modesty,
Riot and Rapin, for the Arts and Learning of Greeks, the Ignorance and
Barbarism of Goths; These are the fruits of this tyranical Virtue, which
knows no end of booty and Conquest. Patience was never injurious to any, but
as it is happy to it self, so it is always innocent to others, and ambitious
of nothing but Martyrdom.

Yet, in regard we are fallen into those latter times, when he that wants a
sword, is advised to sell his Cloak, and buy one: Swords, I confess, are now
become as necessary as Laws, And we can no more want Valor, than Justice, For
how shall that protect others, which is not able to defend it self; Justly
therefore does the World do homage to a Virtue, which is at once both terrible,
and amiable, since from it we fear our Destruction, and to it we owe our
Protection; It oppresses indeed, and that sometimes heavily, But withal, it
rescues us from all Oppressions; save its own: Truly it has an excellent use;
But then like strong Minerals, it must be corrected and refined from its
Crudities; It must be steered by a better Pilot, For like fi^e and water, it is
safer to serve, then command.

My result and Conclusion is this, I esteem no Valor to that Christian
Fortitude, which had rather suffer the greatest injuries, then do the least;
And I reckon no Coward to the Impatient man, to whom nature was cruel at his
birth, and wisdom a Stepmother in his Education.

XXIV. Of Clemency.
CLemency is a generous Virtue, enclining Magistrates to pardon, where Laws
condemn; And herein it surpasses Equity, as much as that does Justice, For
Equity is but moderated Law, Clemency is free grace, Equity relieves against
rigor, Clemency remits where no Equity can relieve.

Now this Virtue in men, is parallel to one of the greatest Excellencies of the
Divine nature, For as God, when he relieves our wants, exercises his Mercy, so
does he, when he forgives o^r faults, his Clemency.

But, Clemency, as well as Justice, is fled to Heaven, And has scarce left her
Mantle behind; Only a kind of Rag, patched up with these three sordid and
rotten Ingredients, Fear, Policy, and Remissness.

Fear is like a secret conspirator, by whose unworthiness and treachery,
Justice is commonly surprised and disarmed, perhaps poisoned, or smoothered;
And yet, when Princes have not the courage to do Justice, but are sordidly
overawed by the Power, and Greatness of Offenders, This their Parasites are
wont to call Clemency.

Policy, in this sense, is as a corrup^ Judge, suborned to condemn, or a
Messenger of Death, to strangle the Laws unheard; And yet, whilst in order to
some State-end, of more seeming advantage than a forfeiture, Magistrates are
content to look, as it were, through their fingers, Even this Impostor must put
on the shape of an Angel.

Remissiness is as the Lethargy of Government; Howbeit* when the R^igns thereof
are so slack, that (contrary to the Excellent Doctrine of Stoics, Parci^ and
indulget sapiens, non ignoscit) not only criminous persons are indulged, bu^
even Crimes remitted, And that so slightly and ^requently, as it seems rather
a Compliance, than a Pardon, so that vices, as Weeds, are suffered to overtop
and choke the Laws, This loosnesse also usurps the honorable name of Clemency.

Whereas indeed true Clemency is distempered with no alarms, awed with no
duress, bribed with no end^, stupefied with no Opium, But being a free and wise
habit, has no Aim save Virtue, and is a^ void of design as Bounty.

Certainly, the practice of this Virtue was never more necessary, than in our
days, when Laws are become as dark and intricate, as the crimes and abuses
they would prevent or punish, As generally penal, as if all sins were equal,
And as if they were made, not with an intent that they should be duly executed,
but stand, as many of them do, only for bug-bears and scare-crowes, Yet withal
so numerous, that no memory can hope to retain, and indeed, scarce any
innocence to satisfy them. Magistrates therefore, should by their wisdom and
moderation, correct and sweeten them, especially in matter of capital
concernment, wherein the wariness of ancient Lawgivers is most imitable, who
ordained the greatest punishments for none, but the greatest and most important
Crime^, Thereby declaring, That even whilst they designed to punish men as
transgressors, yet still they pitied and considered them as men.

The errors of ignorance and improvidence differ from wilful and determinat^,
b^ing such as seem to be extorted by a kind of necessity, are not equal to
those that proceed from malice, wantonness and contempt, Some faults there are,
whose punishment will neither serve for example to others, nor pardon endanger
the Commonwealth; some persons, whose former merits, or future hopes might
challenge indulgence or mitigation, In such cases Magistrate^ have fair
opportunities to renown their mercy and prudence, by distinguishing the
circumstances and degrees of Guilt, and interposing betwixt laws and offence^.

Laws only examine Quid, Magistrate^ should consider Quo animo; Laws can
admit of no excuses* But Magistrates may entertain Apologies; Laws must not
endure that their sentences be disputed, But Magistrates should listen to the
equity of an appeal.

The wi^e Magistrate does not punish men, because they have offended, but lest
they should offend; He is not angry, but provident: In all his Rigours, he has
still an eye to these three ends, The amendment of the party, the Reformation
of the People, and public security. This Maxim he lays as the basis of all
his Justice, That it were better many great offenders should escape, than one
hon^st Citizen suffer, Or a Member be unnecessarily lopt off from the
Commonwealth; And therefore it is truly said, That Nature and Reason designs
good men for Magistrates.

Seneca, with much earnestness, inculcates this Doctrine to Nero, That against
Law, none could destroy, nor any, but the Emperor, preserve, Thereby
persuading him the more to value this power of pardoning, as being the most
radiant Gem of his diadem, and his best prerogative. Indeed, what glory can a
Prince affect, like that of Clemency? since it is superior even to Justice, A
virtue truly sovereign, and incommunicable.

To some offenses, an evil Conscience is sufficient punishment, Some are as
slippery as Eeles, Laws cannot take hold of them, Those that endeavor to
restrain them with penalties, do but soil themselves, and betray their
insufficiency, As that wise Emperor Tiberius observed of the pomp and
superfluity in his time, That Vices of that nature could be no way redrest,
unless necessity reformed the poor, saciety the rich, and shame all. A good and
prudent Governor will not baffle his Justice* in directing his severity
against these and the like abuses; but will rather endeavor with the Virtue of
his example to supply the defect of Edicts.

3 But why do I vainly discourse of Clemency, whilst Equity, and even Justice
it self lies every where bleeding. Alas, the Laws of most Countries are
squared, rather to private Passion, then public Benefit, to serve present
designs, then procure lasting Reformations: Their obscurity is not by chance.
It is the aim of the Lawmakers, that, in interpreting them, they may draw to
themselves a power, as absolute, as if there were no Laws. How then can we
hope for redress, when Remedies prove Diseases? Or what room is there left for
Clemency, whilst forfeitures are more acceptable then obedience?

XXV. Of Magnani^ity.
IT is admirable to see, how the world has misconceived of a brave and
generous Spirit, which name is commonly attributed to none, but men of
unbridled Passions, and such as fortune and Education have made insolent. Now
this is not properly the Courage of men, but of horses, which with high keeping
are apt to grow fierce and unruly.

He that is truly magnanimous, Judges the habit of domineering to be but a kind
of Pedantick Gallantry, and abhorrs nothing more, then the brutishness of a
Voluptuous Appetite, and disolutenesse of a lawless Spirit.

He places not all his glory in his power to Offend, as Boars do in their
Fangs, But as he scorns the Imputation of a Coward, so he much more hates
disloyalty and Oppression, And prefers the Idea of Cato before that of Caesar.

He esteems War (as War, without due limitations,) to be a profession for
none but Goths, and Vandales, a barbarous decision of right and wrong, the last
appeal, and worst of remedies to be used, like the cutting of off Gangreened
lims.

A just War he persecutes, only with Relation to honest Peace, To which he
Courts his Enemy, even when he has conquered him, Always ready to refer or
compound his Interests, and never Obstinate, but in the defense of his country.

He is not affected with the Popular Air, and for discontent he never habored
it so much as in a dream, Faction he declines, not so much for the Dang^r, as
the Vice and pravity of it, Reformation he intends, but listens not to Novelty;
so that turbulent Spirits despair of his confederacy, and fear his Moderation,
more then the Enmity of others.

He is not easily scared out of honest Principles, nor are his sober and
generous resolutions checked with any servile fear; For he hates that
Providence, which, to the Prejudice of virtue, foresees all possibility of
hazard, and reserves his friendship then to appear, when all others are
timorous, and withdraw themselves.

He despises not Honor, in regard it is or ought to be the shadow of Virtue,
yet weighs not himself by titles, since they add not to his intrinsicall
Value; He is rather content with the true honor of doing nothing unworthy of
himself, and with the Greatness of a sincere heart, Thus he never seeks
preferment, but it always follows him, and he has the refusal of it.

He is cautious, in Promising, for he is rigorous in performing, and can give
no greater assurance then his word, from which to recede, might perhaps do
injury to others, but to himself violence.

He is no Usurer of his Benefits, neither by precedent delays, nor subsequent
reproaches, Full of humanity, as knowing the Instability, and contemning the
Petulancy of Fortune.

His memory is the faithful treasury of Benefits, or but Courtesies, received,
which he ever quits seasonably, and with interest; In the mean time, he owes
and owns them cheerfully, and looks not upon his Patron, as his Jailer,
detesting that ingrati^ude, which when it cannon requite, hates its benefactor.

As he is strict in discharging Obligations, so he is nice in receiving them,
especially from unworthy men, lest he be driven to a kind of magnitude. For
such benefits are to him, as suspected as Snares, as loathsome as Prisons, as
odious as Bribes; remembering that excellent address of Seneca to Cicero, where
persuading him to disdain the mercies of Anthony, He alledg^s, That if his life
were worth acceptance, it would not be freely offered him by so great an enemy
and Tyrant.

He is candid and tender in his transactions, actions, and so modest in his
just demands, that his modesty even extorts Justice from others; In his
censures well-advised, not only out of Prudence, but Conscience, He flie-blowes
no man's same, his reports and narratives neither multiply, nor yet aggravate.

Prosperity he suspects, as temperate men do sweet Wine, And therefore allayes
it with sober recollection and vigilance, Adversity is more his Element, He is
the same to the World in both Estates, Only to himself severer in the former,
doing double duty, in regard his greatest enemies are then nearest.

He is large in all his actions, noble in his entertainments, laying the
foundation of magnificence, in discreet frugality, Careless of outward things,
as his prudence will permit, And if he be rich, he is not in bondage, nor
pupillage to his Estate.

He has the Boldness of a Lion, without the Rage, The Caution of a Fox,
without the Craft; Subtle without equivocation, Courtly without falsehood,
Courteous without design; Friendship he esteems a holy Mystery, and would as
soon commit sacrilege it self, as wrong it. Of nothing, but God, and his own
Conscience, he stands in awe, And therefore is as solicitous, in directing his
thoughts, as wary, in framing his discourse, And provides, that his intentions
be as well upright, and reasonable, as his actions moral.

XXVI. Of Taciturnity.
IF it be a beginning of Wisdom to avoid folly, Certainly silence would at
least challenge this honor: For there are not greater or more considerable
Errors or mischiefs, then those that proceed from the misgovernments of the
Tongue, No greater breaches of Charity, Violations of Justice, or interruptions
of Peace, betwixt man and man, in private Families, and often times even in
Cities.

Yet, since we live not in Cloisters, but Commonwealths, since Virtues consist
not in Negatives, and Wisdom is not a dumb spirit, It follows, that as
Temperance is better then entire abstinence, so the wisdom of speaking, only in
due season, is to be preferred before demure silence. Sapiens non silet, sed
tacet.

No S^ct, or Order, methinks, should be so austere, as to interdict us the
benefit of an innocent conversation; But discretion should always direct our
discourses, to some profitable end: For, a wise man will be frugal of his
words, though they seem to cost him nothing.

He will know, that his speech can hardly be sufficiently weighed, so as it
neither ssavour of levity, nor give offense, especially in such an Age as this,
wherein there may perhaps be as little safety in telling truths, as honesty in
speaking falsehoods, And prejudices are so many, That the veriest Sycophant
finds enough to do to please all.

He will consider, That the most innocent Discourses, may be either ignorantly
misinterpreted, or voluntarily wrested, and perhaps enviously misreported, That
it is not enough, to mean uprightly, unless he speak so warily, that even
malice it self can misconstrue nothing; for free speakers have need of Candid
Auditors.

He will observe, How confident talkers betray themselves to snares and
discoveries, Their thoughts are transparent, and their breasts, as it were,
Crystal; silence has as much advantage on them, as the close Guard in
fencing, upon an open posture, or a well-conducted Troop, upon disordered
Squadrons.

He will seldom give way to unprofitable Arguments; Nor loves them, for their
own sake, but truths; Knowing how much apter they are to end in animosity then
peace, and how subject to uncivil interferings. However, he is neither
peremptory, nor loud in maintaining them; Not peremptory, For bold assertions
proclaim either invincible ignorance, or overweening prejudice, which is ever
blind of one eye; Nor loud, because he directs his speech, not to Sense, but
Reason.

He will remember and weigh, how great an impotency it is for a man, to fall by
his tongue, How many have been accounted wise, till their own follies have
confuted fame; How decently on the other side, even ignorance it self is
palliated with silence.

He will be serious, even in his mirth, and wonderful choice in the subject of
his Jests, so that they render him, neither faulty to himself, nor guilty to
others, For unseasonable scoffs are sometimes as much resented, as solemn
injuries, And friendship has as often been broken in jest, as in earnest.

In all his Discourses, he will chiefly aim at Virtue, or Peace, having an
especial regard to the strict Duties of Religion and Charity, And rather then
transgress either of these, he will be content to live and die a Carthusian.

XXVII. Of Temperance.
TEmperance is a virtuous habit of governing the Appetite, according to Nature
and discreet Convenience: But, in regard, all Virtues consist in regulating the
Appetite, lest this Definition should prove too large, we will rather describe
Temperance to be the Philosophy of Diet, or Habit of eating or drinking
moderately.

Truly it is both a great Virtue, and a great Wisdom, A great Virtue in its
Principle and Design, A great wisdom in its Progress and Issue.

Its design is self-Conquest, and the sovereign Command of Reason over sen^e, A
noble disdain to serve the belly, An ambition to be as spiritual, as is
pos^ible, And to resemble the perfection of Angels, who subsist without those
feeble and dishonorable supports, Upon these grounds, The generous soul
con^ines her self to simple nourishment, to exalt Virtue, as far as she can,
without robbing nature; Upon these indeed, yet not upon these only, she has
yet higher and worthier designs; To obey Gods Commandments in the regular use
of his Bounty, To serve him with vigor and serenity of thought, To off^r him
the sacri^^ce of chaste and pure Moditation, To give example of Christian
sobriety to others, To be Christ's frugall and discreet Almoner, To reign over
her Affections and Lusts, To wean her self from the love of this World, To grow
old in the service of God, These are her excellent aims and endeavors; And
accordingly, they prosper with her, For as Solomon, asking only Wisdom, had
riches and honor cast in, so Temperance aiming directly at Gods service,
collaterally procures her own advantage, And her events are as happy as her end
was honorable.

She has clear digestion, not like the Gourmand, whose afternoons and nights
reproach his Meals, No sour Vapors revenge the sweetness of her Morsel, No
Cholick or Crudities torment her; she has firm and vigorous Constitution, not
like the Epicure, whose abrupt health resembles only the intervalls of
Frensies, Her health is entire, so that nothing but the soul takes Physic; she
has lightness of body, not charged with dross and bulk, If she take a bruise,
There is no resort of peccant humors, like that of Vermi^ne to Carrion, And if
she get a wound, she has no Ulcer, tha^ bleeds Wine and Porrage; she has even
temperature, The Quartane fiend does not haunt her, The Calenture does not burn
her, she i^ not like Tinder to every spark of Infection; No ^legme intercepts
her breath, she takes no head Pills to purge the brain, nor sirrups, to ripen
and void her Rheum, lest the Gangreen seize upon her Lungs; In sine, she is
subject^ to few Diseases, and none incurable, but Age.

She has free and easy mirth, not like the surprisals of disbanded laughters,
but such as exceeds not Moderation, Decency, or it self; Her reason is still
awake, and unclowded, No mists of prejudice are cast before her eyes, Neither
is she in danger to put a fallacy upon others, or her self receive one; Her
passions are curbed, and offer not to swell, She can reprove without anger, or
be angry without sinning, And her temper is the wonder of those with whom she
converses; Her will, being unseduced by the Appetite, is simply obedient, and
follows Conscience, with an implicit faith; Her soul is at perfect leisure to
perform all its functions, Nay to receive divine impressions, and enlarge it
self, a^ if it were out of the body; Her affair^, be they never so crabbed or
difficult, entangle her not, but yield to her diligence, and prove only
Entertainments, so as she has nothing to interrupt her present happiness, or
intercept her future.

And let none object, That many temperate men are far from arriving at these
perfections, since, alas, Temprance is unhappily mistaken for a mere negative
Virtue of not surfeiting, or Wine-bibbing; As for the simplicity of Diet, a
Spartane Table, and the slender proportion of that which is enough, it is
scarce known now a days; surely, our Bills of Mortality acquaint us not, how
many dig their Graves with their teeth, who, I fear, are more in number, then
those that fall by Sword, Famine, and Pestilence.

XXVIII. Of Gratitude.
AMongst the Characters of heroical Virtues, I may not omit one so eminent, as
that of thankfulness, since, he that exhorts others to be thankful, pleads the
Cause both of God and Man.

A grear Virtue, said I, nay rather a great Duty, and but a little Virtue;
since eminent Virtues are such only, as seem to supererogate, Or at least
enlarge themselves, beyond the narrow Chanel of not offending.

Yet, I cannot concur in Opinion, with those that would have Gratitude to be a
limb of Commutative Justice, no more then I esteem Bounty, a species of
Commerce. But this I dare not affirm, that the unthankful are but Galley-slaves
to the Law, and cannot pretend to so much, as natural Conscience; for it is
observable, That even Beasts of Prey, that have no bowels of mercy, nor sense
of Justice, have yet a kind of Religion to remember benefits, Nothing is
unthankful, but evil Angels, and wicked men.

An Ungrateful man is a Felon to Reason, which recommends to him Gratitude, (if
possible) before Religion it self, And lays it as the Cornerstone o^ natural
Divinity, which exalts Lex talionis, above all Laws, and even teache^ us to
serve God, because he made and feeds us. Now, if we be thereby commanded to do
in Justice, as we would be done to, How much more are we directed to deal in
Charity, as we have been dealt with? Especially since thankfu^ness has no need
of Art, nor is tied to outward advantages, But is an Act of so great
simplicity, as nothing but malice it self can prevaricate.

Ingratitude is the worst kind of disloyalty, and breach of Confidence, For
injured benefits are like Jewels, secretly deposited with friends, who, for
want of witness, never restore them; with this only difference, that there our
honesty, here our piety is concerned.

Yet, let me not seem, in condemning the Vice, too much to eclipse the Virtue,
For Gratitude is the most free and natural Issue of well-born souls, not
allured with hopes of reward, nor extorted with penalties, but an invisible
habit, which has only conscience for its Jury, and God for its Judge, Parallel
to Charity, the Queen of Graces, whose glory it is, that she might safely have
been uncharitable, Whose reward, to have expected none.

FINIS.

