AT THE Two White Posts, Against the STATUE, AT Charing Cross, On Thursday the
18th. Instant at Three in the Afternoon.

Will be Exposed to SALE, A Curious Collection of Original Paintings, and other
Excellent Copies, of the best Masters; some fit for Closets, Chimneys,
Stair-Cases, etc. Continuing daily, till all be Sold.

By Mr. WRIGHT Junior.

CATALOGUES may be had at Mr. Nott's in the Pall Mall, at Mr. Playford's near
the Temple-Church, and at the place of Sale, Gratis.

The Conditions of SALE.
I. THat he or she that bids most, is the Buyer: And if any difference arise,
which the Company cannot decide, then the said Lot so bought shall be exposed
to Sale again.

II. That the Money for the Goods so bought, is to be paid at the place of Sale
within I hree Days after the Sale is ended; but for the convenience of them
that desire them sooner, constant Attendance will be given every day at the
said Place.

III. That all Gentlemen and Ladies, etc. after the Buying any Lot, will be
pleased to give in their Names and Lodgings, at the Sale; otherwise to pay the
third part of the Price, or the whole Money presently for them, where, upon
Payment of the remainder within the time limited, the said Goods shall be
delivered to them or their Order; they paying Porterage, if they desire to have
their Goods carried home.

IV. That no Person is to bid less than Six Pence a time for any Lot exposed to
Sale.

A Curious Collection OF Original Paintings, etc.
1 SAint Sebastian, after Van Dyke. 2 A Winter and Summer, neatly done. 3 A
Prospect of a Town, by a Dutch Master. 4 An Original Fire-piece. 5 The Prince
of Orange when newly married 6 The Princess of Orange when newly married 7 A
small Landschape with Cows. 8 A Head of Susannah as big as the Life, an
Original. 9 A Half-length of Sir Peter Lilly, an Original. 10 Queen Catharine,
after Mr Housman. 11 An Original Head of Paulo Veronese. 12 A Water-fall, by
Knife. 13 A Head of King James. 14 A Head of Queen Mary. 15 A Thistle, well
done. 16 A Piece of Amphion on a Dolphin. 17 Alpheus and Arethusa. 18 The
Twelve Emperors, after Titian. 19 An Original Head, by Cornelius Jonson. 20 A
small Head in Limning. 21 Another duto. 22 A Fruit-pieco, well done. 23 A Head
of the present Grand Signior. 24 A Head of the Pope. 25 A Head of Cromwell,
after D^pson. 26 A Head of the Lady Hamilton. 27 The Lady Clapo^l, by Mr Wright
senior. 28 The Duchess of Monmouth, by Mr. Wright senior. 29 A large Piece of
the Hunting of a Lion. 30 A large Landschape of a Gentleman's house. 31 A Man
with a Jug, well painted. 32 A Head of Sir William Russel, supposed of Van
Dyke. 33 A large Piece of Paying Tribute to Gaesar, after Ruben's. 34 A Piec^
of the Grown and Sc^p^er. 35 The History of Perseus and Andromeda. 36 A
Sea-Triumph. 37 A great Dog, after Van Dyke. 38 A great piece of Noah with his
Family, offering a Sacrifice after the Deluge. 39 A Head of King Charles the
First in Armor, after Van Dyke. 40 An excellent Head in Croyons, of the Lady
Strangford, Original; by Mr. Wright Senior. 41 A large piece of Ulisses in
Storm. 42 An excellent Copy of Venus after Tition, the Motto Vanitas. 42 An
Original Painting of Boys and Goats. 43 King Charles the First in Three several
Views, after Van Dyke, by Mr. Wright Senior. 44 Narcissus and Echo. 45 A
Lanskip of Paulo Brill. 46 A Lanskip of Grimaldi Bolognes. 47 Another of
Grimaldi Bolognes. 48 A Lanskip of Hannibal Caracci. 49 A piece of Rocks of
Xavery. 50 A little piece of Rocks. 51 A piece of a Skeleton treading amongst
the Heads of Princes. 52 A piece of Mr. John Lacy the Comedian in Three
different Postures, as the Life; of Sawney in the Taming of the Sbrow, Parson
Scruple in the Cheats, and Monsieur du Vice in the Country Captain. 53 A lesser
piece of the same. 54 A Piper Courting of a Woman, after Cornelius Honthost. 55
A large piece of Susanna and the Elders, after Schut. 56 A piece of the burning
of Troy, after Tintoret. 57 Achilles amongst the Daughters of Licomedes in a
Female Habit, after Van Dyke. 58 An Original Painting of Satyrs striving for a
Kettle of Wine. 59 A little piece of Venus, after Titian and Vanitas. 60 A
piece of Susanna, after S^hut. 61 A piece of Lacy the Comedian, the same as the
former. 62 A Head of Innocent the Eleventh. 63 A Head of Cromwell. 64 A Head of
the Grand Signior. 65 A Head of the Queen, after Wisson. 66 A little piece of
Parrots. 67 A little Otangle in Limning. 68 Another Ditto. 69 A little Dutch
piece on Board neatly done 70 St. John Evangelist on Allabaster finely done. 71
A piece of Boys cut in Tortoiceshell. 72 A little Lanskip in Limning with a
Pyramid. 73 The last Supper in Alabaster. 74 A large piece of Jacob going into
Egypt with his whole Family, by Jesus. 75 The Lady Newport, after Van Dyke. 76
A Naked Boy representing Mortality, supposed of Carrat. 77 A Lanskip of one of
the Brugh. 78 A Head by the Life. 79 A Turk's Head in Crions. 80 Two other
Heads. 81 A Boys Head. 82 The present Queen's Head after Wisson. 83 A Crucifix,
an Original, done at Rome. 84 A Lanskip after the manner of Vouters. 85 A
Lanskip of the manner of Poloveronese. 86 Charity, after Van Dyke. 87 Psyche
and Cupid of Vouters. 88 A large piece of Daphne and Apollo, an Original well
Painted. 89 A Lanskip of a Town, and Ruin, well Painted. 90 A Lanskip with
Houses, Ditto. 91 A Winter and Summer neatly done. 92 A large piece of Ulisses
tied to the Mast of his Gally. 93 A Storm well done. 94 A Lanskip, and As^ and
Cow. 95 A piece of Beggars neatly done 96 The Angel and Hagar. 97 The Angel and
the Thrasher. 98 King William on Horse back finely done. 99 A City on Fire well
done. 100 A Winter. 101 The Road to Black Heath. 102 A Lanskip after Walter
Cabers. 103 A Head in Crions by the Borgignon. 104 Another ditto. 105 An
Original Storm piece, by Artonell. 106 A Droll, by a good Master. 107 A Winter
and Summer. 108 Lot and his two Daughters, well done. 109 A small Piece of
Flowers. 110 A Crucifix in an Ebony Frame. 111 A Head of King Charles the 2d of
Sir Peter Lilly. 112 St. Peter in his Penitence, with a Cock crowing, Original.
113 King James, a Half-length. 114 Queen Mary, a Half-length. 115 A small
Sea-storm in a black Frame. 116 A Landschape, ditto. 117 A small piece in a
black Frame, ditto. 118 A small piece of St. Francis. 119 A Piece of Achilles
in a Female habit, among the Daughters of Lecomes, well done. 120 A Winter and
Summer, by a good Master. 121 A Prospect through a Rock, ditto. 122 A Droll,
after Brower. 123 A Winter and Summer, by a Dutch Master. 124 A Winter-piece,
by a Dutch Master. 125 A Landschape, ditto. 126 King James, after Wisson. 127 A
Head of the present Grand Signior. 128 A Head of Pope Innocent the 11th. 129 A
Winter and Summer, by a Dutch Master. 130 An Original Fire-piece. 131 King
Charles the First on Horseback, after Van Dyke. 132 Bacchus and Philemon. 133
Christ and Nicodemus. 134 A Prospect through a Rock. 135 A Landschape, ditto.
136 Winter, ditto. 137 Fire-piece, ditto 138 A Flower Piece, by Verelse. 139 A
Lanskip in an Ebony-Frame. 140 A Lanskip well done. 141 A Lanskip by Vestrado.
142 A Flower Piece in Limning, well done. 143 General Lambert's Head, well
done. 144 A Head of King James. 145 Two Boys playing with a Goat, an Original
Painting. 146 A small Piece of the Ascension of Christ.

