IMPRIMATUR,

May 29, 1665. John Hall, R. P. D. Epis. Land. a Sac. Domest.

To J. S. (the Author of Sure-Footing) his Letter, lately Published:

THE ANSWER OF MER. CASAUBON, D. D.

Concerning The New way of INFALLIBILITY, lately devised to uphold the Roman
Cause: The Holy Scriptures, Ancient Fathers, and Councills laid aside.

LONDON. Printed for Timothy Garthwait, at the King's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1665.

SIR,
I Have by the help of a Friend, lately received your Letter to me, which you
have published with some other pieces of yours. Had I apprehended any
difficulty in the business, I could have found an excuse, from my present
indisposition of body, which has been upon me this long time. But I think I
shall not need much Study, to answer you; this Letter, I mean. I will not
insist upon personal things, which do not at all concern the cause it self, no
further than civility does oblige me.

First, you challenge me (so I understand you) of somekind of breach of
friendship. A great crime, I shall acknowledge it, if truly guilty. But the
truth is: Now that you have put me in mind by those circumstances you mention,
I remember well, when Bp. Morton (of Reverend and Blessed memory) lived in
Durham-house, (which was at the beginning of the late Troubles) there was a
civil Gentleman in the House, (whether in the quality of Chaplain, or
Secretary, I do not remember) with whom I did walk some time: but what our
communication was, about Religion, or any thing else, I can give no account. It
should seem by your Letter, you are the Gentleman. But whether this may be
called Acquaintance, or Friendship, I know not. For since that time (so many
years ago) I never heard of you, that I remember: neither did I think my self
by any Law of friendship (such as this) obliged to inquire. If your memory of
me, and my name, has been more tenacious; I wish you much good of it: I have
often grieved, that mine is no better. If it were your kindness, to think of
me, when I did not of you; I am beholding to you for it. But how I should know,
20 years after, that S. W. the Author of SCHISM DISPATCHED (now turned into I.
S. in Sure Footing, etc. which I prosess I do not understand:) was the party
whom I had seen in Durham-house, especially after so much trouble of body, and
mind, which those times did occasion, I will leave it to your further
consideration, I protest to you seriously, that neither by any information I
have had from any body else; nor by any suspicion of mine; I never had the
least thought of any such thing.

Before I enter into the cause; I will make an end of this business, of our
acquaintance. You charge me at the end of your Letter, that I was accessory to
your change. Truly Sir, because I acknowledge we did talk together, but can
give no account of particulars, in any thing that I think, (as my mind and my
apprehension of things then was; which I remember very well:) could possibly
proceed from me; so far I may and will, in civility believe you: But to believe
that I said any thing to you, wittingly and willingly, which I knew to be false
and fictitious, contrary to my sense and judgment; and this too, to no end at
all, that is, without any provocation, or inducement, but to do my self hunt;
when, for ought I knew, what I said to you, might probably come to the
knowledge of that Reverend Prelate, a zealous Protestant, and who entirely
loved me; you must pardon me, Sir, if I believe you not in this, but absolutely
deny it, and offer my self to take my oath to the contrary.

But because I am not willing to believe, that you wilfully devise, but
rather, that your memory has deceived you; I will see what I can do to help
you.

First then you say, I told you, They were mad, who read the ancient Fathers,
and saw not, that they meant Christ was as really in the Sacrament, as in
Heaven.

I remember it was once, by a Jesuit, laid to my Fathers charge publicly;
that he should write somewhere, in the margin of a book written by a learned
Protestant, where he treats of the Eucharist: Omittamus Patres: nam little
authoritate velle uti ad nostram sententiam confirmandam, est exquisitissimo
genere insanioe insanire. Though the words might be justified (being written
hastily too) if by nostram sententiam, we understand them, who make a mere
figure of the Sacrament. Yet I shall not need to fly to that; in case it be
granted, these words were written by my Father. For there was a time, (and I
have acknowledged it, in a book dedicated to King James, that learned and
religious King, above 40 years ago:) when my Father, who then followed other
studies, was very much set upon by Cardinal Perron in matters of Religion:
neither could he avoid it, because it was by order from the King. What opinion
you, or any others now, have of the Cardinal, I know not: but he was then
generally accounted the greatest Wit, and most Eloquent man of his time. And I
can show, how at that time my Father did write many things from his mouth, (so
expressly acknowledged by him) for his remembrance; which afterward, upon
further perusal and consideration, himself, in the same paper, condemned and
consuted. I have at this time by me, a very considerable Collection of such
Notes; and had them when I answered the Jesuit. No wonder then, if he had
written such words at that time; who afterward, at more leisure, took infinite
pains to satisfy himself about that matter, having examined all the
Testimonies of Ancient Fathers, and Records of all Ages, of that Argument, with
great accuracy; which Work of his had been published soon after his
Exercitations, if he had lived. No wonder then, I say. However, I had no reason
to believe it then, upon his report, whom (the Jesuit, I mean, before spoken
of) in other things I had found very bold, and partial; to say no more. But
afterward, it was my luck in the King (now Charles the Second our Gracious
Lord and Sovereign) his Library, at St. James's, (where for ought I know it is
still) to light upon the book, and I do acknowledge, I found the words there.
Now the thing being in a manner public already, though not, perchance, so
publicly known; it is possible I might say somewhat of it to you, (the word,
mad, makes me think I did) who, probably, being before resolved, were willing
upon very little ground, as I conceive, to make some advantage of it.

And how much less, I pray, as to the matter of the Eucharist, does Calvin
himself say, in that passage by me produced in the book you mention;
Substantiam vcri corports and sanguinis Jesu Christi uti ex utero Virginis
illam semel accepit, Proesentem esse in cana tam sidelibus, quam infidelibus,
which passage is out of his Epistles? But many other, to the same purpose, may
be collected out of his other works, as that, Idem Corpus, quod passum est pro
nobis: and, Substantia Christi, manentis in coelig;lo, arcana vi nobis
communicatur: and the like. So that you have no reason to except against
Calvin's interpretation of the reality, except you deny God that power, (for
Calvin makes it a great Miracle) to exhibit the body and blood of Christ, truly
and really; and yet spiritually which, I think, is not more incredible; than a
corporeal presence, and yet invisible.

Sure I am, and can show it under his hand in more then one place; my Father
was well pleased with Calvin's Doctrine, in this point. Judge you therefore, how
likely it is, I should tell you, your second objection) that either Father or
Grandfather, did hear Calvin say, He would willingly cut off one of his
fingers, on condition he had never written what he had written, concerning that
Sacrament, or that kind of Reality.

But what say you, if I can help you in this also? I am very confident I can.
For this I can show you, or any body else, written with my Father's own hand;
that a Person of Credit and Integrity, as he believed, and one that had been
very intimate with Mr. Calvin, had heard him say, Dolere sibi vehementissime,
quod usus exhibendoelig; Eucharistioelig; morientibus esset sublatus. Et
affirmabat (idem) semel audivisse Calvinum, orto super ear sermon, dicentem,
Optare se ut sibi unus e manu digitus esset proelig;cisus et ille usus esset
restitutus; sed se reverentia earum Ecclesiarum, quoelig; usum bunc damnant,
impedirl, quo minus de eo restitaendo cogitaret. Here, you see, Calvin does
profess his grief, wishes one of the fingers of his hand cut off, on a
condition: gives a reason, why he cannot help it: All this, you have. Your
mistake is about the Subject: you say, reality; which was, according to the
true Relation, the denying of the Sacrament to dying persons.

Sir, you see how willing I am to save you from suspicion of wilful falsehood.
For otherwise I might have thought it enough absolutely to deny, what you lay
to my charge. I might have done it with a good Conscience; and I think my
negative, with impartial judges, would have carried as much show of probability
as your affirmative.

The matter of friendship and private talk answered; your next charge is, that
I have showed my self an absolute stranger to Science; and withal very
uncivilly injurious, without any need or provocation. First, an absolute
stranger to Science (if I mistake you not) because I slight so much your way of
infallibility, in matters of faith; which you so much extol, as grounded upon
self-evidence, upon principles of reason and nature; so demonstrable, that
nothing in the world can be more.

Then secondly, injuriously uncivil: in what? First, in the harshness of the
terms, whereby I express my Judgment: and secondly, in wrongfully, or
standerously imposing upon you things, or words which you never wrote, you say.
Now, sir, will you please, laying aside all passion, as I shall endeavor in
this answer, to hear what I have to say my self: and it may be you will be of
another Judgment. I will not tie my self to your order; but as near as I can,
I will not leave any part of your charge unanswered.

First then I say: Your book Schism Dispatched, came to my hands from a learned
Gentleman, who desired me to look upon it at leisure, intimating that it was
much cried up by some men of your side. He was pleased to give it me, and tied
me to no time. At last, the time came; I was at leisure. You may believe me, as
you please: I shall only desire, if you think it reasonable, that you will not
judge till you have read all. I have naturally a great antipathy to Fanatics
and Fanatic opinions. I look upon them, as the great enemies of mankind; that
is, of true religion, and civil government. You know what this Kingdom has
lately suffered by them, and how near it came to utter destruction. When I had
read your opinion, of Orall Tradition, (a thing, as you explain it, I had never
met with, nor heard of before:) upon which you would have us to ground our
faith, and without which you acknowledge no right Christianity; I profess I
took you for either a right fanatic; or one, who cunningly did endeavor to
undermine all religion. But of the two, rather, I thought, a fanatic. Whether
I had any just ground for such an opinion, or suspicion rather; I shall by and
by further satisfy you: in the mean time, think of me as you please.

I could not but think the worse of you too, for handling that pious worthy
man, against whom you write, so unhandsomely. An ingenuous man, would love
worth: and a good Christian, piety even in an enemy. I know you give him some
good words in your first Chapter: but in your Preface; in you: book generally,
and at the end of your book, where you pretend to reckon his faults; truly,
Sir, though confidence, I know, and high language goes a great way with them,
that cannot judge; and might be proper enough to your end; such scorn, such
petulancy, did not become you. These two considerations, without any particular
grudge, or provocation; made me, I confess, somewhat beyond my ordinary
strain, or genius, to express my self, in delivering my judgment.

I should now, in the next place, give you some reasons for my Judgment. But I
will first see how I can acquit my self from imposing upon you, and
mis-relating your words. Before I wrote, what I have written, (where you are
mentioned:) I had read (in part, for it is a great book, you know:) Dr. Hammond
his answer, entitled, The Dispatcher Dispatched. I supposed he had read you
more at leisure, (indeed I never did, but here and there by parcels:) than I
had done. Besides, I found some others, to whom you referr us, and from whom
you profess to have learned; mentioned by him; and their words often quoted,
and compared with yours. I had them not; never saw them; much less, read them.
That he would or could mistake, or misrelate you; or them; so candid and
judicious a man, as he was; I had not the least suspicion. This made me less
heedfull, whether I used your own words, precisely; and in your own order, or
method; so as I set down nothing, but what was your sense and meaning; clearly
to be gathered from your own words. Sure I am, I intended it no otherwise; and
I am yet very confident, if I have laid no more to your charge, then Dr.
Hammond has done, to you and to those others, which concur with you in the
same opinion; I have done you no wrong. For, as I take it; the question is not,
Whether you protest against your absurdities, sometimes; and seem to disclaim
them, in words: (which is ordinary enough, to writors; especially, when they
have an uncouth opinion, or assertion, to make good:) but, Whether you have
positively declared your self, this, or this, to be your opinion; and, Whether
that be not the principal end, and scope of your Discourse, To maintain such an
opinion. If therefore you take the advantage of any words, casually misplaced;
or of pages mis-quoted, to criminate: this is not to criminate, properly; but
to cavil. Give me leave therefore to remind you, (for I profess I did partly
rely upon him, and upon those grounds I have mentioned, I thought I had reason
so to do:) how he (Dr. Hammond) upon accurate examination of what you had
written, and some others had written, does represent your opinion: and it was
some argument to me, that you did not think your self wronged by him, because I
never heard of any answer that you had made. However, it shall be upon this
condition, that if I cannot make good my charge to the full, from what you have
written, and I have read, since; I will make no advantage at all of his words.

First then; the main business, as I conceive; what you mean by Orall
tradition: Orall Tradition is that, (faith Mr. White; they are Doctor Hammonds
words:) which the mothers flatter into their children: and is the most sweet
and connatural way that can be imagined, to beget a firm and undoubted assent:
and this, (faith Doctor Hammond, from you both) if not exclusively; yet,
comparatively, so, as to carry it clearly from Scripture, and Fathers, which
are but dead letters, and mute writing in comparison of this, which alone he
looks on, as Gods living word. This then is your opinion. That all the
assurance we have of our Faith, and the only thing Christianity stands upon,
is by this teaching of flattering mothers; or in your words, of fathers and
mothers of families. Dr. Hammond faith; if not exclusively. But whatever you do
in Schism Dispatched: (where nevertheless you plainly enough exclude Scripture
and Fathers, as Dr. Hammond does else where tell you:) it is apparent, that in
your Sure footing, you do very positively exclude both Scripture and Fathers:
as when you say, There is no arguing against Tradition, out of Scripture: and
that none canin reason oppose the authority of Fathers and Councils, against
Tradition. Insomuch that you will not allow Christ's promise to his Church,
(which both Protestants and Papists, if true Christians, have so much relied
on, and found so much comfort in:) to bear any part in the Rule of Faith: that
is, (what else you mean; by Rule of Faith: I cannot tell) to be trusted to, as
certain and infallible without your Tradition: Nor allow us to say, that
Tradition is certain, because Christ has promised it; no further than can be
made good, or demonstrated by principles of nature, and such Mediums as you
call intrinsecal.

Of the Scriptures particularly, Dr. Hammond does give us this account, that
never any Romanist, Jew, Heathen, or Mahumetan, has attempted the like against
them, to bring their credit down; as Rushworth has done in his Dialogues, to
establish this Oral Tradition, which you maintain. And if the same (though
truly I do not see what can be done more, by any) be not done, or attempted by
you: yet you are answerable for what is done by Rushworth in those Dialogues,
because you refer to him, without any exception; and that both are engaged in
one cause, which does oblige you, if not to say, yet to think no less.

Another thing which does much add to my wondering and indignation, is, the
newness of your way: the consequences whereof is, that if this way have not
been known to former ages till this late discovery, it must of necessity
follow, (and your Corollaries acknowledge it) that Christ has had no Church all
this while: no people, or nation upon Earth, that could be called faithful.
You indeed, for the most part, cunningly hide, as much as you can, the
monstrousness of your Doctrine, under the general word of Tradition; which you
know both Papists, and Protestants, under several notions; or in the same
notion, with some limitations; do own and acknowledge: though you still
understand but one thing, by that word: that is, the teaching of flattering
mothers, in every age. Of mothers, I say, and upon them, it seems, you most
rely, because Dr. Hammond, who has read all your books, does most keep to
those terms; but, of Fathers and Mothers of Families, if you will, as you
express it. So you tell us in a place, this way (of Tradition) is the way
every Catholic in the whole Church, none excepted, holds and follows: your way
therefore, not a new way: as if a man would prove, that a dog is a man,
because both dog and man, are Animals. All Romanists hold Tradition; therefore
they hold the Tradition of Fathers and Mothers; that, and none but that, as the
only foundation of their faith: for so it must be understood, or else you say
nothing. Now, by Mr. Whites account (as I find in Dr. Hammond) the first
invention, or beginning of this, was in a slight familiar conference
(afterward exalted to no less, then Divine Revelation or Inspiration; you
shall know what I mean, by and by:) which made Dr. Hammond say, that this
Discovery of Mr. Whites, as it is the greatest blessing, the richest jewel; so
it is the greatest riddle and mystery in the world. And again to propose it to
his Readers consideration, Whether it be credible, that so great a Jewel as
this pretends to be, should be withheld from the Christian world for above 1600
years, and at last brought forth, not only by one man that pretends not to
inspiration, (then he did not, it seems) but also in a slight familiar
conference, between two Kinsmen. So that if Dr. Hammond, who made it his study,
and had read all your Books, (as was said before) did not ignorantly mistake,
or wilfully falsify, as you charge me; what can be more horrid, and monstious?
And then again, by your own Corollaries; That body of men, who adhere to
Tradition, (Oral still, that is the teaching of Fathers and Mothers of
Families:) can evidence clearly and plainly, who are truly faithful, who not,
-- who are of the Church, who not: page 97, 98. And again; No company of men
hang together like a body of a Christian Church, or Commonwealth, but that
which adheres to Tradition: p. 99. By these Corollaries, I say, it is clear,
and must of necessity follow, that till this way of Tradition was hatched,
(whether new, or old) Christ had no Church, no faithful People in the World.

As the Consequence of your Doctrine is horrible; so the Doctrine it self, both
at first hearing, and the more a man looks into it, (if he have the patience)
with reason and judgment, no less prodigious, and incredible. The Doctrine of
Faith, on which Gods Catholic Church is founded; true Christianity, on which
depends Eternity of bliss, or misery; to be preserved in every Age, sound and
entire; and so conveyed from Age to Age; by Fathers and Mothers of Families?
This, the way, and the only way God has appointed, and Mankind must trust
unto? It is far from my thoughts, in this short Answer to your Letter, to
reason the case with you, by way of Confutation; there be some about it, you
tell me, who I hope will make you sensible, how miserably you are mistaken in
your grounds. Give me leave only to insist a while, on the monstrousness of
your Opinion, as it does appear unto me. You know the World is much amended
generally, in point of knowledge, within these hundred, or two hundred years.
Who has not heard of that admirable or regeneration of Learning, by all kind
of Writers, since, or about that time, so much extolled and magnified? Let Pope
Leo the X. who then was, and his Cardinals, have a great part (under God) of
the thanks, if you will; I am not against it: though by the aversness you show
frequently to Books and Learning, I doubt you will be more ready to curse, than
to bless them for it. But durst you, even now, undertake, that every twentieth
or fiftieth man, or woman generally, among you, is able to give an account of
their Faith? I will not say rational, but reasonable, so that they may deserve
the name of sound Christians, in the main Fundamentals, wherein we, for the
most part, agree? England, I think, I may say, (not to disparage others) is
furnished, and has been these many years, with as able Ministers, as any
Nation can boast of in Europe. I have been a Minister and Preacher here these
Forty years, and above: I know what I have found, to my grief, in more places
then one. We may thank the Puritans of England, if it be no better; whose
endeavor has always been in all places, to set up their Lectures, and
Pulpit-Preaching, instead of Catechizing; whereas Three months right
Catechizing, will make more Christians, I am confident, then Forty years
Pulpit-Preaching. Do not think, I pray, to take any advantage of this, and tell
me, Though it be so among us Heretics; yet, you thank God, it is otherwise,
among Catholics, as you call your selves: For I could tell you strange things,
from your own Writers, men who never were suspected, in the least degree, to
favor Protestants; concerning your Preachers; what manner of men they are
commonly: how able, or how careful to discharge their duties. I will name but
one to you, (till you desire more) Laurentius Villavineentius, Doct. Theol. De
reite formando studio Theol. which Book (though not that particular passage of
Ministers) he did almost verbatim transcribe out of Hipperius, a Protestant;
though otherwise, a virulent inveigher against Protestants, as any I have read.
Read him there; but especially, De sacris Concionibus formandis, Lib. I. c. 2.
and I think you will say, you have your belly full. So now: Will you have a
fight of former times, from unquestionable Records? In the days of Alfrid,
King of England, the ignorance of the Land was such generally, that himself
complains in his Preface to Gregory's Pastoral, Christianity was become an
empty name, without any substance, or reality. And Asserius, one of his
Masters, in his life, does relate that it was a long time before he could read,
because he could get none to teach him; though he much desired it. Some six or
sevenscore years before, when Cuthbert was Archbishop of Canterbury, and
Ethelbald, King of the Mercit, or Middle-land Counties, a Synod was held at
Clyff, by which it was ordained, that (for the time to come) All Priests should
learn the Creed, and the Lord Prayer, that they might be able to teach them to
others. So in England: How elsewhere? In the days of Charles the Great, in
France, there were so many ignorant Priests, that a Law, or Capitulum, was made
for the rebaptization of such, as had not been baptized in the Name of the
Father, the Son, (a hard Lesson, it seems, for the Priests of those days) and
the Holy Ghost. Yet we deny not, but the worst days afforded some men of
worth: but what the generality was, we may guess by these particulars.

I have read a Book entitled, Fragmenta Caroli Magni, printed at Antwerp, A.
D. 1560. in a place it treats of the ancient manner, as the marginal Note
does import, of choosing Bishops. First he is chosen, a Clerosen Populo; that
is, by the Clergy, and the People, according to the language of those times:
Then he is presented to the Apostolic: (that is, the Pope) for consecration.
Then faith the Record, ( Pontifex jubet inquiri de quatuor Capitulis
Canonicis;) Inquisition is made concerning the four Canonical Articles; by
which it seems, the capacity or incapacity of men, for such a degree, was wont
in those days, chiefly, or in the first place, to be judged: The first is;
Whether he had not been Arsanoquita, ((...) a Sodomite?) The second, Whether he
had not lain with a Nun? The third, with a Beast? The fourth, Whether he had
not married one, that had been married before; or a Widow? Et de his
inculpabilis inventus, etc. and being found innocent in these, he further takes
an Oath, he will be so for the time to come. Some few more questions being
asked, (among which I find none, except it be included in Dimissoria ab
Episcopo; concerning his sufficiency, in point of Learning:) he is consecrated
the next day.

I could tell you of Italy, and other places. But, by this, I hope, you will
give me leave to ask you; What you think of the Fathers and Mothers of
Families, of those times; in what a capacity they may probably be supposed to
have been, to preserve and transmit sound Christianity, without any further
helps of written Word, or Record, unto posterity? Ordinary Romanists, I know,
when they are put to it, about the Popes Infallibility; they fly to Christ his
Promise, and peculiar Providence: which is a good plea, could they prove by
Scripture, or true Tradition, (that is, the consent of Primitive Fathers) that
such infallibility was ever promised by Christ, unto the Pope: Which to say,
your friend, and Master (as I find him styled, in Dr. Hammond) Mr. White, does
resolve to be Heretical; yea, archiheretical; where, Dr. Hammond will tell you,
p. 263. for I have not the Book. But a plausible plea, however, I say, as it
pretends to ground upon Christ's Promise, but not your plea, because you
disclaim Christ's Promise, and all plea of a peculiar Providence, as a principle
to be grounded upon: Is not the Church of Rome much beholding to you?

One thing I must grant to you, that your way, though few Romanists, I think,
will acknowledge it their way; is no new way, absolutely. For it was indeed the
Heathens way, as is objected unto them by ancient Fathers; which they made use
of, to uphold their Heathenism, against Christianity: and what those Ancient
Fathers thought of that way, you may read in them, or may be told by others, in
due time. It was also the very way the infidel Jews used, as by others has
been observed, by which they endeavor, to this day, to just fie their
infidelity. I cannot say, it is the way of the Mahametans, as yet: they have
somewhat else to plead for themselves; Success, and Multitude. But this I can
say, whenever it shall please the Mahumetans to make use of this way, who now
can plead above a thousand years Oral Tradition; you leave us no way how to
deal with them; how to confute them. And have not you well deserved of
Christianity?

But again; do not we see that a great part of the Christian world, (the
greater part I may say, if you allow them not Christians, who are not under the
Pope;) where once Christianity flourished, has already failed, notwithstanding
Tradition? Those flourishing Churches of Asia; of Africa; those Apostolical
Sees; where are they What security have you from principles of Nature, which
you only allow of; that the same may not befall these Churches also,
supernatural pleas of Divine Promise, or Providence, being laid aside, as you
would have them?

Sir, be not offended, I pray, with my plain dealing. I have no desire to anger
you. What I thought of your Opinion before, I have told you. But since the
reading of your Sure footing; what I did but suspect, before; seems now to me,
very apparent and visible. First, I consider your language, such as this, for
example: [ Seeing by this time, that my Discourse, by stooping from my first
principles, while I applied them to my business, seemed immerst in matter; and
by the blunder of many more and more particular Terms, then were in the mere
Principle, forcibly taken in, began to look with a contingent Face; ( though
indeed I still perched upon the specifical nature of things, and so never
flagg'd below the sphere of science,) therefore, etc.] Then secondly, your
Confidence, as though, if your opinion should not prove true, the whole course
of Nature were in danger to be turned back, and the Elements to return to their
original Chaos: for to this purpose, you often express your self. And then: I
fear not the gates of Hell; (for which you choose rather to trust to the
strength of your own wit; than to Christ's Promise:) and, Hence I set TRADITION
on her Throne; and the like. Thirdly and lastly, your Science, certain sense,
self-evidence, intrinsecal mediums, connection of causes, demonstration,
principles of Nature, and the like; which you inculcate in every page, as
though science and demonstration were meat and drink and sleep to you, and you
lived by nothing else; Whereas (let me be accounted mad, I am willing, if it be
not true:) all that you ground upon; your principles; (as you apply them:) your
reasons, your consequences, are so ridiculous, and childish, and senseless,
that a man may with as much probability undertake to reduce all Story, all
Truth, all Religion, to Esops Fables; as to reconcile your Doctrine to Sense
and Reason. Believe me, Sir, these be shrewd Arguments of a distemper, which is
not ordinary. I could tell you of pregnant instances, but I doubt you would not
thank me.

But above all things, Mr. White, (whose Scholar you have acknowledged your
self. Dr. Hammond does tell me, in this new Device;) let his case awaken you,
and make you (if it be not too late) sensible of yours. It cannot be unknown to
you, I believe: but because this Answer, (as your Letter) may come to the hands
of others, who know it not; give me leave to set it down here. This good man
then, (a rational man otherwise, it cannot be denied: what he has written
against Apparitions, and false Miracles, not to speak of his other Works, which
I have not seen; show him to be so:) being, it seems, highly conceited of his
parts and performancess, fell into a conceit, That God himself, by immediate
inspiration, had inspired him in all he had written; of Religion, especially:
and moreover, that God, to the end all men should know and believe he was
indeed inspired, and by what they now saw, might judge of his other Works by
him published; had wrought a great miracle (upon himself) visible and apparent,
able to satisfy any rational man. I say miracle. Yet true it is, and I must
take notice of it, lest I hear of it afterward, as a Calumniator; that Mr.
White, where he does begin his story, to prevent somewhat, which he cunningly
foresaw, might be objected; does say somewhat, to decline the presumption of a
miracle, as not so proper in this business; but, how agreeably to the rest of
his tale, and to his conclusion, Quod superest, tibi consule, and ostentum a
coelo ad te delapsum, ne contemnito; let the indifferent Reader judge. Now the
miracle, (or ostentum, which you will:) as himself relates it. is; That
whereas, neither by Books, nor by Masters, he never had applied himself to the
study of Geometry, so as to think himself, or to be accounted by others, a man
of skill in the Art of Science: God, on a sudden, had made him a perfect
Mathematician: so perfect a Mathematician, that he took upon him to resolve
greatest doubts in that Art, which had posed the wits of greatest
Mathematicians in all Ages; as particularly, the Quadratura Circuli. With what
success, I will not take upon me to judge: but one of his own profession, in
point of Religion, has told him and others; in an Answer, titled, Querela
Geometry: who, page 40, 41. does conclude in these words: That, whereas Mr.
White aimed to be accounted a person, whom Almighty God particularly designed
to use as his instrument, for the governing of his Church, in this present
conjuncture; and to this effect, to have received great light, and infused
knowledge from him; (as we heard him speak in his Preface:) he has now given
such a Character of himself, that it is impossible any man should be so simple,
etc. Who also, for the Readers further satisfaction, has reprinted Mr. Whites
whole Preface to his Book, titled, Tutela Geometrica; both in Latin, at it was
written, and in English, translated by himself; where the Reader, if he please,
may find such expressions of deepest Enthusiasm, or Infatuation; as can scarce
be parallelled out of any Book, now extant, and written by a Christian; that I
can, at this present, call to mind. Of any Book, I mean, written and published
by the Author, or Enthusiast himself. For otherwise, stories of Enthusiasts,
their high language, great brags, and confidence; yea actions, and deportment,
suitable to their words, even unto death; we have good store. Whether Mr.
White, since that, become to himself again; (as to this particular, I mean. For
a man may be out of reason; out of his wits, I will not say; in some one
particular, through much intention: who yet in other things, may be very sober
and rational: it is a known case among Physicians:) or indeed, whether alive or
dead, I know not; you do, I suppose. Me thinks this example should be a warning
to you, to make you sensible of your case; more then those great Wits, you so
often tell us of, (who perchance look upon you, as a crazy man, and think it
Charity not to offend you:) their applause, to confirm you in your distemper.
If I had so much interest in you, as some have; I know what advice I would give
you: if, that mentis gratissimus error, (as the Poet expresses it) which
ordinarily does accompany such distempers, have not taken too deep root. To
tell you truth; that whole passage of yours in your Letter of Advice to your
Answerer, p. 14. I easily yield to those great discoursers, etc. I do not like.
Your language is modest enough, were it in another cause: but in such a cause
as this, (your opinion, I mean:) such study, such sedulity, yea such zeal, as
you there mention; must needs do you great wrong. Sir, the worst I wish you,
is, that, you may be sensible of your case, before it be too late: and the best
I can wish to our cause; were it lawful, or charitable, to wish hurt unto any,
that good may come of it; is, that all Romanists, who meddle with
Controversies, were of your mind and opinion; which I make no question, but all
men truly rational, on either side, would look upon, as the ultimus conatus, (a
pitiful one, God knows) of a dying Cause: as to reason, I mean, and good
authority, either of Scripture or of Ancient Fathers.

Now I come to particulars, in the order I find them. Infallibility you say
(the Popes personal Infallibility) is not the thing you build upon: and
therefore not very sollicitous, what becomes of it. You do not, it may be; and
Mr. White does not: but others of your profession, both for number and account,
incomparably the greater part, (who perchance will think I do them wrong, to
call you a part:) tell us otherwise, and make it their chiefest Article. Of
this, somewhat has been said by me, in my late book; and it is the opinion of
diverse others, Papists and Pretestants, that it is the main point, or
Controversy: till you have disproved this, I need to say no more. Now if you,
and Mr. White, and some more, whom you think considerable, or a considerable
party, be of another opinion; and think it Heretical, or Archiheretical, to
maintain the contrary; what occasion you Romanists have to boast of your good
agreement, who are of such different belief, in main fundamentals; I leave to
you to consider.

But was not this a sufficient ground (which you call my mistake) since you
dispaired, and gave over this, which others of your company, built so much
upon; to make you, (since you would not be so ingenuous, or had not so much
light yet, as to acknowledge your error, and return to us) to make you look
about, I say, to find somewhat else, that you might build so many strange
practices, and opinions of your Church upon; for which you know, and partly
acknowledge, you have no ground at all, or at least, not sufficient ground,
either in Scripture, or what we call Tradition; that is, the consent of Ancient
Fathers? I say no more.

In the next place, you endavour to countenance your new way though not under
the notion of new) by the temper of the times, which has produced so many
attempting wits. Truly, Sir, it cannot be denied, but your opinion or way,
has much of the temper of the times; be it spoken without any disparagement,
or disrespect, to any of real worth; whether you call them Wits, or
otherwise. Not to speak of England, lest I may be thought, to aim at any,
particularly; you cannot but know, by report, and by books, that in some places
beyond the Seas, there is a sect of men, who take upon them to be the only
Wits of the World, and glory in that title; whose chiesest Wit is, to make a
mock of all Religion, and to scoff at the Scriptures: which the dullest
Complexions, if they make it their study, are very capable of; and indeed,
rather deserve the name of Boufons (some, naturally have a faculty that way,
who are good for little else) then Wits. You might better have forborne that
word, (which you often use) when you tell us of men of real worth. I am not so
addicted to old things, though you make me so; but I can embrace new, with
thanks and congratulation, when I shall see just cause. Their attempt, or
project, I profess, I do not like, who to make themselves the more admired,
trample over all, that former ages, which produced so many excellent wits, had
in great respect, and esteem, under the notion of Learning, or Science.
However, though some innovation in matter of humane Learning, or Science, may
be born; yet in such a fundamental of Religion, as you make your way to be; no
man truly sensible of Religion, but will abhor it. It is the ready way to no
Religion at all; or, to any; and you know many account them the only Wits
shall I say, or wise men of the world, that are of that temper. I will not say,
it is your end; but that it will be the effect of your new way (give me leave
to call it, as I find it:) should it prevail, (which God forbid) I have much
reason to believe. As for the rest, that you object; I have said it before, but
I must repeat it: You play the Sophister too grossly, and abuse your Reader
shamefully, when you tell us, Your way is not new, because the ancients of
Vincentius Lirinensis, I have given you a particular account; I wonder you
would name him:) maintain Tradition. There is as much difference between that
Tradition, which they maintain, and that which you do; as there is between a
brute, and a man, though both be animalia. Neither will that help you; to say
they maintain (some may speak so) Tradition, unwritten; therefore, oral For it
may be so called, in regard of the first original, or Authors; though, since
that, recorded, and attested by multiplicity of Authors. And though there were
no such attestation extant, (which cannot be said of true Tradition) yet still
you are as much to seek, to bring it to Fathers and Mothers of Families in your
sense, which seem confident, never came into any man's mind, till you, or Mr.
White dreamed it: of all other inventions, in this kind, the most ridiculous, I
ever heard of. So much of mistake, laid to my charge.

Now to the injuries you complain of. The first is, That I confess my selt a
stranger to Rushworths Dialogues; and that I make some doubt whether Schism
Dispatched, and Rushworths Dialogues, might not be of one Author, though under
two names. Your descant upon this, is, my genius does not incline me to trade
in books, that pretend to reason. You do pretend, indeed, and so do most in
your case, with as much, or more confidence, (ordinarily:) though the matter
appear never so ridiculous to others, and false; as the most rational, in best
causes. As in our English story, he that could not confirm his new Revelations
by miracles, (Mr. White's miracle, it seems, you do not much trust to:)
endeavored to do it, by strong asseverations, and from thence proceeded to
Oaths and Execrations, against himself, if it were not true: etc. so D. Hammond
tells you, you know where. You are not come to Oaths and Execrations, I am glad
of it: for then we should be forced to stop our ears: instead of them, we hear
of strong asseverations, of principles of nature; and connection of causes. and
demonstrations: these we may hear, and laugh. The Doctor, it seems, by this
application, began to suspect somewhat, which I do more then suspect. But I
believe had he seen your Sure footing, and these pretty Corollaries; he had
never taken so much pains to consute you, as he has done. But he also I
perceive made some question, whether Rushworths Dialogues, the Apology, and the
Dispatcher, were three, or one.

The next injury; I charge you, you make nothing of, and disclaim the
testimonies of Popes, and Prelates, etc. I say so; you say, you do not; in that
very page, it may be; but all that you have written, does tend unto this, and
you do it eminently, in your Corollaries, page 100, 101. Still provided, that
Tradition be taken in your sense, for orall tradition, (that is, the
instruction and catechizing of fathers and mothers of families) in opposition
to written. And so you explain your self, Schism Disp. p. 47. To Stop the way
against the voluntary mistakes of mine adversaries, I declare my self to speak
here, not of written tradition, to be sought for in the Scriptures and Fathers,
which lies open to so many cavills and exceptions; but of orall tradition. All
the rest of your accusation, is but words, and impertinencies; which I will not
spend time upon.

To this may the third also, (which you call injury) be referred; That I
charge you, you slight Scriptures, Fathers, and Councils as and call them in
scorn, wordish testimonies. It is not your bare professing, you respect and
honor them, in such and such a sense, that will serve the turn. The greatest
Rebel in the world may tell his King, he does honor him; as he is a Man,
perchance; Gods creature, made after his Image, etc. when he has a knife in
his hand, to stab and murder him, as a King. So you deal with the Scripture,
you cast upon it all the dirt and scorn you can; as Scripture, in general: you
call it, a dead dumb letter (what do you think of the Author in the mean time?)
you make it to be of no use at all, as to the rule of faith, or deciding of
controversies of religion. But if fathers and mothers of families tell you;
that understood (in points of faith) in this and that sense, it is good
Scripture, and the word of God; then it shall be Scripture with you, and not
till then. As for other uses, which godly people might make of them (so highly
recommended unto all people by the Ancients, upon that score:) those uses you
take away also, whilst you forbid them to read them. But this, you will say,
does not concern Oral Tradition, properly: in so doing, you do no more, then
other Papists. But then I must tell you, it does not a little aggravate the
case, that flattering mothers should be trusted by you for the conveyance of
faith and Religion (sound and sincere) and the true sense of Scripture, (in
things controverted) to posterity and so many brought up to learning, and so
much more rational and intell gent, not allowed (where the Inquisition
reigns, especially:) the use of them, for fear they turn heretics.

Before I proceed; you charge me, I call ordinary Citations, testimonies,
though many citations have nothing in them of a testimony. True; but he that
cites, commonly, does intend his citation, as a confirmation of somewhat that
he says, and so it becomes a testimony, in a larger sense, as the word is
commonly taken in Bellarmine, for example, and others, Testimonia Patrum; any
words of theirs, are so called though never intended for such by the authors;
nor attired in the formality of a testimony. I wonder you should stick at such
a thing: but you may as wel' wonder, I take notice of it.

The fourth injury; I say, the only thing you place infallibility in, is Oral
Tradition and the Testimonies of fathers of families. Have not you told us many
times you admit of nothing, to have any part in the rule of faith but Oral
Tradition? Do not you upon that account, exclude Christ's promise to his Church?
Do not you forbid your adversaries, to use dead testimonies, (that is, Fathers
and Councils:) or some book granted to be sacred? yea, elsewhere, expressly,
any kind of testimony, either from Scripture, Councils, Fathers, or History;
except your Oral Tradition be first granted to you; which granted, all
testimonies become uselss? Is not this your business every where, that
tradition (your tradition) is the only thing, against which nothing must be
heard, and which only gives credit unto all other things; such credit, as they
are capable of? You would make a man hope sometimes, that you begin to be
sensible of the absurdity of your doctrine, which makes you so often say, and
unsay, and contradict your self. But I fear, it is not so well, but rather,
that you are afraid to offend your party, and therefore write so variously and
inconsistently. You say, you place infallibility in other things too, though
you make that the greatest. Either you aquivocate in the word, Infallibility;
and abuse your Reader: or manifestly contradict your self, and overthrow your
own grounds. But Popes, and Prelates, are masters of families also, you say,
and therefore have a part, or bear a share in your Tradition. I could answer,
that flattering mothers is the word in Dr. Hammonds reply all along, or most
occurrent, not without ground, certainly: and in the very manner, or nature of
this Tradition, as it is explained; it is certain, they must be the greatest
part, incomparably. But if we take in Fathers, as well as Mothers, (which I
suppose is your intention:) then Popes and Prelates may come in, I will grant
you; but then it must be, in the most literal sense, as they are fathers of
children, as well as other men, though they have no wives. For though he may be
called Pater familias, I know, that keeps a house, though of servants only:
yet servants, men and women at large, are not for your purpose, as you explain
the business of Tradition; but such only, who were taught by their Fathers and
Mothers, when Children: neither are others mentioned by you, that I remember.
Yea most of your arguments, fall to the ground; as natural affection, and the
like; if others be admitted, besides Children. If therefore you take in Popes
and Prelates, as partners, or actors in your tradition: it must needs be, you
presuppose, they have Children, all, or most. Which though it may be true
enough; yet whether they will take it well, at your hands, to acknowledge it so
publicly, I know not. But all this granted; yet it is but little, that you
grant to Popes and Prelates. For you say, they are a part, and the eminentest
members; that, is somewhat: but you add, (and indeed could not avoid it, by
your grounds:) page 333. in proportion to their number and what is that, among
so many millions of other men?

The fifth Injury: I charge your way, or Doctrine, with many Chymerical
suppositions, and impertinencies. I have said enough to this, which I shall not
need to repeat. I shall only add; I understand by you, some body is appointed
to answer you. You know what Dr. Hammond has done already, whom I think you
never answered. But by your Sure footing, first and second part, I perceive
you, or rather indeed your disease, or delusion, has made a great progress. If
therefore it should so fall out, that you have been misinformed, and your
dreams are not thought so considerable as to deserve an answer; pray for my
life, and health, (for it may do you good, and I look upon you still, as an
ingenuous man, however this has happened to you;) and I will promise you, very
mathematically, and scientifically, (as great an enemy as you take me to
science) to examine all your grounds; and to make it appear clearly, to your
self, if possible; but to all men that have but eyes and ears, (to use your own
expression) that nothing can be more contrary to the course of Nature, and to
Reason and Providence, grounded upon certain and approved experience of all
Ages; than what you ground upon. What you may think of it, I know not: but I do
not conceive that there is any thing of bragging in this undertaking: else, it
would not become me, and I should be sorry for it.

In that which follows, by Ours and Yours; I know not what you mean, whether
Poepists and Protestants, in general; or whether you, and me particularly: but
I think, and it is more probable, Papists and Protestants, in general. However,
it is apparent, you do brag and vapor egregiously, as if you intended to put
your adversaries out of countenance, by calling them cowardly rogues; and by
telling them, what brave things you have done; when in very deed, it is but a
dream, and pure imagination. Put this is, as all the rest, Tradition on its
Throne: and, the gates of Hell, etc. it is no good sign.

But I have said, (or indeed suspected, I say no more; but I will not stand
upon that) you are no friend to ancient books, or learning: Truly, Sir, I think
a man may gather so much by your own words and profession. What mean you else,
when you so often tell us of, wordish learning; aicry descants and discourses;
knacks of humane learning; Grammar and Criticisms; bookishness, and much
reading; and the like: But if it be granted, all this may come from a man that
is a lover of true learning, but impatient to see how much it is wronged by
many false pretenders; (which is true enough:) yet if Fathers and Mothers of
Families, who, I think, generally, do not pretend to much learning, are able
and sufffcient, nay the only sure means appointed by God, to preserve truth,
in matters of Faith and Religion; what further use have we of all books,
ancient and late, that have been written on that subject? You know, Sir, that
ancient Fathers and Councils, and other Ecclesiastical Writers, their
Translations, and what has been written upon them, by sundry learned men, will
make a great part of that, which we (Divines, at least) call Learning: that
such Books, in greatest Libraries, take up most part of the room. It is not
enough to say, a man may read them, for his recreation, if he will, and we are
not bound to burn them: You need to say no more, but that there is no need of
them: what will follow, should you be believed, generally, by men in Authority;
any man may foresee, without the gift of Prophecy: in this age especially, so
much addicted to new knacks, and inventions; so fiercely set, to disgrace and
cry down whatsoever former ages have most esteemed, and reverenced.

Your division of Books into several Classes, and sentiment of them so divided,
I have no mind to quarrel at, or examine, because it is not much to the
purpose, or main business. That many deserve no better then to be burned, even
of them that fill Catalogues and Libraries; I should easily yield: so it were
done by them that could judge of Books indeed, not by self-conceited men, or by
men addicted to one kind of study, who are apt to think all needless, that
comes not within the verge of their cognizance, or capacity. But I do not like
your counsel of abridging: for that has been the destruction of best Authors,
in all Ages, and has brought many a curse upon the Abbreviators.

Among them that deserve to be burned, it would not much trouble me, if Dr.
Dee's tedious Legend about his Spirits, were one. And because you tell me of
him, I am very willing to take this occasion to acquaint others, (in case this
paper be ever printed) how I came to have to do with him. I know, I have said
enough elsewhere; but because many have heard of the Book, by relation, who
never saw it; and because somewhat is come to my knowledge, since, which I did
not know then; I hope it will not do amiss here.

When I lived at Sir John Cottons, (where, besides the comfort and honor of
that truly noble and learned Gentleman's company, I had the use of a choice
Library, as any England, for the number, does afford) in his Father, Sir Thomas
(then living) his house, at Westminster; I had not been there many months, but
Sir Thomas did mention these papers of Dr. Dees unto me; adding, that my Lord
of Armagh had seen them, and wished them printed; not for their worth or
exellency; but because he found in them so much of the humor and language of
the times, as that he thought many would be convinced by the book, from whence,
either, ( Canting language, and affected Sanctity) did spring. When I had
perused them, my answer was, I was very fully satisfied of the reality of those
things which the book related: that I knew Dr. Dees hand very well, (I did know
it, because I had diverse books, which had been his; among others, a Simleri
Bibliotheca, where Dr. Dee had written, in the margines, the names of diverse
Manuscript books, in England, Greek, and others, which he had seen in several
places: I know not how I came to part with it, as I did with many others, for
which I have been very sorry since:) and was sure it was his hand; and made no
question, but the Devil, or deluding spirits, (whom he thought to be good) had
appeared to him, in that manner, as is there related. But for the printing, I
doubted scarce any man would adventure upon it, because it was such mad uncouth
stuff, for the most part. So the business rested, half a year, more, or
less. After that, Sir Thomas spoke to me a second time, and seemed very
desirous that the Book were printed. I told him I would look upon it again, and
if I found, as I had done before, I would bestow a Preface upon it; and then we
would try, what could be done. This was done, and the book (so it fell out)
printed. What I have said of it, in the Preface, for which I have had thanks
from many, who were not much pleased with the Book; I retract not. If the Book
has not given content unto all men, I have no great reason to wonder at it.
Only this, by your good leave, I shall add, to confirm the reality of the
relations, that are printed. Many other papers of Dr. Dees, since that Book was
printed, came to my hands; containing more Visions and Revelations; with many
Letters from great Princes, and particular transactions; by all which (for the
hands and seals, with many other circumstances, will satisfy any rational man
of the sincerity of the Records) it does further appear, in what credit he was
then, in the World; what use he made of his Spirits; or rather, they of him;
and that some great matter was attempted by the Devil in him, and by him, but
that God disappointed it. Among those papers, there is a particular relation of
a Conference they had, (Dr. Dee, and his mate Kelly:) with a great Prelate,
(Bishop, or Archbishop, I do not well remember:) in Germany, but not a German;
in the conclusion whereof, because the Bishop would not yield these Apparitions
were true, (that is, from God, and by good Angels) Kelly in a great rage
challenged him to go down with him to the open fields; He should pray, and he
would pray; and they should know, which of them God did own for his, and which
not. Which the Bishop refused, but gave him very good Reasons, (such as became
a sober grave Christian, and Prelate:) why he would not. That relation, I
think, is in Latin. I conclude; What you say in scorn of that Book, does not
concern me. If you have any thing to say to the Preface, I will answer you.
These late Papers I have mentioned, if you desire to know, are to be found
(with the permission of the worthy, and honorable Owner) there, from whence
the others, now printed, came.

And now to return to you, Sir; it does offend you, that I said Atheism and
Mahometism would get well, by your way, How can it be otherwise, when all
faith, all christianity, practical, and other, necessary to salvation, is
reduced to such Authority? You have already been told, that you justify
Mahometism, and Atheism: it is the way that the Atheists anciently took, to
uphold their cause; and the Mahometans may, when they please: now, they need it
not. Neither, may you be sure, will ever be converted by your principles. And
for Christianity; in very deed, I cannot fancy them, (I will except you; I
conceive yours is a different case:) much better then Atheists, that build
their faith upon such a ridiculous (good sport to Atheists, or atheistical
men:) senseless foudation.

The sixth, and last injury, which, you say, you account the worst; That I
should write, Others of approved worth and abilities, had met with you, who I
thought had done you more credit, then you deserved. I am sorry I should
express my self, which I avoid as much as I can, so obscurely, you should be so
much mistaken in my meaning. But when you know my meaning, whether you will
like it better, I know not. However, I will tell you: My meaning was, that Dr.
Hammond, a man of approved worth and ability, had already answered you: who I
thought, had done you, (your book, not your person;) more honor, by so long
and elaborate an answer; (which indeed I did wonder at) then you had deserved,
by that book of yours.

I think I have done with all that concerns me. Nothing now remains, but
that, as obliged, if by nothing else, yet by your example I subscribe my self,
Sir,

Your well-wisher and humble servant MERIC CASAUBON.

FINIS.

