

Of the NECESSITY OF Reformation, In, and before LVTHER'S Time; and what
(visibly) has most hindered the Progress of it.

Occasioned by some late virulent Books written by Papists: but especially, by
that Entitled, LABYRINTHUS CANTUARIENSIS. Here, besides some other Points, the
grand business of these Times, Infallibility, is fully discussed.

BY MERIC CASAUBON, D. D. and one of the Prebends of Canterbury.

LONDON, Printed by A. Maxwel for Timothy Garthwait, at the Kings Head in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1664.

PErlegi hunc Librum cui Titulus (Of the Necessity of Reformation, etc.) in quo
nihil Doctrinae Disciplinaeve Ecclesiae Anglicanae, aut bonis moribus
contrarium reperio; plurima vero Doctissimo Authore non indigna, and huic
seculo utilissima.

JOH. HALL, Rev. in Christo Pat. Humfredo Dom. Episc. Land. a Sac. Domest.
Jul. 5. 1664.
To the Reader.
IF it lie upon every Christian, in general; but, upon them principally, whose
profession is, to teach others, to be ready at all times, to give a reason of
their hope, to them that ask: (1 Pet. 3.15.) that is, as I conceive, of every
thing they believe, as matter of Faith: how much more does it concern all men,
to be well satisfied in themselves, that what they believe, and wherein they
place their confidence; though they can give good reason for it, and justify
the truth of it; will, or can do them any good? Certain it is, and it is a case
fully argued and defined by St. Paul (1 Cor. 13.) that if one thing be wanting,
the soundest, or most Orthodox Faith will do no good: and as certain it is,
that whoever is guilty of Schism, does want that one thing, without which no
salvation can be had. For Schism does exclude from the Catholic Church; to
which Catholic Church only, as a jointure settled upon it, by the Gospel of
Christ; the benefit of Christ's redemption, does belong.

A strong apprehension of this truth, ever since I begun to apply my self to
the reading of ancient Fathers; as them, from whom, after the Scriptures, I
expected a certain resolution of all doubts and differences: those words of St.
Augustine, among others, especially, Separationis immanissimum scelus; by which
he does set out Schism, as the most horrid of crimes that can be committed by
the wickedest of men; made me very inquisitive into the nature of Schism, and
very sedulous to collect such things, as I met with in my reading, whereby I
might thoroughly satisfy both my self, and others, if occasion should be, that
no such thing as Schism, either as a Protestant, in general; or, as a member of
the Church of England, (which may well be called the Paragon of all Reformed
Churches:) could justly be laid to my charge. What I had collected to this
purpose, I have kept by me (as many other things:) not with any certain
intention, to make it public, but as I should see great cause* I must confess,
that some books of this subject, set out by Roman Catholics, within these few
years, which came to my hands, did somewhat provoke me by their confidence,
which I could not but admire. But then, as those came to my hands, so some
Answers also, and other books of the same subject; as particularly, what has
been written by a Reverend Bishop, then of Derry: and since him, by a worthy
Knight, of this very County, where I live; in Vindication of the Church of
England, particularly: which made me think my silence would be no prejudice to
the cause.

I might have thought so still; but for two Reasons. First, I did observe by
some very late books, set out by some of that profession; even since our late
happy Restoration; that as it was anciently said of the Sardi, proverbially,
Alius alio nequior; so they did seem to me, to strive how to outgo one another
in boldness, and impudency; (I am sorry I must speak so plain:) and still, the
last, seemed worse, then the former. I speak of such as I have seen. For,
others, there may be, besides them; which, perchance, may deserve a better
testimony.

However, I might have considered longer, but that about last Christmas, a
book sent from London, came to my hands, of which I had heard somewhat before,
but had not seen it, till then. The title is, Labyrinthus Cantuariensis --
being an Answer (so the title does promise) to the late Archbishop of
Ganterburies Relation of a Conference: Paris: 1658. We might expect somewhat
extraordinary, from one that durst undertake such a work. What is performed, I
am very willing the Reader should suspend his Judgment, till some trial. And my
hope is, That among so many, yet alive, whom that great Prelate, and blessed
Martyr, has so greatly obliged; some will be found, who will make it their
business, to vindicate him fully. In the mean time, finding that the Author,
whether following the example of others; or himself, an example to others; has
endeavored by much confidence, and vilifying language, (whereof he is very
plentiful:) to abase the credit of that work, which by strength of reason, he
saw was not feasible; my zeal for the truth, which in the wrong done to that
excellent piece, must suffer much; and particular respects, to the memory of
the Author, whom I also shall ever acknowledge a benefactor; made me very
desirous of an opportunity, to make his adversary known unto the world, till a
further discovery be made by others.

This opportunity, (besides, that it was my chance, at that very time; for
diverse weeks together, by some bodily infirmities, to be confined to my house;
so that thereby disabled for other duties, I had the more leisure at home:)
that subject, which I had in my thoughts before, I did think would give me.
Some things I saw, would offer themselves without seeking; others would be
brought in, without much digressing from the main purpose; and the Reader, I
thought, where so much affinity of matter is, might think my pains as well
bestowed upon on the one, as upon the other. As my Title, so my chiefest
subject is, The necessity of Reformation: tending to this, to prove that our
separation from the Church of Rome, upon that score, cannot be charged with
Schism: contrary to that the Author of the said Labyrinth, does maintain, That
Protestants are Schismatics, and no part of the Catholic Church; Chap. xi,
xiii, xiv. of his Labyrinth. To prove that Necessity, we must either suppose,
or prove that Church to have notoriously swerved from the truth of the Gospel
and primitive times, in matters of Faith, of great consequence to salvation.

Now the particulars being many, wherein they are liable to this charge; to go
through which all would be a long work, and perchance not so needful; I
thought, if I pitched upon some one particular point, and plainly evinced it,
in that one, it would serve my purpose very sufficiently. That one, I have
pitched upon, is the business of Infallibility, which in a manner, does
comprehend all the rest, and which is the point now, generally, most in
agitation; as the Reader may be more fully satisfied, if he please to turn to
the 11, 12, 86, 87, 91, 92. pages of the Book.

That was the only point, by me intended at the first: and that makes a great
part of the Answer, (more rightly, Labyrinth:) to the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury his Book, as may appear by the Contents. However, accidentally, two
other points are handled, The mutilation of the Sacrament: (and that too,
handled by the said Author:) and the marriage of Priests. So that the very
Subject principally aimed at, has given me opportunity enough. If any thing be
brought in otherwise, yet I have reason to hope it will be acceptable, even for
his sake, whose memory all true Sons of the Church of England, are so much
bound to honor. One thing I must profess, that I have been very careful, to do
his adversary no wrong, by mistaking or misreporting his Sense; and to that
end, I have sometimes, where I thought it most convenient, exhibited his own
words at large, to prevent all suspicion.

Besides the necessity; I have some considerations of the hindrances of
Reformation: and this brought us to a consideration of Ceremonies: not intended
against Papists; but to satisfy (if possible) some men among us, whom ignorant
people look upon, as most zealous Protestants; but wise Papists have reason, I
am sure, (and I think it will appear by our discourse:) to account their best
friends.

So much of the accessory. Now concerning my chief subject, a justification of
the Reformation, in general: some perchance, may say, or think; What need of
this, which has been done by so many already? I might answer; It is that which
is done every day; in voluminous comments, especially: what is new, besides the
dress, and some alteration of method? but that men are men still, and will
prefer that which is new, (as the Poet of a new Song;) before that which is
old, be it better or worse; which right palats only can distinguish. The same
may be objected to the adversaries. What have they, that has not been objected
and answered, over and over, even ad nauseam? Yet if there be that read them,
because they must have somewhat, that is new: then, new answers, if not
absolutely necessary, may hope for the same favor.

But I will not make use of that Plea. I am not of that opinion, that people
should be humord in their folly. I will judge no other: but it is contrary to my
judgment, to busy myself in such an employment. Though therefore the subject
be very ordinary; yet I am much deceived, if much be not here, that will not be
found elsewhere, upon the same subject. Even there, where I insist upon common
instances, as objections out of Scripture, and Fathers; the diligent Reader,
may observe some difference. If it be otherwise (for I will not undertake to
have read all, even later books, of this argument:) I desire the Reader to be
so favorable, as to believe, (he may do it truly; though I shall acknowledge it
a great favor:) that I had no intention to deceive him, but was deceived my
self. Farewell.

A Summary of the Contents.
NO Salvation out of the Catholic Church; granted; but not, the Roman Church,
the Catholic, but as the word Roman, anciently, taken for Catholic, or
Universal; and why: page 1. etc.

One particular Church, in some cases, may separate (with due limitation) from
another particular Church, in external communion, though both Members of the
Catholic. But whether for corrupt manners, and discipline, publicly
maintained and allowed; a case proposed out of Baronius; and Baronius his
allowing of execreable murder and rebellion, in the case of Irene and her son
Constantine, for religion (as pretended;) noted, and detested. p. 3. etc. to p.
10.

Infallibility, the main controversy of these times, between us and the
Romanists. Their arguments for it, from reason and necessity, examined, and
answered; and the danger of this kind of arguing, discovered by diverse
instances: from p. 10. to 24.

Arguments from Scripture examined and answered: Others against it, proposed:
from p. 24, to 36.

Antiquity (for the said Infallibility) some forged, some suppressed;
otherwise, for us. First, their silence, where the matter did oblige them, if
they had believed it; observed. Then, their speeches, which seem to make
against us, answered, and others objected. Bellarmine, his crafty false
dealing, in the contest between St. Cyprian, and Pope Stephen. Unity of the
Catholic Church, in what chiefly. Vincentius Lirin. his Rule, or Direction,
how to discern Catholic truths, from haeretical falsehoods, (much commended by
Papists:) altogether for us; proved at large. From p. 36. to 64.

Infallibility, full of irreconciliable intricacies, and contradictions, as
proposed: uncertain, in the persons: slighted and opposed, by many Romanists.
New devises, and inventions, to uphold it. The Author of Schism dispatched,
noted; and the Author of Labyr. Cant. upon this occasion. What Infallibility we
grant. From p. 64. to 92.

Possibillity of Salvation, granted to Protestants, by Papists, in their
Church: and, The Roman Communion, not the safer way; against the Author of Lab.
Cant. and others, From p. 92. to 109.

Necessity of Reformation, concluded from the premises: yet, further asserted,
from the Testimony of Authors of greatest worth, and credit amongst Papists:
yea, zealous Romanists, otherwise. The Pope acknowledged the greatest Cause of
the breach, or separation. From page 120. to 136.

Hindrances of Reformation,: Puritanism in general: but more particularly,
First, Luther himself, that begun it: his fierceness, arrogancy etc. John Hus,
his Prophecy, concerning Luther. Another, out of St. Jerome, concerning
Reformation, in general. The denying of the Church of Rome, to be a true
Church, another great hinderance, and a dangerous assertion, (otherwise:)
contrary to the judgment, and declaration of the Church of England. Again;
furious inveighing against Ceremonies; as Popish, Idolatrous, etc. one of the
greatest hindrances: and upon that occasion, somewhat of Ceremonies, in
general: first, against Papists; then, against Puritans. Calvin, his rash and
rigid censuring, not sparing (though, we believe, not intended by him:) St.
Paul himself. An account of a business, which happened in K. JAMES (of blessed
memory) his reign; (the subject of much talk, in those days:) by reason of a
book, then set out, under the name of Is. Casaubon: and the temper of ordinary
Puritans, evidenced by what then happened. From p. 136 to the end.

This is the series, of the Contents, in referrence to the Title, and principal
argument. Occasionally, two controverted points, The marriage of Priests, and,
Administration of the Sacrament under both kinds; The first, p. 5.6.7. and p.
110. etc. to 120. and p. 130. The second, p. 67 etc. to p. 73, And again p.
129. are handled.

The Author of Labyrinthus Cantuariensis, (a great occasion of this
undertaking, as the Preface does intimate:) noted and confuted; and the
Reverend Author of The Relation etc. vindicated, upon all occasisions; as p.
14. etc. 39. etc. 45. etc. 56. etc. to 61.71. etc. 74. etc. 79. etc. 85.88, etc.

ERRATA.
THe Reader is desired to take notice, That when the Author delivered his Copy
(which was about the beginning of June last:) to the Stationer, his Friend;
nothing being then concluded about the Printing, but time given and taken for
further consideration: he did promise himself the opportunity of another
review, not to alter any thing in the Matter, or Substance; but to amend in the
writing, what (probably) might escape his eyes, before. So he expected: but it
fell out otherwise, a good part being printed, before he knew what was
resolved. Which, as he is very well satisfied did not proceed from any wilful
neglect; so it must be acknowledged to have been the cause, that all is not so
correct here, as it might have been: as particularly, that some private
References in the Margins, which the Author himself, does scarce now
understand, being found in the Copy, are here exhibited: as page 13. [ V.L
Miscell. etc.] and p. 52. (falsely printed 44) Uni, etc. which the Reader is
desired to blot out: as also, partly to correct, and partly to supply page 16.
thus: line 26, 27. entitled, De Veritate, etc. upon the str. l. 28. of
salvation ( ex consensu Universali, and communibus notitiis:) comm. l. 34. in
England, or elsewhere; except they understood not the drift and scope, which is
very possible, because, for the most part, obscurely set out, and artificially
disguised.

Page 2. line 11. read, speak. ib. l. 16. Gospel^ 4.25. no not. of it there.
There w. 7.16. Beneu. 8.6. execr. since that the h. 10.7. could be w. ib. 30.
either to r. 13.34. putetis. 14.3. earth, which. ib. 32. Hell (the u. 15.2.
torm.) did exin. ib. 22. shall think. 18.1. certain. ib. 6. intit. 20.27.
(...). ib. 29* (...). 22.27. ipso facto (so some) ib. 28. to be P. 23.18.
ingenuous. 24.17. blasph. ib. 27. seek. 27.12. successors? S. ib. 23. (...).
29.14. Infall. It h. ib. 21. in th. w. 34.25. (a sec. qu.) th. ib. 30.
successors. 38.10. at Smirnium. 40.26, 27. ( quinimo -- heretics*) anim.
53.36. dent, that my e. ib. 39. looked him o. 56.28. end of his b. 59.5.
Catholics. 63.8. of these t. 65.1. hold them inf. 66.17. the like; to be l.
67.16. sumpta tant. ib. 31. Gelasium. 71.11. Constance. 75.21. (thereby a. ib.
27. Cenom. 84.15. injustum. ib. 23. prevailing, it was d. 85 24. penes. 86 28.
Appr. are, (m. 93.13. grounded (for Scripture grounds) chapter 99.19. securus.
118.17. stuck at. 119.36. compertorum. 130.10. purpose after w. 137.22. they
conc. ib. 36. one of the greatest app. 140.21. an effect. 141.20. many, if not
most err.

Of the necessity of Reformation, in, and before Luthers time; and what
(visibly) has most hindered the progress of it.
THere is not anything that our Adversaries (so I must call them in this cause,
though in Christ the common Savior, whom we and they profess, fellow members
and brethren) have more frequent in their mouths, or which they make more
advantage of, when they have to do with ordinary people, then this common
saying, That no salvation can be had out of the Church. It is a true saying,
and well worthy their serious consideration, who account it their chief
business whilst they live, to make their Salvation sure. We shall make good
use of it: it shall appear in due place: willing therefore we are to lay it as
a foundation, and to begin with it. The reason is given by St. Augustine, and
is obvious enough upon Scripture grounds: Totus Christus, caput and corpus est:
Christ and his Church; Christ is the Head; the Church his Body; no man can have
any interest in Christ, but as he is a Member of his Body, which is the Church,
the Scripture says, Col. 1.24. St. Cyprian therefore pithily and briefly:
Habere non potest Deum patrem, Cypr. De Unit: Eccles.
qui Ecclesiam non habet matrem.

No salvation then out of the Church ordinarily; I say ordinarily, leaving God
to the privilege of his Omnipotency; as Christ in the like case answered, Mar.
x.27. So still we keep to this main foundation, That there is no other Name
under heaven given among men, whereby they may be saved, but the Name of
Christ: Act. iv.12. But what other way or ways God may have to bring men to the
knowledge of Christ available to salvation, does not become us to enquire, much
less to determine: For the secret things belong unto the Lord our God; but
those things which are revealed belong unto us and to our children. Deuteronomy.
xxix.29. But this by the way only.

That by the Church, in this assertion the Catholic Church is intended, that
also is generally acknowledged, since no particular Church can pretend unto
Christ, but as it is a member of the Catholic; which Catholic Church our
Creed does oblige us to believe, as a fundamental point of Christian Religion.
But St. Augustine is very express, when he says, Extra Ecclesiam Catholicam
totum potest (quivis, scil. though he spoke there of one particular man; but it
is the same reason of all:) habere, etc. that is, Out of the Catholic Church,
all things besides may be had. A man may have honor; (honorem: that is,
promotion Ecclesiastical; alluding to 1 Timothy v.17. and Heb. v.4.) a man may
have the Sacraments; he may sing Allelujah; answer Amen; be perfect in the
Gospect; (or perchance, perform the part of an Evangelist, or Gospel reader in
the Church:) have Faith in the Name of the Father, the Son, and Holy Ghost; and
preach it; but salvation he can find no where but in the Catholic Church.

Now the question is, what title the Roman Church has to the Catholic Church,
more then any particular Church? They will not say, That the Roman Church, as
it is a particular Church (which they acknowledge) is the Catholic Church. No,
they profess to the contrary, and it would be too gross an absurdity if they
should say otherwise. But as the Roman Church is the root, or center of Unity,
as it does infuse Universality into other particular Churches; (a strange
speech, and opinion!) and again, ( Privilegio Dignitatis and Dominationis, quia
sub se continet universas Ecclesias:) as God, says one of the Popes, maybe
called Universalis Dominus, quoniam omnia sub ejus dominio continentur:
Universal Lord, because all things are under his dominion, (Decr. 1. did. 99.
a strange speech that too!) So the Romish Church is styled the Universal, or
Catholic Church. Truly, I think it may, without any contradiction in the
terms, be so styled, if this be true, in all, or in part, that is alleged; but
how truly or probably said or alleged, besides what by others, against it,
fully, solidly, which can never be answered, has been opposed, let the Reader
judge, by what we shall have occasion to say of it, though not intended
purposely, but as it comes in our way.

But besides this allegation, which has been mentioned, (of the truth whereof,
the Reader, as I said before, may be able to judge by what we have to say;) I
will acknowledge, and it may give some satisfaction to them that have not
observed it, that the Roman Church may be called the Catholic Church, (it is
so by some ancients:) in another sense, or respect, by a Catachresis or
Homonymia of the word Roman. Anciently, Romanus Orbis, or Romanum Imperium,
because of its great extent, and generality, was used by many in ordinary
language as including an Absolute universality. Passages of ancient Heathen
Authors, are obvious to this purpose, which by learned Philologists, though
upon another occasion, have been observed. Nay the very word Romania, or
Romanitas, has been used for the whole World; that only, which they called
Barbaria, or Barbaricum, excepted. Romana dominatio, id est, humani generis,
says the Epitomizer of the Roman story, Florus. Why not then Romana fides, or
Ecclesia, in this sense, for Catholica. Now as it would be impertinent, to
infer that all Gentiles, or Heathens, were Greeks properly, and none but
they, because the word (...), or Graeci, is so used in the New Testament, and
elsewhere; and (...), or Hellenismus likewise: or that all Europeans are
Frenchmen, or Franci properly, and none but they, because so called anciently
by the Turks; as is well known, and has been observed by diverse: so if in this
sense Romana fides, or Ecclesia, be used by some ancients for Catholica fides,
or Ecclesia; to infer upon it, that therefore he that is a true Catholic,
must of necessity be of the Roman Communion, how can it be less than a gross
and absurd mistake?

The next thing which we shall ground upon, and will be granted on all hands,
is, That one particular Church may have just cause of separation, in external
Communion from another particular Church, and not be guilty of any Schism. The
chief cause generally acknowledged, is, false Doctrine, in matters of Faith,
not absolutely fundamental; for that would make it no Church: but material in
point of truth and soundness of doctrine, and not of an indifferent nature. But
there may be other just causes too; as, unjust usurpation upon rights and
liberties: As also corrupted discipline and a scandalous life publicly
maintained, and allowed by authority.

And here I desire to propose a Case to the Intelligent Reader. In the year of
the Lord 795. Constantine the VII. Son of Leo the IV. Emperor of
Constantinople, having unhappily settled his affections upon one of the Ladies
of the Court, was divorced from his lawful wife, and shut her up in a
Monastery. He pretended, that his Wife had attempted to poison him, and
otherwise too laid plots, to put him besides the government. This he pretended,
but nothing of it was believed; Neither indeed was there any thing of
probability in the pretense. However, he did what he could to get some of the
Church on his side. He attempted the Patriarch, and others in dignity, but
could not prevail. Yet, one Josephus a Priest, an Oeconomus of the great
Cathedral in Constantinople was found, who performed all solemnities and
countenanced the business with such credit as he had. All good men were much
scandalized at the business. Tharasius the Patriarch (though a man that had
been promoted to that dignity contrary to the Canons of the Church, per saltum)
particularly. But among the rest, or indeed above the rest, Theodorus Studita
(a man of great fame in those days, for his piety and learning; whom therefore
the Emperor did endeavor to win to him, by all possible means;) appeared so
zealous, that he made bold, being no more in dignity then Guardian of a Covent,
barely, to excommunicate the Emperor, and all that should adhere to him in
this cause. Baronius says, it was not a direct excommunication, neither indeed
was it at that time: but afterward it came to a direct excommunication: it was
upon the same occasion, though not of the same Emperor. But Baronius, who
would have it the Popes peculiar privilege, takes no notice of it; there were
others that joined in that action; as particularly one Plato of great fame, and
piety, he also Guardian of another Monastery. Theodorus his own brother also,
Josephus Archbishop of Thessalonica, held with him; But by the progress of the
story, from the beginning to the end, it does clearly appear that Theodorus was
the principal actor and author who gave life and countenance to all that was
done. This act gave great offense to diverse; who otherwise had sufficiently
declared their dislike of the Emperors unlawful marriage. So that even among
those that were of one opinion in the main business, there became great
division, and indeed apparent, if not Schism, yet separation. Great arguing
there was (all which may be read in Baronius:) whether it were lawful to
separate but for matters of Faith and Doctrine: how far number was considerable
to the constitution of a true Church (the paucity of them that adhered to
Theodorus in this act, being that which gave most offense) and other like
matters. But Theodorus, though he suffered very much in his body for it, as
imprisonment, and stripes, and the like: yet he stood with an invincible
courage to what he had done; and did not suffer in his body more constantly,
than he did plead for himself with his pen, stoutly and resolutely. I will not
take upon me to justify, neither his proceeding, nor all his reasons, though
much advantage may be made of some of his words: but that is not my aim, at
this time. My observation is (and I shall make some use of it by and by:) that
Baronius finds fault with nothing, neither proceedings, nor proofs; nay
commends all, but that he would not have it a right excommunication, by no
means, as I said before; and that he is somewhat angry at those words of
Theodorus in a place, Baron. a. d. 808.. 219.
De papa autem quid ad nos, hoc agat an illud? But much more angry he would
have been, had not the same Theodorus afterward in his great distress, and
deplorable condition, with great humility, applied himself to the Pope for
succor.

This was the Case: upon which I have this consideration: If the Pope and the
Church of Rome, by their own undeniable records, are convicted to have
maintained among the Clergy, who should be examples of holiness unto others,
the practice of lewdness and fornication, such as no heathenish Commonwealth
can parallel, and such as must in all probabillity tend to the confusion of
Christianism, the advancing, and countenancing of Atheism and Heathenisme, more
effectually by far then any thing that can be done or devised to the contrary
for the advancing of the one, and suppressing of the other: whether in that
case all men or Churches, truly zealous of Gods glory, and of his truth, were
not bound in conscience to separate from the said Church, (and the head of it,)
as the mother of Harlots and abominations of the Earth, etc. Apoc. xvii.11.

About the year of the Lord 1058. or 59. The cry of these fornications and
abominations of the Church, which had filled all the world, was so loud in the
ears of Pope Nicolas the II. (who certainly intended well, but took a very
contrary course:) that he employed one Petrus Damianus, a man wholly devoted to
the Pope, and his authority, but otherwise not unfit for such an employment, to
inquire and to apply some remedy. The account that Damianus returned unto the
Pope was, that he found the evil gone so far, and so predominant, that he could
do no good. Tentavi (says he:) genitalibus sacerdotum (Bishops, he does call
them so at the beginning:) fibulas continentiae adhibere, sed quia haec secta
est (continentia scil.) cui ab omnibus contradicitur, etc. As for all other
commands and injunctions that come from your Majesty (for so he writes) we may
hope to give you a good account: But in this particular, all that we could
extort, was but a bare promise made, (or uttered) with trembling lips. Si malum
hoc esset occultum (says he to the Pope:) fuerat fortasse utcunque ferendum:
sed heu scelus! omni pudore postposito, pestis haec in tantam prorupit
audaciam, ut per ora populi, volitent loca scortantium, nomina concubinarum,
Socerum quoque vocabula, and socruum; fratrum denique and quorum libet
propinquorum. Et ne quid his assertionibus deesse videatur, testimonio sunt
discursio nuntiorum, effusio munerum, cachinnantium joca, secreta colloquia.
Postremo vero omnis dubietas tollitur: uteri tumentes, and pueri vagientes. So
he in that account, for the matter of fact, whereby it does clearly appear that
fornication among the Clergy in those days was as public and ordinary almost
as eating and drinking. Now what was the reason? Two are there given by the
said Author; One is, because they dispaired that they could attain to fastigium
Castitatis: not perfection of Chastity (they were far enough from it:) but to
live chastely; which they reckoned to be a fastigium, or great perfection, not
to be expected; Another is, because they feared no punishment. Will you know
the reason of that security? Damianus will inform you: Because, says he, (
Nostris quidem temporibus gemina quaedam Ecclesiae Romanae consuetudo servatur,
ut de caeteris quidem, etc.) In those times, it was the use or custom of the
Roman Church, in other parts or heads of discipline to require performance: but
in those things that concern the incontinency of the Clergy, for fear of the
insultation of the Laics and Seculars, dispensative conticescere: he does not
say, absolutely to dispense; but (what is the difference?) by way of
dispensation to take no notice at all. And how much less is this, then that
they might do it by law? And can we think that where the Rulers gave such
examples, greater licentiousness among the vulgar can be imagined, in a
Commonwealth of miscreants? But it will be said, The Pope was sensible of it,
and did endeavor to remedy it. But how to remedy it except he had taken the
right course, 1 Cor. 7.9. Hebr. 13.4.
which was (commended by the Apostle, Better to marry then then to burn: and,
Marriage is honorable in all:) to suffer Clergy men to marry, as in former
times. Which he was so far from, that at the very same time, whereas the Clergy
of the Church of Milan, were allowed wives (ever since Ambrose his time,
certainly and before:) he never left until by his agents he had brought an
alteration; though all he could do, could not bring it to any perfection or
settlement in his time.

Now, if it were no better, in and before Luthers time, as there is occasion
enough to suspect, because besides the complaint of many of those times, and of
that side too: (not to speak of Petrus Aloisius, Paul the third, Pope of Rome
his bastard; what things, not to be named, were laid to his charge; nor of
Joannes Casa, Archbishop of Benovento in Italy, which things cannot be spoken
without horror, though both continued, as is affirmed by good authors, in great
favor; nor yet to speak of the state of Monasteries in England in King Henry
the 8th^'s time; if we may believe public Records:) the cause still continued,
as it does yet: I think it will be granted, there was very just cause, had
there been no other, for separation from such a Church, where such things to
the great scandal and detriment of Christianity, are tolerated; and the remedy
lawful marriage, (which to forbid, the Apostle says, is doctrine of Devils;)
so severely interdicted. But be it so, that there is great amendment, (as I
make no question, some Popes since that time, have endeavored it very really:)
if it were so then with Rome; and that separation from it, upon that account,
was lawful; I have what I aim at, that in some cases, besides errors in
doctrine, it may be lawful to separate even from the Church of Rome, without
any peril of schism. But of this matter, forbidding of marriage, how lawfully
done, and what mischef it has occasioned; and what may be said of later times
more, for the Readers further satisfaction, since we have had occasion to say
so much of it here, will be said afterward; Before I pass to other matter,
because Constantine the Emperor his divorce from his wife, and what ensued
upon it, has given us the occasion of this confideration, it will be worth the
while to take notice of some passages in Baronius in reference to the said
Constantine. It so fell out, that after some seven or eight years this
Emperor, by the barbarous cruelty and treacherous rebellion of his own mother
Irene, was craftily surprised, his eyes put out, and he soon after made away.
Scelus plane execrandum, says Baronius; so he begins: Baron. a. d. 796.8.
he thought it necessary to make some show of dislike, or execration since,
that the heavens themselves did so abhor the act, that immediately upon it,
there ensued a long darkness (of many days continuance) in the land, that men
could not see their way, and all men interp^eted it, that it was Heavens
resentment. But notwithstanding this judgment both of God and men; Baronius
immediately after these words, Scelus plana execrandum, with a nisi, etc.
turns it into an act of great piety, and worthy of all commendation: warranted
by Moses and by Christ: for which in very deed, he deserves the detestation of
all true Christians: Nisi, says he, (quod multi excusant) justitiae zelus ad
id faciendum excitasset: that is, An execrable act, had not (as many do excuse
it) a zeal of justice moved her, to do what she did. And then again, Plurimum
interest, quo quis animo agat, etc. So that let an act be never so horrid in it
self, never so contrary to the revealed will of God, and rules of his holy
word: yet if may be said it was done zelo justitiae, and out of a good mind
(and certainly it is that that most assassinats of princes especially pretend
unto:) by this rule it will become not only warrantable but laudable, and a
worthy act. This Baronius had learned from Pope Urban the ii. who upon the very
same ground Decr. II. c. 2, 3, 4, 5. does acquit assassinats. But see how
Baronius his zeal (if it must be so called) made him forget and contradict
himself in his account of this sad Tragedy! For whereas he says here without
any author, that Irene did not give any order for the putting out of her sons
eyes, or death; but only that he should be made fast or secured: his own
author whom he does produce (who also was present, as he professes) says
directly, Et circa horam nonam, crudeliter and insatiabiliter, oculos ejus
evellunt, ita ut mors subsequens confestim extingueret, consilio matris suae,
and consiliariorum ejus. Then follows that memorable change of the skies,
which no story can parallel: Bar. a. d. 797. Sect. 2
That the sun for the time of seventeen days, was darkened and did not give its
light (or did not put forth his beams) so that ships for want of light wandered
upon the sea, and all men said the sun did withdraw his rays, because of this
execution upon the Emperor. And again the same author quoted by Baronius in
the same place: Die Sabbathi, Ba. ibid.
orbatus est oculis a propria matre idem Constantinus. So far was Baronius
transported with his blind zeal, that he knew not what he said. But now for a
further confirmation of Baronius his perfidious false dealing in this business,
and to the end the Reader may the better know him, I shall oppose to this
disciple of Nereus, and a Cardinal, one of Loyolas disciples, a very Jesuit,
even Petavius, whose account is very different, the more he to be commended for
his love of truth and ingenuity. For first he tells us that Constantine was
forced by his mother much against his will to marry that wife which afterward
he put away, whereas she had made him sure to another before; then concerning
that abominable act, Effossis oculis Constantinus paulo post expirasse dicitur.
Quod parricidium in Irenes laudem traxerunt Graeculi quidam. Dion. Pet. in
Ratio tom. Paris. A D. 1632.
Sed quam invisum Deo fuerit, Septendecim dierum horrenda caligo testata est,
quae mortem illius consequnta est: That is: His eyes being put out, Constantine
is said to have dyed soon after. This parricide some Graeculi would draw to the
praise of Irene. But how hateful it was unto God, seventeen days horrible
darkness which insued upon it, did witness. So Petavius. Graeculi quidam: a
notable and true censure: wherein Baronius, though not a Graeculus himself
personally, is equally involved: For the matter is: those Graeculi would
persuade the world, that this had happened unto Constantine justly at the hands
of God; and that his mother did the act of a pious and religious woman in it,
because her son had cruelly entreated some Uncles of his and other kindred,
which, some in power, had attempted to set in the throne, in his stead: put out
the eyes of some, and cut off the tongues of others: which indeed was cruel,
and abominable; but done, partly by the Counsel of his mother Irene, as
Baronius his own Authors testify: which Irene had executed little less her
self, upon others, who as loyal subjects did, or were ready to do their parts,
to free her son from that bondage and subjection, against all law and equity;
in favor of her self and her dear favorite ( Stauratius by name) even after
perfect maturity, She kept him in. Her son therefore what he had done cruelly,
he did it partly by her advice, and partly by her example: but her unnatural
disloyalty to him, even before this last act, (in favor of her self and her
favorite, as I said before;) was without example. What then should make
Baronius and those Graeculi to speak of her with such respect? The true reason
is, because she had been before, and was after this horrid parricid, a fierce
promoter (or promotrix) of Image worship. Such friends that goodly cause has
had: and for being such a friend to the cause (a Mystery or Maxim our late
Rebels and Regicides learned of Popish zealots) Baronius is not willing to
believe she could be so wicked or cruel, though she so cruelly killed her own
natural Son; and which is more, her lawful King and Sovereign.

Now to go on as we propose to our selves: That one Church may separate from
another for errors in doctrine, is not at all doubted: and upon this account it
is, chiefly, that we justify our separation from the Church of Rome. The
particulars are many, wherein we charge them to have swerved from the true
doctrine, both of the scriptures and primitive fathers. There has been so much
written by men of excellent learning, since our first breach within the space
of 150 years, to make this charge good, as that it is very hard now for any
man, be he never so diligent, to add somewhat to what has already been done;
or indeed to hope, after so much done and performed with no better success,
that any more writing can be to much purpose. They that are both wise and
godly, may hope to do more by praying, then they can do (the confidence of men
to maintain a bad cause, which does discover it self every day, more and more
considered:) by arguing or writing. But in very deed it can be to little
purpose to dispute about particular points with men who are possessed or rather
infatuated with a conceit of their Churches infallibility; which of all points
being the most absurd and ridiculous, and most repugnant to antiquity, what
hopes can any man have, that they that can swallow this, or have the confidence
to press it upon others, as a main fundamental article of Religion without
which nothing can be certain, or satisfactory, either to eason or to
conscience, as long as they continue in that mind, will regard any thing that
can be alleged in any other point?

Laby p. 37.
The Church being infallible (says the author of the Labrynth) twere merely
vain to examine her Decrees (which the relator requires to be done) to see if
she have not added Novitia Veteribus, New Doctrines to Old. For the holy Ghost
(as hereafter shall be proved when we speak of this point) having promised so
to direct her, as she cannot err, will never permit her to declare any thing
as matter of Faith, which was not before either expressed or infolded and
employed in the word of God. And again: The Bishop of Rome being St. Peter's
successor, p. 147.
in the government of the Church, and Infallible (at least with a General
Council) it is impossible that Protestants or other Sectaries, should ever find
such errors or corruptions definitively taught by him, or received by the
Church, as should either warrant them to preach against her doctrine, or (in
case she refuses to conform to their preaching) lawfully to forsake her
communion. Again, p. 171.
We have already proved the Roman Church (in the sense we understand Roman)
infallible; and therefore she ought not to be accused, for teaching errors.
Neither can she submit her self to any Third, to be judged in this point; both
because there is no such competent Third, to be found; as also because it were
in effect to give away her own right, yea, indeed to destroy her self, by
suffering her authority to be questioned in that whereon all certainty of Faith
depends: for such is the Catholic Churches infallibility. And not long after;
The Church (Roman Scil. p. 172.
) may lawfully judge her accusers, because she is infallible in her decissions
of Faith, and has full authority finally and absolutely to determine all
controversies of that nature.

So he there, and elsewhere often, to the same purpose: So that in effect, all
controversies are reduced unto this one of the Popes Infallibility. Which to
make the more plausible, being a point of it self so contrary to reason, and
(upon examination of evidences) to manifest experience, that a rational man had
need to shut his eyes very close, before he can entertain it with any stability
of assent: it is proposed in many terms, and represented under several
aspects: sometimes under the notion of infallibility of tradition: sometimes of
Councils, sometimes of the Church: all which in their dialect, come to one, as
the author of the Labyrinth does tell us: Labyrinth. p. 177.
Wherefore since the infallibility of the Church, Councils and Tradition depend
so necessarily upon one another; whatever authorities prove the infallibility
of any one, do in effect, and by good consequence, prove the same of all the
rest. Now we also ascribe much to tradition, in a right sense: more to General
Councils: but most of all to the Catholic Church, which we acknowledge
infallible, in the main fundamentals of Christianity, according to Christ's
promise, Math. 16.18.
That the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. Which promise of Christ
is well applied by the Council of Trent to the Fundamentals of Christianity
contained in the Roman Creed, (which little differs from the Nicene) which
Creed is generally received by all that profess Christianity, in all parts of
the world. This would give us some hopes of some possible agreement in time.
But upon a nearer view, or search into the bottom of the business, all this is
resolved into the Popes Infallibility; Labyr. p. 33.
whatever else is pretended, vanishes into mere nothing, as will be showed more
at large in due place.

My purpose therefore is, instead of other particular points, which I said
before are many, wherein we charge the Church of Rome to have erred grossly and
dangerously, to insist upon this of Infallibility; which, though I know it has
been canvased and refuted by many, and by none more solidly and rationably,
then by the late Archbishop and Martyr, in that Book which the Author of the
Labyrinth makes a show to answer: yet because some things did offer themselves
to me upon this subject, which I have not met with elsewhere; I thought it
would not be amiss to impart that also, since no diligence can be too great to
discry a falsehood, where so much endeavor is used to cry it up to the credit
of a Fundamental Truth.

To uphold this Infallibility against all assailants, three forts have been
raised: the one founded upon pretended Scripture; the other founded upon the
authority of ancient Fathers; the third, upon the strength of natural Reason.
What is fetched from the Scriptures, is so remote, that by their own
confession, (you shall hear them afterward) little can be made of it: as
little from what the testimonies of Antiquity afford: but from Reason, there
they triumph, and dare tell Christ, had not he so provided and ordered, as they
would impose upon our belief, he had been (I have some horror to speak it)
neither good, nor wise: laying a necessity upon us (as much as in them lies,)
either to yield to their inferences, whether we see reason or no; or to
blaspheme him in our thoughts, whom our faith does oblige us to adore as a
Savior. We will therefore begin with that, because they presume so much upon
it; and the rather too, because it has been least taken notice of by others,
(so far as is come to our knowledge;) nor the consequence of that kind of
arguing, which may extend much further, if good and warrantable, by any that I
know, fully considered of. Let us hear then, if we can hear with patience, what
these men, pretending to zeal and conscience, have made no scruple to utter.

Hence it follows, (so one of them) that even our blessed Savior, who is
Wisdom it self, would have been esteemed by all the world, not a wise
Lawgiver, but a mere Ignoramus, and Impostor. For had he not framed (think
you) a strange and chimerical Commonwealth, were it alone destitute of a full
and absolute power, (which all other well ordered Republiques enjoy) to give an
authentical and unquestionable Declaration, which is the genuine and true Law?
Labyr. p. 77.
So the Author of the Labyrinth, whose plea for Infallibility generally is,
because it is necessary, as he does apprehend it. Deus non deficit in
necessariis -- This is necessary for the peace and unity of the Church: and
therefore not to be denied, unless an impossibility can be showed therein, p.
263. And p. 276. from thence Infallibility is rightly and invincibly concluded,
as we have shown by the grand inconveniences which otherwise would unavoidably
follow, both to Religion, and the Church.

So another, that wrote much about the same time: That since it is unworthy the
wisdom and goodness of Almighty God, who sent his Son to save mankind, not
first to lay, and then leave efficacious means for that end, etc. which is
often repeated by the same Author, upon several occasions. Another of that
side, having set down the opinions of Protestants, as he would have it
believed, blasphemously concludes, Biblia illa non sacra, sed fanatica;
spiritum illum, Valor. M. decred. reg. p 55.
non sanctum, sed mendacem: Christum tuum, non redemptorem, sed seductorem,
constantissime affirmavero, etc. and the same Author elsewhere, nec existimarem
(except you will grant him Infallibility) Deum esse sollicitum de nobis, etc.
and again, Si desit mundo illa lux -- tyrannidem non suavem, Vid. l. Miscel. 4.
(...) p 9. and (...), etc.
fortemque divinam, etc. But long before, Non videretur Dominus discretus
fuisse, etc. was the speech of one that commented upon the Canon Law, as has
been noted by others: and Pius the Second goes upon the same grounds, but is
more sparing in his expressions, in a particular Bull of his, of this subject,
though he had been of another mind before; Ne putatis divinam providentiam
inordinatam reliquisse militantem Ecclesiam etc.

In answer to this, I shall here in the first place, profess, That were it so
indeed, and did it appear unto us by clear Scripture, backed with the consent
and practice of Primitive times, and by answerable event, that Christ did
establish, besides his holy Word, a certain living and speaking Oracle upon
Earth, to which all men, upon emergent occasions, in controversies of Faith
(wherein the truth of God is much conce^ned) might have recourse unto; by whose
infallible (grounded upon Gods Word and Promise) resolution and determination,
all weighty differences and doubts might be composed; and men, for the
preventing of all schisms and divisions among them that profess the Name of
Christ, fully satisfied: we should not only submit, as in all things we are
bound, (whether more or less plausible to man's reason,) with all humility; but
gladly, and joyfully, with all possible expressions of due thankfulness,
embrace such an appointment. For what man is he, that has any true sense of
humanity, that would not rejoice in peace, and unity, and concord among men,
(and by consequent in the true means of it;) as the chiefest of worldly goods,
and the greatest of heavens blessings? But if all that is plausible to humane
reason, and which right humanity may oblige a man to wish, must therefore be
true, and pass among men for good and sound doctrine: what more plausible, (to
instance in one particular;) then that all ancient Philosophers, and others,
who before Christ, lived in the belief and profession of a Deity, and in their
lives and conversations (so far as their knowledge extended, and humane frailty
afforded,) became examples of virtue, of justice, temperance, continency,
contempt of the world, and the like, unto others; that such should not be
excluded from the benefit of Christ's Redemption? How far some ancient Fathers
have gone in this point, and with them some later writers, of no small account
among the Roman Catholics, has been observed by more then one. It seems in
St. Augustins time, some went further; who grounding upon some places of
Scripture, as they understood them; as particularly, 1 Pet. 3 19. Act. 2.24.
that he had preached to the spirits in prison, and loosed the pains of Hell:
did conclude, that Christ by his descent into Hell, the very place of the
damned; for so St. Augustine does avouch it, and says of it plainly: Quis nisi
infidelis negaverit fuisse apud inferos Christum? and not only there, but in
his 57 Epistle, as expressly; ubi Dives torquebatur, etc. Whereby by the way,
(...). p. 336.
we may see how much the Author of the Labyrinth is to be trusted, when he
says, But how will it appear that the Primitive Church interpreted Christ's
descent to be as low as that place where the reprobates are tormented? did
exinanire infernum; deliver all that he found there: Of which opinion St.
Augustine, as a man whose charity did extend to all mankind in general; (which
indeed is truest charity; not as some, who inhumanely and barbarously have
maintained, if Heaven were open unto all, it would not be worth having or
seeking:) quis non gratuletur? who would not be glad? says he. And again*
vellemus vel praecipue: we had much rather it were so: but it follows, Nisi
aliter se haberet sensus humanus, Aug Epist. 99. to 2. p. 502.
aliter justitia Creatoris: That is, were it not that humane reason and
ratiocination, is one thing; and Gods Justice or Decree, another. We say
therefore, upon grounds of humane ratiocination, whether true or supposed, (for
all men will not agree, what is reason;) peremptorily to determine what God
has done or determined, or according to the tenor of those passages for
Infallibility, and Supremacy (for they go together commonly) which I have
produced: was bound, if good and wise, to do, or determine; I verily conceive,
nay, and peremptorily (upon reasons to be produced) affirm, to be the ready way
to Heathenisme, Atheism, Mahometisme, and lastly, to all manner of Heresies,
and the overthrowing or undermining of all true Religion and Piety. I do not
desire to be believed any further then I show reason; and if my reason deceive
me, I shall thing my self beholding to them that will inform me better.

First then for Heathenisme, or Paganism: this was the very way, whereby,
chiefly, ancient Heathens, the most learned among them, did oppose Christianity
in the mysteries of our Faith. Let a man, to pass by others, but peruse the
writings of learned Origin against Celsus the Epicurean, (so commonly called
and reputed, though by his tenets, a Platonist, rather then an Epicurean, as
Origin does often observe: who therefore does doubt in a place, whether this
title of Epicurean, was not rather a surname, then a profession of his sect:)
he will find that Celsus his main design in that book, which Origin does
answer, was, to show and to prove, that not only the redemption of mankind in
general, by the Incarnation of the Son; but every particular circumstance
almost of that heavenly mystery, and all that is recorded of Christ, from his
Birth to his Resurrection and Ascension, was inconsistent with Divine Wisdom,
Power and Providence; and how every thing might have been contrived much better
in reference to God; and much more plausibly to the satisfaction of humane
reason and prudence. How often does that word occur in him, (...) (and
sometimes (...)) It should have been, or it ought rather to have been thus, and
thus; as he does propose and argue? And indeed, if we must stand to the trial
of humane reason, (but that it is greatest impiety, even to consider, where
divine wisdom has certainly determined;) it cannot be denied, but many things
may be spoken plausibly; especially in the judgment of ordinary men: Which
makes Origin to say in more then one place, or to the same purpose, (...):
These things are able indeed to extort assent from illiterate ordinary men, to
cause great applause, etc. And I think S. Paul intended little less, when he
pronounced of the mysteries of our Faith, but of Christ his Incarnation
particularly, that it was unto the Greeks, foolishness; and unto the Jews a
stumbling block: 1 Cor. 1 23.
or, then was foretold by the Prophet in these words, (applied by S. Ibid. 11 19
Paul to that purpose) I will destroy the wisdom of the wise, and bring to
nothing the understanding of the prudent.

This very thing, humane reason and ratiocination; (so conceived and
apprehended by men that are self-conceited, and think highly of their own
wisdom: for certainly right reason and wisdom is in all such things, so far
above the reach of man, wholly to rest upon divine revelation, as ancient
Fathers so often inculcate; and I have proved elsewhere, even from the
testimony of wisest Heathens:) but this very thing, made the Author of the
Book, entitled De vero, verisimili, and falso, upon the strength of his own
brain, to which he did very much ascribe, to devise a way of salvation common
to all men, and to all times: a way plausible enough, had it any other ground
but fancy. The design was to show, that there is no need of a Christ: (though
he durst not openly profess it;) and what opinion he had of the Gospel, is not
unknown to them that knew him. I have heard the Book was burnt in Rome: if
true, they deserve much more commendation, then they that licensed it in
England.

The same humane reason and ratiocination, has caused the reviving of that
foolish, heathenish conceit of the souls praeexistence; which with, or
notwithstanding all its plausibility, even then set out, and contrived, to the
utmost of humane wit and invention, (which the late revivers would make us
believe is the light and happiness of these late days:) was by the care of the
then rulers and governors of the Church exploded, and cast out, with shame and
ignominy.

Again, humane reason and ratiocination (so conceited as I said before) is the
thing, that made some of these late times (pious otherwise, as I have heard;)
to fall upon a project of making all men wise, and religious, and of one mind;
concerning which, (that we may not be thought to instance in things not worthy
the mention:) some Books have been written, and many have been persuaded to
entertain the project, and contributions of money made toward it; though, I
dare say, since that fabulous attempt of scaling the Heavens, by heaping up of
mountains one upon another; (I have said it elsewhere, and say it again:) never
any thing entered into the heart of man, more ridiculous: that I say not (though
it may be said as truly) more derogatory to the revealed wisdom of God. So much
for Heathenism, and Heresies, or strange opinions.

I said this way tended to Atheism: For if reason must be the judge; what
advantage will an Atheist make of the prosperity of the wicked, in this world
(so notorious, so generally observed, that even the godly have been troubled at
it) against God and a Providence; especially where and when no certain knowledge
of the rewards in another world, is yet, or was by revelation? Has not that
been the language of Atheists in all ages? that if there were a God, or a
Providence, it would be thus and thus in the world: and not as it is? (...)
(says one) (...): that is, in the words of another; Pl. Mil. glor. ed. 8 p.
422.16 p. 392.
Cum vexent mala fata bonos (ignoscite fasso) Solicitor nullos esse putare
Deos. Divos dispertivisse vitam humanam aequum fuit (reason and equity his
plea, we see:) Qui Lepide ingenuatus esset, vitam longinquam darent: Qui
improbi essent and scelesti, iis adimerent animam cito. Si hoc paravissent,
homines essent minus multi mali, etc.

Men would be less in love perchance with this Infallibility, if they knew what
Patrons it has had. Not the Popes Infallibility particularly, I do not mean;
but such a kind of Infallibility as they did fancy; which because they saw
never had been in the world, they thought they had ground enough to deny, that
there is any truth, or any thing cetain; and that the pursuit of either truth,
or virtue, this world affording no such thing really, was altogether vain and
frivolous, the consequent whereof must be (though the inference, being odious
and dangerous, they leave it to others to make it;) no God, no Religion.
Lucian, that great scoffer of all Deity, and great Patron of Epicurism, has
written a pestilent book, instiled (...): (that is, Of choice of sects and
opinions:) In which he does set out the variety of sects and opinions of
Philosophers, in the pursuit of truth and virtue; from which, with much
sophistry, and rhetorical cavillation, he does bring things to this conclusion,
that it is no less then pure frenzy and madness, for any man to busy himself
about such things; and that all Philosophers, that professed any help toward
those ends, were mere juglers and impostors. Witness those last bitter words of
his Book: p. 127.
(...). Our adversaries may find many of their arguments, and the very way of
their proceeding in that Book. The main of all he does express in these words:
(...) (he does also use the word (...) and (...) to the said purpose:) (...):
and this (...), he would have so palpable, and discernable to all, that even
blind men might be led by it. We might english him for a need by those words of
a noble Champion of the Roman Cause; S^. K. D. his conser. with a Lady, p 84.
The true saving faith to bring men to beatitude, ought ((...), that is the
word) to be obvious to all mankind, and open, as well to the simple, as to the
learned. In what esteem most ancient Fathers have had ancient Philosophers, and
their labors in the search of truth, and true virtue: and what wonderful
operation their doctrine has had upon men, whereof they alledg many particular
examples, no man can be ignorant that is any thing acquainted with them; though
upon occasion, I know, (and there was occasion enough, I confess;) they speak
freely enough. But without an absolute infallibility, that all is but foppery,
and lost labor; that is it Lucian would have.

As for Mahometisme, that this way of proceeding and reasoning does give great
advantage to it, is very apparent, if we consider, that the Mehometans p^^ is,
that Christ indeed, the virtue and wisdom of God, (for so they speak of him;)
was sent by God to turn men from their vain ways, idolatry, and the like, by
persuasion to the true God, and right manner of worship. But being that way did
not take, that he sent Mahomet to bring that to pass by force of arms, which
gentler means, reason and persuasion could not effect. And is it not very
plausible (upon those very grounds before specified) that God should be obeyed,
and have his will one way or other? Which might be further pressed, by that
incredible success which their arms had; having conquered more people and
nations in few years, then the Romans had done in some ages. And will it not
follow, or at least, very plausibly be inferred upon those grounds of humane
ratiocination, that Christ having purposed unto himself such an end, he must
needs have left (so they speak) or appointed some means, how that end may
infallibly be compassed; or else (as some to countenance their own inferences,
have been bold to censure, or rather to blaspeme,) to be thought so, and so:
will it not, I say, follow upon it, that the Pope should be in a manner
omnipotent, (and we know them that have made no scruple to give him those
titles;) as well as infallible? That at least he should be backed with power
sufficient, to compel them that will not be ruled or swayed (as many will be
apt enough, if it be for their interest) by his Infallibility? May not Christ's
reputation, upon this ground, suffer as much, or more, by such a contempt? And
in very deed, upon this very consideration, some have grounded the necessity of
the Popes temporal Supremacy over all Princes and Kingdoms, giving him power to
depose, and to kill, as he shall see cause; because without such a power over
Kings and Princes, and Kingdoms, Christian Religion, they say, may in time come
to nothing. So Suares, for one, a great Author, and of great authority among
the Romanists; who does confirm his opinion with the dictat of Pope Boniface,
pronounced by him as an Article of faith to all Christians; Extrav. Com. l. 1.
tit. 8 c. 1.
Porro subesse Romans Pontifici omnem humanam creaturam declaramus, dicimus,
definimus, and pronunciamus esse omnino de necessitate salutis. Which to be
spoken by him, of temporal subjection, as well as spititual, appears by the
tenor of that Decree, or Declaration. Now it is well known, that many Roman
Catholics, even of the learnedest of that side; yea, whole Nations, and
Kingdoms of that profession, have not held it problematical, (as some would
persuade) but disclaimed this doctrine as impious and diabolical; and Princes,
with their Council and Clergy, have made strict Edicts against it, condemned,
or censured the assertors, burned their books, and the like: Nay, more then
that, when the Pope has angered them, they have gone very far, some Princes and
Kingdoms, yet in subjection, to cast of a great part of his spiritual power,
and Supremacy, as we shall show more fully afterward. If therefore this
Infallibility stand upon such ticklish points, so defective in those things
that should make it useful, and available; what will the conclusion be upon
those former grounds of humane ratiocination?

Now, if a power to compel be not allowed; how likely it was, or is upon
grounds of humane ratiocination, that this Infallibility, though granted and
acknowledged, would be available to that end which is pretended, I further
propose to consideration. How natural it is to man, to be led by example,
rather then by council, or reasoning; who knows not, that knows any thing of
the world, and has been acquainted with men by experience, or by reading? That
a man that is of a bad life, may be Orthodox (as to the world at least,) in his
opinion, or doctrine, no man does doubt: but whether such a man, where his
actions are public and notorious, may probably do more hurt, or good by his
Doctrine; is, I think, a great question. Gods own words by his servant David
are; Psalm. 50.16.
But unto the wicked, God says: What have thou to do to declare my Statutes;
or, that thou should take my Covenant in thy mouth? Upon which words St.
Chrysostom does observe, that in Princes Courts, (by the laws or customs of his
time) it was not ordinary or usual for any man to be allowed to be an
Interpreter of the Kings Laws, that was convicted of a corrupt life. His words
are; (...). The same St. Chrysostom elsewhere calls that (...), the most
uncontrollable, or irresistible (we may say infallible) proof and conviction,
(...): adding in the same place, that all the reasoning in the world, without a
godly life, is to no purpose. Nay, the same Chrysostom, in his sixth Homily,
upon the same Epistle to the Corinthians, does peremptorily deliver, that
miracles, where a corrupt life is visible, will do no good; and that a godly
life without miracles (since the first miracles of the Primitive times) is
sufficient; among Christians, at least.

If therefore God designed the Popes breast for the sanctuary of truth, ( qui
jura omnia in scrinio pectoris sui censetur habere: Sext. Decr. l. 1. tit. 2.)
may not a man, upon ground of humane ratiocination, plausibly infer, that
certainly the same God, who intended him infallible, would also make him
impeccable; or, if that be too much, or not so necessary; yet at least so to
provide, that he might not be extremely scandalous and exorbitant in his life
and conversation; lest that instead of keeping men in the right faith, by his
infallibility in doubtful points of doctrine, he should (as most probably)
overthrow the faith of more in points fundamental: make more Atheists by the
one, then preserve from Heresy by the other? That there have been many,
besides the Primitive Popes, (who were all Martyrs, or most of them,) pious and
exemplary Popes, worthy of that place, we will easily grant, and I think no
body will deny; but is it not strange, that any zealous for the Pope and his
greatness, should confess,, (forced by truth,) that no less then fifty Popes,
one after another, (or thereabout) for the space of 150 years, Genebrard. in
Chronol.
were no better then arrant Apostates? I think I need not name him that has
said it, because diverse have taken notice of it; but if any desire it, they
shall find his name in the margin. And Baronius says directly of some of them,
though they sat without opposition, (and there is the same reason for all;)
that they were not right Popes, but mere usurpers. What was the Church all that
while without a head; such a head, as they would make us believe, Christ was
bound, or thus and thus to be censured, to provide it? Could it subsist so
long, without this provision for Infallibility, and yet we to believe upon pain
of eternal death, nothing so necessary, so fundamental, as infallibility? What
contradictions are these? They that tell us upon grounds of humane
ratiocination, that God was bound by his Goodness and Wisdom, to make the Pope
infallible, to prevent heresies; how will they reconcile this with Providence?
Has God taken such care to prevent Heresy, and made no provision against
Atheism, in which all Heresies are included? What can be more inconsistent
with humane reason, more derogating to Providence, then that a man promoted, if
not by the Devil immediately, (as by their own Authors it is written of some
Popes;) yet by public Strumpets, and governed by Strumpets after his
promotion, (which of Pope John the Tenth particularly, is acknowledged by
Baronius;) should by the extraordinary assistance of Gods Spirit, be made
infallible, in mysteries of Faith?

Lastly, Is it likely, in point of reason, or agreeable to Providence, that God
should make a Pope miraculously infallible in his public decisions and
decrees, ex cathedra, as they say; lest the Church should receive hurt, and yet
suffer him to be an Heretic in his ordinary life, and profession, from which
as much, or more hurt may justly be feared? But it will not be granted by all
Roman Catholics, (though by many it is, men of great credit among them, who
never were accounted Heretics for it) that any Popes have been Heretics:
Baronius does not grant it, nor Bellarmine, I know; but he that shall with
judgment and unpartiality, read their answers to the objections and instances
to the contrary, will find, I am confident, that they are put to such shifts to
find evasions, that he will rather be confirmed by their answers that it is so
as we say, then receive satisfaction that it is not. Let any man, to instance
in one, see how Baronius is put to it, to acquit Honorius the First, who was
excommunicated, after his death, by the sixth general Council, for a
Monothelite, and the excommunication confirmed by Leo the Second; how miserably
he does come off; and after many windings and turnings, is glad to betake
himself to caligo temporum, (or, darkness of those times) for an excuse; I
think he will say Baronius might have spared his pains; but that what shift
soever he makes, he must hold to his conclusion, which was the chiefest design
of all that great and voluminous work. We shall have another instance in
Liberius before it be long, where Baronius is as much put to it. Now if it be
said that the Pope cannot be an Heretic, because when he becomes an Heretic,
he does ( ipso facto, so some) cease to be a Pope; if they mean by that, that
at that very time, by a miraculous Providence, such a Pope is always deposed,
or does die: they say somewhat indeed, but that which is contrary to truth;
neither indeed, is that their meaning. But to say, that he ceases to be a Pope
de Jure, though he continue still Pope, and in full authority de facto; the
answer is altogether impertinent as to Providence: For if he continue in his
place without apparent opposition; how shall people judge him to be no Pope, for
his false doctrine; and not rather believe his doctrine (upon their principles)
good and true, because he is in the Popes Chair? As well may they maintain that
the Pope is impeccable, upon pretense, that as often as he does sin,
(scandalously at least) he ceases to be Pope, although he return to his right
afterward. And the like may be said of any Priest in general, that he is
impeccable upon that account, which shows the impertinency of this evasion.

I will instance in one particular more, though I think I have already gone
over all the particulars I promised. Not to speak of the East Indies, of
discoveries and opportunities in those parts; when the New World (which may
truly be called a New World, either for the extent of Land, found to be greater
and greater every day; or for the number of Inhabitants;) was by Gods
miraculous providence found out; a way opened for the conversion of innumerable
multitudes of heathen people, to the saving knowledge of Christ, and of his
Gospel: what readier way, in the judgment of humane reason, for the
accomplishment of so great a work, then signs and miracles; even as at the
first plantation of Christianity in the world, the reason in appearance being
the same, and the number of men to be converted not less considerable? This
made one of the learnedest and most ingenious Papists, who by long experience
was thoroughly acquainted with that business, to take it into serious
consideration, as does appear by what he writes of it in his Books De
procuranda Indorum salute: lib. 2. c. 9. where he does propose a question in
these words; Cur miracula in conversione gentium non fiant nunc, ut olim, a
Christi praedicatoribus? He there tells us, that they were many that wondered at
it, as well as he; for that it was (by approved experience) the readiest way;
and that they were innumerable nations (whose salvation they were bound to
believe was dear unto God,) that would speedily have been converted, if God had
vouchsafed them the same means. He does not absolutely deny (trusting upon the
relation of others) but that some miracles, or miraculous operations have been
performed by some, in some places: verum cur tanta signorum parcitas sit, cum
videtur tam effusa esse necessitas: (necessity the great argument for
infallibility:) merito: cruciat animum. It pierced his very soul, as he
professes: It is well he was not of the temper of the defenders of
Infallibility; God should have heard of it in another manner, as you have heard
before. But Acosta it seems, had better learned Christ; and therefore, besides
what Gods holy Word did afford him, which he makes excellent use of, having
consulted with St. Augustine, and S. Chrysostom, upon the matter, whose words
he does there produce, he does resolve the question with much wisdom and piety.
The best resolution is, (though indeed, he does also, after that, very modestly
attempt upon some other plausible reasons:) Quis novit sensum Domini, aut cum
quo iniit consilium? Isa. 40.13.
Who has directed the spirit of the Lord; or being his Counselor, has taught
him? Which also in that great question, concerning the conversion of Nations,
why God should leave some in their ignorance so long, and not afford them the
means which he does unto others, is St. Augustins, and all wise men's that have
considered of it, their resolution.

Hitherto it has been our business to show the danger and impertinency withal
of that kind of arguing (in general) which is used by many, and wherein they
put great confidence, to prove a necessity of the Popes Infallibility. But now
what may be said for Providence, in this very particular, to show the
unreasonableness of their allegations, (or blaspemies rather) as well as
impiety; the reader, if he please, shall find at the end or conclusion (where I
thought it more proper) of this discourse of Infallibility.

Now if they shall quit that plea, and fly to Scripture, or true Primitive
Antiquity to prove it, we cannot except against the way; and though we have no
purpose to examine all places and allegations, which would require a large
volume, and has been done fully by more then one; yet I shall propose some
things to be considered of, which perchance may save some men whose leisure
does not serve them for long discourses, the labor to see further; And though
Infallibility be the thing that we propose to our selves chiefly to insist
upon, yet because it does often coincidere with Supremacy, in proofs and
allegations, and has some connection with it in the Popes case, both, as is
pretended, being grounded upon one thing, the welfare and unity of the Church;
we shall not decline what offers it self in the way, concerning that also.

The first question then will be, whether it does appear by Scripture, that
such Supremacy joined with Infallibility, was promised to St. Peter? The
second, whether to his Successors? As for the first, what was granted to St.
Peter personally, as an Apostle, will not much concern us to inquire: Of his
Successors is all the question. What is said of the first therefore, shall
only be as it makes way for the resolution of the second question. Those
places that are produced to show the Churches Infallibility, we meddle not with
them; if any thing can be made of them, they concern not the Pope, but the
Catholic Church; the Infallibility whereof, in Fundamentals, we maintain more
truly then the Romanists do, as we shall see afterward.

But before we enter into the examination of particular places, I shall propose
to the Readers consideration, what I think he will not think unreasonable: If
it be so, as we are told by the abettors of it, that without Infallibility no
man can tell what to believe; that there can be no certainty of Faith; and by
consequent, no hope, no possibility of salvation to any: that therefore Christ,
who in his goodness had founded a Church, was bound in his Wisdom, though by a
continued miracle, to provide this infallibility for it, as that without which,
his Church could not subsist; it will certainly follow, that the same God did
also provide that this infallibility might infallibly come to the knowledge of
men, that would not be willingly and obstinately blind and ignorant. Of all
men, I mean, who by their birth, as born of Christian Parents; or, by their
conversion afterward, have, or should have any interest in the Church. If they
send us to the Scriptures, to find it there, we desire no better assurance. But
then, since it is well known and granted on both sides, that the Scriptures are
oftentimes obscure, and of doubtful interpretation; as once St. Augustine
desired of the Donatists, so must we of our Adversaries, that they may not
produce Scriptures which may admit of different interpretations: but clear,
perspicuous, unquestionable Scripture; such as may be sufficient to convince
any reasonable man that is but capable of common sense, August. De Unit. Eccl.
and is not wilfully cross and refractory. Such Scripture St. Augustine
required of the Donatists, and such did he produce against them himself very
plentifully.

The places alleged for the Popes Infallibility (into which all Infallibility
by their doctrine does resolve) are three. First, Luke. 22.31, 32. Simon,
Simon* behold Satan has desired, etc. But I have prayed for thee, that thy
faith fail not: and when thou art converted, etc. What man, without a
revelation, since Christ knew that Peter particularly, which no other Apostle
did, would deny him, could imagine, that Christ intended any more by these
words unto Peter, then this? Though I know, Peter, that thou will deny me
through fear; yet, etc. And truly this denial of Peter, whose zeal had been so
eminent above the rest of the disciples, after so glorious a confession, might
have troubled all the disciples, had not Christ foretold it: by which
foretelling also, the Disciples in this time of Christ's apparent outwardly
dereliction, were seasonably confirmed, that Christ knew all things; and that
nothing happened to him, or his, without a providence. But that any
infallibility was promised to St. Peter, peculiarly to him, or more then to the
rest of the Disciples; and not to him only, but to all his Successors in that
See; by which infallibility the Church should continue sound in the faith, and
orthodox: must not he have the spirit of Prophecy, that could fetch all this
infallibly out of these words? Besides, diverse ancient fathers have commented
upon these words. I am not so well furnished at this time perchance, that I can
have recourse unto all. But neither in Maldonat, who uses to be very exact
upon such occasions; nor in the Rhemish Annotations, do I find any Commentators
alleged, that have any thing of infallibility. No nor in Bellarmin: who does
indeed (as the others also, some:) produce the words of diverse ancients, which
apply upon occasion, those words to the Popes, as Peter's Successors. But who
are they? Some of them mere counterfeits, as Leo, the First: Felix, the First:
out of the first Popes Decretals: which Papists themselves, when occasion is,
stick not to disclaim, as false and suppositious ware. And then others but
those later Popes, in their own quarrel, no competent judges or witnesses.
Bernard his authority after the Popes were come to that highth, is not
considerable. Chrysostom says little, neither does he quote those words
particularly, as Bellarmine does acknow^edge. To all these I will oppose
Theophylact, whom Bellarmine and others not without reason, style Chrysostom^s
abbreviator, who is copious enough upon the place, and speaks of Peter's
Primacy, as other Fathers do: but nothing of any infallibility peculiarly
granted to Peter by these words; much less to his successors. Nay it is
apparent, that he knew no such thing: and certa^nly had it been a thing known,
or bel^eved in his days, he had not been ignorant of it; and if not ignorant,
he would have made some mention of it (who can think otherwise?) where he could
not omit it without suspicion of wilful perfidiousness. That he knew no such
thing, or at least would not be known; (if any can be so absurd as to believe
it:) does manifestly appear; because in the exposition of those words, and when
thou art converted strengthen thy Brethren, he brings two interpretations;
the first in reference to the present; the second extending to future times,
and after-ages. In reference to the present time he says, it became well
Peter, as he that was, (...), the chiefest of the Apostles: yea (...) and
(...): that is, the rock and fortress (or bulwark of the Church; (other Fathers
have said as much, as this, of St. Peter, it is not denied: but how little this
does advance the Popes cause, will abundantly appear, I hope, before we have
done:) after his repentance to confirm the rest. The second interpretation, in
reference to future times: What? Because this grant, or privilege (call it
what you will:) was to pass to St. Peter's Successors so indeed, reason would
enforce, had any such thing been believed; especially, as an article of Faith,
and a main fundamental of Religion. Theophylact his words are: (...), etc. That
is, Theophyl. in Evangel. Romans Ed. p. 357.
This may be understood also, as spoken not of the Apostles only, that then
lived, that they should be confirmed by Peter: but of all the faithful that
shall be unto the end of the world. For thou Peter, being converted, thou will
become a good example unto all men of (or for) repentance: and none that
believe in me, will despair looking upon thee (or, whilst they look upon thee)
who being an Apostle, did deny me; and again (or, afterward) through
repentance did receive (...), primacy (or, superiority,) over all and ((...):
as much has been said of other Apostles;) the care (or superintendency:) of
the whole earth: (or, World) Let any man judge by this, whether Theophylact
knew any thing, or had any inclin from others of St. Peter's Successors their
infallibility from those words of Christ unto Peter. Bell. De. R. P. l 4. c. 3.
p. 796.
If any man shall reply, as Bellarmine does, both of him and others, upon the
same occasion; that though they say nothing of it, yet they deny it not; they
say nothing against it: let the impartial reader consider, whether the silence
of a Commentator, upon a Text, upon which, such a necessary fundamental Article
of Faith, (as they would have us to believe) is grounded, does not amount to an
absolute denial; or at least imply the ignorance of the Commentator, concerning
any such thing. But the reader may observe by the way, how manifestly
Bellarmine does contradict himself in this matter. For whereas he says in one
place, Caeterum isti Patres, (Augustine, Chrysostom, Theophylact, Prosper; by
him named before;) licet, etc. that is, Though these Fathers make no mention of
the other privilege, which is, or was, (as he a little before does expound it;)
That as Bishop, or Pope, he should never teach any thing contrary to true faith
-- which privilege did certainly descend to his posteri (or successors:) yet
they deny it not, nor indeed could they, except they would contradict many
other fathers. So here he confesses, that those Fathers, Theophylact for one,
made no mention of this second privilege in their expositions upon this place,
Luke xxii. etc. In the very next place he has these words; Praeter hos Patres,
non desunt etiam alii authors, qui eodem modo, (de secundo Privil.) exponunt.
Theophylactus in caput 22. Lucae, aperte docet, dari Petro hoc privilegium,
quia ipse futurus erat princeps and caput aliorum, and perinde dari omnibus
aliis qui illi in principatu succederent. And then produces Theophylact his
words, (which we had before) Quia te habeo principem discipulorum, confirma
caeteros. Hoc enim decet te, qui post me Ecclesiae Petra es, and fundamentum.
The same Theophylact in the same place, silent, Bellarmine says, a little
before, and yet so express concerning it, as he makes him here; is not this a
manifest contradiction? If it be said, Bellarmine by these last words, intended
only that so much might be collected, or inferred from those words of
Theophylact he cites afterward. I answer, were it so; yet non meminisse, and
aperte docere, is a contradiction however, that cannot be denied. As for the
inference, that that also is a false inference, does appear by Theophylacts own
words immediately following, when he does expound what follows in the Text, And
when thou art converted, etc. Some may wonder at this kind of dealing; but not
they that are versed in Bellarmine, and have examined his quotations; they will
not wonder at it.

The second place of Scripture upon which they ground this Infallibility, is
that saying of Christ to Peter (concerning which so much has been written on
both sides: Matthew. xvi.18.
) Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church: and the gates of
hell shall not prevail against it. I must desire the reader to bear in mind
that we are upon an Article of Faith, (as our adversaries would have us
believe;) which is the Cardo Religionis; the main fundamental of Faith, upon
which all depends, and without which, no certainty of any thing to be had; no
hopes of salvation left to any: which therefore (upon their own grounds of
reason, upon which they build the necessity of Infallibility) had need to be
written in capital letters in the Scripture, that all men may read it there,
plainly and legibly; or else the Wisdom and Providence of God, etc. The rest
may be supplied from their own words; I make some conscience, even to repeat
them. Now this is the chief passage of Scripture, upon which both Supremacy and
Infallibility are built. That much has been ascribed to St. Peter's Chair, by
some ancients from those words, we may, and will easily grant: what may be made
of this grant, we shall consider afterward, in its proper place. All that we
have to do here, is to consider, whether there be such a consent of ancient
fathers in the interpretation of these words, as may induce us to believe that
we have in them plain and direct Scripture, for either absolute Supremacy or
Infallibility, it has been the task of more then one, to examine all
particular places: I think, if we can show that some fathers of principal
authority, have pitched upon a sense of the words, very different from that
which the Romanists contend for, and which gives no advantage at all to either
Supremacy or Infallibility, we shall have done as much to the full, as in
pursuance of what we have undertaken, can reasonably be expected. The main
difference is those words, Et super hanc Petram, and upon this rock: whether
Christ intended Peter his person by that rock; or himself; or as some, St.
Peter's Faith; or the Church. I know much endeavor is used by the chiefest
abettors of the Popes cause, Maldonat, Baronius, Perron, to reconcile their
interpretation that would have St. Peter's Faith, or the Church, understood with
theirs that understand St. Peter himself. But he that well weighs the places,
let him be a friend to the cause as much as he will, let him but judge
impartially, will commend their will more then their success; however we may
spare that labor. St. Augustine in his Retractations, which he wrote when his
judgment was ripest, and his mind most disengaged, he does there acknowledge,
and in a manner retract, that in one place he had followed that interpretation
which made St. Peter himself to be the rock; which, that he might not be
thought to have done singularly, he does alledg St. Ambrose his hymn, where
that sense is followed. But then, Sed scio me postea saepissime sic exposuisse,
etc. Though I did so there, (says he) yet I am sure I did in very many places,
since that time, (upon better consideration belike:) so expound it -- ut (super
hanc) intelligeretur Christus, quem confessus est Petrus, dicens, Tu es
Christus, filius Dei vivi: ac si Petrus ab hac Petra appellatus personam
Ecclesiae figuraret, quae super hanc Petram aedificaretur, and accepit claves
regni coelorum. It is true, he leaves it free to the Reader to follow either;
he does not condemn that former interpretation, expressed by St. Ambrose, in
those known verses of his; but if we follow his judgment, it is clear, Christ
himself, not St. Peter, is the rock. And what need we more? What can Baronius
answer for himself, or any body for him, who lays no less then madness to
their charge ( eo amentiae provecti sunt) who would not have Peter understood,
and by consequent, nothing here intended to him by Christ, particularly?
Baronius would make us believe, that which gave ground to this interpretation
of St. Augustine, is, his ignorance of the Hebrew, or Syriac. True it is, that
the difference observed by St. Augustine, between Petrus and Petra, will not
hold in the Syriac, as to any difference of termination; but as to the
difference of sense, it is the same thing in the Syriac, and in the Latin. For
Cephas for a proper name, and Cephas for a rock, (Tu es Cephas, and super hanc
Cepham;) are quite different in the sense: Besides, those that peruse those
many places of St. Augustine, where he does assert that interpretation of
Petra, for Christ himself, will find that he has other reasons for it, besides
that observation of the difference of the words; and there be other ancients
besides St. Augustine, who follow the same sense, and make no such observation.
And besides ancients, I will name one of these later times, a man of great
authority in Spain, whilst he lived, Michael Medina, who in his Apology for
Ferus (hereafter to be mentioned) does treat of these words, and has more
interpretations then one, but not any that does concern St. Peter particularly;
much less the Pope, and his pretended Infallibility. We shall have occasion
again to speak of the words, and give the Reader fuller satisfaction: But by
what we have said, the Reader may judge whether it be probable, that these words
were ever intended by the Holy Ghost, as an evidence for Infallibility.

The third and last place of Scripture, is, Pasce oves meas. Joh. xxi.16. Feed
my sheep. But they themselves that alledg this, can make nothing of it, but by
remote consequences; (and indeed, if there be any thing of Infallibility in
these words, who does not see, that every Shepherd must be Infallible?) which
therefore we shall not need to insist upon. But if any man desire to be further
satisfied, let him but read St. Augustine in his 49 Homily upon St. John;
where, treating of those words, he makes the effect of them equally to concern
all Bishops and Pastors; that is, to be tender of their Flock, and not to enter
into that charge otherwise, then by the right door, etc. but that they were
spoken to Peter particularly: First, because Christ ( in Petro formabat
Ecclesiam:) in the person of Peter, did lay the platform of his Church; and
secondly, because Peter, having offended more then any other, would be obliged
more then any other to the observation of this charge: but of any dominion, or
peculiar privilege granted unto Peter by those words, not any word there, nor
in the next Homily, where he treats of them again; where also he does assert
Christ the only Master, and head Shepherd: all others without any distinction,
to have equal interest in Christ.

Now if this be all that the Scripture does afford for Infallibility (for the
example of a chief Priest, among the Jews alleged by Baronius; or the Urim and
Thummim, which he did wear, by Bellarmine, cannot be called arguments, much
less evidences) let the reader judge, whether it have any ground in Scripture to
be believed as an article of faith, by all men, as necessary to salvation.

But now on the other side, it will not be amiss to consider, whether a man not
pre-occupied or pre-possest with prejudice, reading the Scriptu^es will not be
rather inclined, by what he finds there, to believe the contrary. I said
before, that Supremacy and Infallibility* had some connection. For in very deed,
Supremacy, such absolute Supremacy as the Pope challenges, without
Infallibility (in fundamentals at least) will be very dangerous, and
inconsistent with the welfare of the Church: and Infallibility, as was said
before, without Supremacy, even such as is contended for, to little purpose. We
shall therefore take them here together into consideration: I will but point at
the places briefly, and leave them to the Readers further consideration.

First, we are often told that Christ is the head of the Church; so expressly
called and styled in diverse places. As we read, so we believe and maintain; and
we see and admire the effects of this headship of Christ, in Gods wonderful
providence and dispensations for the preservation of a Catholic Church, in
all ages, hitherto, notwithstanding all the attempts of men, or devils, in all
ages very visible, to the contrary. It will not serve to say, the Pope is head
under Christ; For in a large sense the same may be said of any Bishop in his
Diocese, or Pastor in his Parish: and of temporal rulers also, more eminently.
But the Pope challenging to himself such power over the universal Church under
that title; even as great, as would be due to Christ himself, if he ruled
personally: is it not more then probable, that that title being given to Christ
often, never to Peter, or any other; no other can pretend to it, and to the
right of it, without manifest usurpation and Sacrilege? St. Peter himself
charges all Ministers, pascere gregem (pasce oves meas, 1 Pet. v.2 4.
was Christ his charge to him; how much short is this of that, in ordinary
construction?) to feed his flock: tells them of a chief Shepherd to whom they
are accountable: says nothing of himself: Lord, what other guess of language
do we find in the Popes Epistles, and Decretals?

St. Paul Ephesians. iv.11. does set down the Hierarchy of the Church (we may so
call it) in his days: he does particularise the several charges and offices
appointed and instituted by God in his Church: some Apostles, says he: some
Prophets: some Evangelists: some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of
the Saints, etc. He does it also 1 Cor. xii.28. In both Chapters he does treat
of the unity of the Church, and wherein it consists: the unity of every
particular Church: and the unity of the Catholic Church: Would not any man
admire, if St. Paul knew any thing of the Popes Supremacy, in order to his
Infallibility, and the Churches infallibility (for that is the principal end:)
as St. Peter's Successor; that he should make no mention, either of St. Peter
particularly: nor of any such charge, to be continued in the Church, so
necessary as we are told to the preservation of it?

And again, the same Apostle speaking of the divisions among the Corinthians,
relates their words, and makes them say, I am of Paul; and I of Apollo; and I
of Cephas; and I of Christ; and then adds, Is Christ divided? was Paul
crucified for you? Which implies the same of the rest also: as if he had said:
Was Apollo? Was Cephas? Would any man think St. Paul would have made so bold
with Cephas, as to mention him among the rest, without any distinction, or
acknowledgment of his superiority, nay supremacy; which is now so eagerly
pressed and contended for, as if all religion lay in that one Article?

But above all, let a man calmly and soberly, (I mean without passion or
prejudice;) read St. Paul, Gal. 2. the whole chapter: wherein St. Paul gives an
account of himself, and of his carriage in his charge; in reference (and partly
opposition) to some others, who also were Ministers of Christ: how he speaks of
them; first in general, who seemed to be somewhat, in the sixth verse;
asserting there the Independency of his charge and proceedings, in these words,
(...), which is a very significant word, and of great extent, In conference
added nothing to me: so expressed in the English there; but others more
generally, nihil addiderunt; auctoritatis, aut cognitionis, scil. that is, they
added nothing to me, either of knowledge or authority. then v.9. naming them
whom he intended: James; Cephas; and John; who seemed pillars. And then v. 11.
of his contest with Peter, particularly; that he withstood him to the face (and
v. 14. before all the company:) because he was to be blamed. and v. 13. that he
dissembled. v. 14. that he (with the rest) walked not uprightly according to
the truth of the Gospel: Would not a man think that St. Paul foresaw somewhat,
or that he was moved by the spirit of God, to write those things of purpose, to
prevent, or at least, to convince the strange attempts and extravagances (to
use the title of one part of the Popes Law, or Decrees; which might well be so
styled) of after-ages? I cannot blame the Pope, if he would not have these
things read publicly to the people, in a language they can understand.

Again, Acts xv. Where we have the story of the Apostles meeting together, to
consider of some doubtful points; we find indeed that St. Peter spoke first;
(which Baronius and some others would draw to an argument of his supremacy and
presidentship in this Council; quite contrary to St. Chrysostom his opinion,
who directly makes St, James his speaking last, or after Peter, an Argument of
his authority, as Bishop of Jerusalem, who also does observe, that St. Peter
spoke more roughly; St. James not only more fully (to end the business) but
also more mildly; as became him (says he) to whom (...):) the power (or
government) was committed: who was ((...)) in great power (or authority:)
(...)) to leave those things, that would be most offensive unto others; and
himself, to insist upon those things, the subject whereof would well agree with
more meekness and moderation.

I shall not insist upon the weight of this observation, or the pertinency of
it, in this place. All I observe upon it is, that if St. Chrysostom had
believed St. Peter's Supremacy, a great part whereof must be to preside in all
Councils, he had never written so: But we are not yet come to that; (the
opinion of the Fathers in general) but that this offered it self in the way.
But to return to the Text: Does not St. James seem to speak more distinctly,
not only determining of some things, which Peter had not mentioned; (according
to which determination, the letter was framed:) but also in those words, (...),
(is there not some Emphasis in the pronoune; which though the English cannot be
without; in the Greek, it is ordinary) My sentence is? (...); says the same
St. Chrysostom: What means this, (...), or, My sentence is? that is ((...),
I speak, or declare with authority, that so it is. I pass over these things
briefly, to which much more might be added, if we intended a full discourse, or
discussion. Those things are direct and pat against St. Peter's Supremacy: such
at least, as is contended for: which is the only ground on which by way of
Scripture authority his successors build.

But when our adversaries have done all that they can, to bring together some
places that may seem to ascribe to Peter somewhat above the rest of the
Apostles; yet still a second question, they are to prove, wherein they confess
the Scripture is silent: that, what was granted to Peter peculiarly, in this
kind; was with equal right and infallibility, to descend to his successors,
without which they do nothing. That nothing in the Scripture is to be found,
that does evidently concern the Popes as St. Peter's successor; is the
acknowled^ment, Laby. p. 280.
as of others, so of the author of the Labyrinth particularly in these words:
To omit Scripture, wherein I confess there is no express mention of the Pope,
but only of St. Peter, in whose right the Pope does succeed. And will they say
then; can they dispense with their own Consciences so far, or so presume upon
our credulity, as to maintain that the Popes infallibility, has any grounds in
Scripture, to make it an article of Faith, of necessary belief to all that will
be saved*

I know it is not for men, peremptorily to judge of the heart; yet if we
consider all things, and may judge at any time, by outward appearances, their
judgment we may say, is not without great probability, who think (as diverse
have professed) that none are further from the belief of this strange Paradox
of infallibility, then they that are most earnest, and apparently zealous, to
make others believe it. The reason may be; because many, upon the authority of
great names, and some plausible allegations; and especially by the confidence
of the assertors; may probably be induced to believe it, truly and really: but
that they that have taken the pains (as they must that defend it:) to look
neatly into it, to see what can be said for it or against it; should not
discern the falsehood of it, the manifold contradictions and absurdities; is
indeed very hard to believe.

And because they send us to the Old Testament, sometimes; and would make some
advantage of some things there; I shall only desire the Reader to consider:
What difference soever we find of administrations and dispensations; of
ordinances and commands, between the times before and since Christ; without
further inquiring into the reasons, we think our selves bound with all humility
to submit to the wisdom of God, and verily to believe, that whatever God did
appoint in Church or State, for the government, or well being of it present and
future, was absolutely best, so as God had appointed. In those things, where
Gods will and authority revealed unto us in his word, has not interposed;
there we leave some liberty to human ratiocination. Whereas the Church
(visible) was formerly confined by Gods own order and decree (what reason of
man can penetrate into the causes?) to one particular Nation; we believe since
Christ, a Catholic Church: that is, Congregations of Christians in all places
of the world, united in and by the main fundamentals of Christianity: and by
their head CHRIST JESUS: against which Catholic Church (because it is so
revealed unto us and promised by Christ himself:) we verily believe the Gates
of hell shall not prevail. But of any particular Church; that it shall be
infallible, it self, and the means of infallibility unto others, having no
ground from scripture, we see nothing in the course of Gods Providence in
former times, that should induce us to believe. For certainly, God was then the
same God, under the law in himself, and in his own nature, (if we may so speak)
as he has been since the Gospel. He had a Church then, which Church had an
interest in Christ, as it has had since Christ. The people of Israel, they
were his chosen peculiar people, whom he did cherish, and protect miraculously,
from t^me to time, more then he did ever any other Nation. What care he took
also for their instruction, that they might continue in his Fear, and true
Worship, is abundantly recorded in the Scripture. Yet for all this, and those
miraculous operations, so frequent among them, God did not provide for their
Infallibility. Both they, and their Priests, did frequ^ntly apostatize in
matters of Faith; and embrace false Doctrines: and they had schisms, and
divisions among themselves: and yet still, God had a Church; a company of
faithful people, which though not without errors perchance, more or less,
stuck still to the main foundations.

So much of the Scripture; which I think I may conclude, does not oblige us,
neither Old nor New, to believe this Infallibility which our Adversaries lay
upon us, as the grand fundamental point of Faith. And to say, That Christ was
bound in his honor to order it so, as they m^ke bold; does imply certainly,
(we have already said it, and here repeat it purposely, because much depends of
it) that he did also provide, how all men (pretending to Christianity) might
come to the knowledge, and be assured of it; without which notification, or
declaration, public and obvious unto all men, learned and unlearned, it would
do but little good. How then a Fundamental, if not in the Scripture?

But if all primitive Christians did agree upon it, in the opinion and
practice, it would be some argument, I confess, that it was at first grounded,
if not upon direct Scripture, yet upon Apostolical Tradition, or Institution.
In the next place therefore, we shall see, what can be alleged for it from the
consent of Antiquity. For still we must stand upon that, that being such an
Article of Faith, as without it all other belief is bootless, or insufficient
to salvation: the evidences of this consent, and general practice, had need to
be very clear, and irrefragable, else the matter will be lest very doubtful,
and not to be received, or pressed, as an Article of Faith.

First then, I ask: Might it not (upon grounds of reason and probability) have
been expected, that an Article of that consequence (as is pretended) wherein
every souls future happiness, and the present welfare, yea, very being of the
Catholic Church, is so much concerned; should have been thought of, if not in
the first (which we call the Apostles Creed; as the most ancient, so the most
compendious of all the Creeds) yet in some one of the rest, that have been made
and received since, upon emergent occasions: some of them professing to contain
the whole (not precisely so, we grant; but the most Fundamental) Catholic
Faith? Well: nothing of it in the Creeds. What in the Councels? those that are
generally received, as most ancient, and authentical: the first four General
Councils? Have they any thing of it? Somewhat, I know, may be alleged out of
the Acts of those Councils; for it, and against it. As much against it, I dare
undertake, upon accurate examination, and more, then for it: But that requires
long time; I hope there will be no need. Besides, we may take that liberty,
Baronius does, to question the integrity of such Acts of Councils, where they
do not make for him. And indeed, it does require good judgment and great
diligence, to know what is sincere, and what is not, in the generality of those
Acts; that cannot be denied. But Baronius, for the most part, goes by one Rule:
as things make for the Pope, or against, so he does own, or reject.

For example: in Honorius his case (whom we spoke of before) the Acts, he
says, of the Sixth General Council are not to be trusted. In Liberius his
case, whom St. Jerome, and so many others do witness, to have sided with the
Arians, and to have subscribed to their Confessions; so many evasions, with
great Art, and subtilty of wit, have been devised, as may perchance prevail
with some to a belief, that he was innocent, as to matter of Heresy: but with
more, I doubt, that shall compare the objections and evidences, with the
answers and evasions, that there is no such thing, as truth, really: and that
men trouble themselves in vain, in their inquiries after it. But yet at last,
so God would have it, that certain Fragments of History, concerning what passed
at the Council of Ariminum where the Arians did establish their Doctrine;
written by that renowned ancient Father, Hilarious Bishop of Poictiers, in
France; with other records of antiquity of the same subject; were found and set
out in France, out of the Library of Pet. Pishaeus, one of the famousest
Philologists of that Country; but set out by Nicolaus Faber, who, besides
other learning in general, and exemplary Piety, for which he was made choice
of, and trusted with Lewis the XIIIth. King of France his education, and
learning; had the name and reputation generally, to be best seen in
Eclesiastical Histories and Antiquities, of any in that Country (to go no
further) without exception: Baronius was beholding to him, and does acknowledge
it, in more then one place. Faber did set them out with a large and learned
Preface. Now by those Fragments, etc. it does clearly appear, that Liberius did
subscribe to (and thereby authorized, so far as his Papal Authority could go)
that pestilent Regula, or Formula Fidei, (so called) set out by the Arians at
S. Sirmium, so much detested and anathematized by the Orthodox party: for which
act, Anathema's are pronounced against him by that Godly Bishop (Hilarious.)
Anathema tibi a me dictum Liberi, and sociis tuis. Iterum, tibi anathema, and
tertio, praevaricator Liberi. And Faber takes notice of it, in his Preface, in
these words; Hoc unum addere sufficiat, ex verbis Hilarii,etc. Besides that,
the same Liberius, as soon as he was Pope, charged Athanasius, and condemned
him, as by his own Letter, there set out, does appear: which Letter, though
Faber makes no question at all of the truth and genuiness of it; ( falsam, aut
subdititiam esse, stylus negat; and praeterea, cui bono?) yet he does
acknowledge, that some objections may be made against it: and therefore we will
not build upon it. But for the rest, as Faber is very confident, so may any
body else be, even upon the judgment of that learned man, if himself be not so
able to judge. But what says Baronius to this? There was no way to avoid,
Baron. a. d. 357. 50, etc.
but one: and because his wit and ability did not se^ve him, to reconcile those
evidences, with his purpose; he does make use of it, to prove them no
evidences; and what by learning and d^ligence may be done in this kind, let the
cause be what it will, you may expect it from him: we have too much experience
of it in these his Annals. Yet in this particular, he had a hard task, when he
must oppose the judgment of such a one, as Faber was. But what remedy, since it
was so resolved in the Court of Rome; though so many Romanists, being forced by
the light of so many evidences, have maintained the contrary; that a Pope can
not be an Heretic?

Let the Reader judge by this, how far Protestants, in reason, may think
themselves bound to submit to those Acts (of Councels, I mean) when objected to
them by Romanists; which Romanists can so freely reject, when they make against
them.

But to leave them: The Canons of those Councels is that which we may safely
trust to; and the only thing indeed, (with their Creeds) which can be be
called their doctrine or determination. What is there in any of these Councels,
concerning this main article of Religion? Even nothing; nothing at all for it:
but somewhat against it there is in the Council of Nice, where the Bishop of
Rome his pre-eminency is derived, not from Scriptures, but mere Custom;
confirmed also since that by Justinian the Emperor.

Now for the particular Fathers, and other Writers of those times, if we do not
much rely upon the testimonies that are produced out of them in this
particular; not as undervaluing their authority, but as having just cause to
suspect the genuiness of all those testimonies that are obtruded in their
names, I think no body can justly blame us. For first, who knows not how many
things, even anciently, have been forged in the behalf of that cause? All the
Decretals of the first Popes (most of whom were Martyrs, and should therefore
be of greater authority;) are of that nature: all destinated to that end, to
insinuate a Supremacy, and sometimes Infallibility; but all, though received
into the body of the Canon Law for good, and to be of equal authority with
Scripture it self, forged, adulterous, supposititious ware; and this, after
much contest, acknowledged by Baronius, by Bellarmine, by all men that are not
very ignorant, or much blinded with partiality. Besides the matter of many of
them, ridiculous, or false; and the false dates, and the like: the language is
such of most of them, as he that can believe it is the language of those
primitive Popes, may as well believe, that the English which is now spoken, and
was spoken three or four hundred years ago, is all one, and not to be
distinguished the one from the other. We may see therefore of what judgment, or
conscience, (shall I say) the author of the Labyrinth is; who, Labyr. p. 208.
and 334.
notwithstanding so many of his own side, who have acknowledged the imposture,
does alledg them, as unquestionable; and elsewhere does take upon him to defend
them, but comes off very sadly, and needs no other confutation then their own
Authors, Baronius especially, Baron. v Blond. p 114. Ibid. p. 112.
whom I think the Reader will believe the abler of the two, to judge of such
things. Bellarmine, though he had done what he could, to uphold their credit,
(though even there, indubitatas esse, affirmare non audeo, is his confession;)
yet afterward, he gave it over, having left most of them quite out in his
Catalogue, De Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis: and if he mention any (as he does
those that are ascribed to Clemens;) he does give reasons why they should be
rejected rather then approved. If any desire further satisfaction about them,
let them read learned Blondellus his Pseudo-Isidorus. He will admire: I will
say no more.

On the other side; whether it may not as justly be suspected, that many
pregnant evidences of that truth, which we assert, have been suppressed, and
pu^posely destroyed, let the reader judge by this one particular. Two Epistles
there be above the rest; the one of St. Cyprians, the other of a contemporary
Bishop, of great fame, in those days, who joined with Cyprian in the cause;
both, in St. Cyprians works, which do not please the Zelots of the Roman Cause.
The reason is manifest: For I dare say it, and maintain it; were there no other
writings extant of antiquity to help us; those two Epistles (if the authors of
them were not Schismatics, and Heretics, eo nomine, for that very
consideration, for opposing Pope Stephanus as they did, which they never were
accounted, but holy men; Cyprian especially, not inferior to any, the most
renouned Fathers:) are very sufficient to justify us, and to confound the
assertors of either Supremacy or Infallibility. They charge him there (Pope
Steven) of pride, impertinency, contradictions, breach of Ecclesiastical unity,
boldness, perverseness, folly, hard obstinacy, presumption, contumacy; this is
the language throughout the first Epistle: and in the second, besides
repetition of the same, or great part of it; they compare him to Judas, (in
some things) upbraid him with siding with Heretics: quinimo tu haereticis
omnibus pejor es: make him worse then the worst Heretics; animosity and
passion; for want of wit; schism and apostasy: (the words are, Peccatum vero
quam magnum tibi exaggerasti, quando te a tot gregibus scidisti! Excidisti enim
te ipsum; noli te fallere. Siquidem ille est vere schismaticus, qui se a
communione Ecclesiasticae unitatis apostatam fecerit. Dum enim putas omnes a te
abstinere posse; solum te ab omnibus abstinuisti:) Again, That he did contra
sacramentum, and fidem, contumacis furore discordiae rebellare: and in
conclusion, whereas Stephen had styled Cyprian (for this kind of language, it
seems, begun from him) a false Christ, false Apostle, and deceitful workman:
Firmilianus says, it was done falsely, ( per mendacium:) and that he (ex
merito,) deservedly, might be so called. I know well enough, St. Augustine did
not like these things should be revived, but forgotten, for the honor of both
Steven and Cyprian: yet St. Augustine does nowhere except (though he do against
the opinion it self of rebaptization, which was the cause of the quarrel;)
against St. Cyprian, as though he had misbehaved himself in point of duty, or
transgressed against canonical obedience for so writing to the Pope, which is
the main business: And I am very confident, had St. Augustine been put to it,
as we are; charged with schism and heresy; yea, impiety, in the highest
degree, for not acknowledging the Supremacy and Infallibility which the Pope
does challenge unto himself as an article of Faith, he would have been the
first man that would have made use of St. Cyprians authority, and example; (he
had him in such veneration) as we do.

Of these Epistles therefore, the latter being the sharper, and besides that,
affording us some notable passages, (which we shall make good use of in due
place:) in some editions (one at Rome) was quite left out, for this very
reason, because so prejudicial to the Pope, as Pamelius does guess; who also
does as good as profess ( consultius foret nunquam fuisse hanc epistolam
editam, etc.) that he would have suppressed it himself, had it been in his
power. The Reader may consider what opportunity the friends and Patrons of the
Roman cause had, to forge, and to suppress what they would themselves, when the
world through the superstition and ignorance of those times (before Printing)
was ready to receive any thing; and all Manuscripts almost, in the hands, and
by the hands of Monks and Friars, who wholly depended on the Pope.

But now for Antiquity, and consent of Fathers, before we come to particular
testimonies; I would gladly know, if any such thing were known to Antiquity,
(still I must add, as fundamental, and necessary, which does much aggravate the
case:) how comes it to pass, that neither Clemens in his Constitutions (what
antiquity soever you allow them, ancient enough for this purpose;) who does so
largely write of Ecclesiastical orders; Bishops, especially: Nor Dionysius
Areopagita (whom our adversaries make such reckoning of, and will have him to
be the right Dionysius mentioned in the New Testament, which we believe not;
but ancient enough, he also, to serve our turn in this place:) in three books
of his, of the Church Hierarchy, especially when he treats of the unity of the
Church in many places; that neither of these takes notice of this great mystery
of Religion (though mysterious enough, Dionysius especially:) Supremacy and
Infallibility? I cannot imagine what the most zealous for the cause can say to
this; or can do less, at least, then wonder. If it be said, it needed not,
because sufficiently known: if that were granted, yet in such a proper place,
to take no notice of such a fundamental point, so necessary to peace and unity,
how can it be less then wilful perfidiousness, or sacrilegious prevarication?
It is true, that Dionysius makes honorable mention, in one place, of Peter, as
chiefest of the Apostles: but that is of Peter only, and merely by the way;
not by way of observation of any necessity or divine providence in it.
Certainly then, they knew it not: no such article of Faith was then heard of.

Again: Gennadius Mussiliensis, who lived before the sixth Century, first a
Priest only, (as in the title:) but afterward, as Platina and Bellarmine
affirm, made Bishop; has written a Book, De dogmatibus: Ecclesiae. He begins
with the most fundamental points, the subject of the Creeds; and so goes on:
and though dogmata fidei be his proper aim, and subject: yet he does intermix
many things that belong to discipline and government also: as particularly, he
has one Chapter, what men are incapable of holy orders: where this
particularly (I wish all men took good notice:) Neque illum, qui usuras
accepisse convincitur, Cap. 72.
(so I find it in the Ordinances of the Church of Geneva too:) aut in scena
lusisse dignoscitur: among others is to be found. Yet I will not say, he does
comprehend all things precisely that may be reduced unto that head. However, it
is hard to believe, if either Supremacy or Infallibility had been such an
article of Faith, so necessary, (we must often repeat it:) so fundamental: no
mention of it, would have been made. In the 26. Chapter, occasionally, Pope
Zozimus (beat a recordationis Papae Zozimi regularis authoritas:) is mentioned,
and that is all.

Yet I must acknowledge, that the Popes of Rome, begun betimes to arrogate unto
themselves: there be Epistles of Innocentius and Zozimus, that go very far,
(and they began the fifth Century:) in point of spiritual power and
jurisdiction. But of all such, and to all, we have one general answer, (...):
it is their own cause that they plead for: no wonder if they be so zealous for
it. St. Peter's prerogative (such as it was) was some ground; and it is the
infirmity of many; they think they are bound in conscience, or at least in
point of reputation, to advance the credit of their place, as much as they can.
So one, after another; and every predecessors example, is an engagement to the
successor: Neither let the Reader wonder, if we speak of them, though pious
otherwise, as men. What Ammianus Marcellinus, a Heathen Historian of those
times, writes of the pomp, pride, and luxury of the Bishops of that See, I
will not insist upon; he was a Heathen: But what Sulpitius Severus, a holy man,
whose memory is sacred, commended by diverse ancient fathers, does write and
testify, (he lived about the same time when those Popes lived) is observable.
In one place, he notes the wicked ambition; in another, the strange
covetousness of the then Rulers and Governors (whom he calls Ministros
Ecclesiae:) of the Church: but in general, temporum nostrorum piget, taedetque:
which includes much. Many such complaints of their times, we have in the
writings of the Fathers; some more ancient; others that lived since: not to
speak of the very Disciples of Christ, and their contentions, who should be
greatest; for which they were rebuked by Christ. What therefore the Bishops of
Rome did challenge as their due, is not much to our purpose to enquire: but
what was acknowledged, and generally believed by others of those times.

There is not any Writer, that the Patrons of that cause make more boast of,
then St. Cyprian: he indeed, as considerable as any, both for antiquity and
personal merits. The words that are produced with much ostentation out of him,
are, that Super Petro fundata est Ecclesia: which words, or to that purpose,
Cyprian uses in several places. Words indeed, which of themselves (especially
were it as certain, that they extended to his successors:) might seem to import
very much: whereas, if we look into the meaning, as he himself does explain
himself; it will clearly appear, that little or nothing can be made of them.
The ground of this expression, does appear by his Book or Treatise De unitate
Ecclesiae: where endeavoring to prove the Unity of the Church by Scripture, he
has diverse arguments; some whereof are more direct and concluding; others,
more remote; from bare similitudes, and typical allusions. One argument is
(often pressed by him and others:) Unum corpus, and unus Spiritus, una spes
vocationis, una fides, unum baptisma, unus Deus. Ephesians. lv.4, 5, 6.
Another, is, from those words, I and the Father, are one: and those three are
one. Another is, from Christ his seamless coat: Another from those words of
Josuah unto Rahab, Joh. 10. 1 John 5. Josh. 2.19.
And it shall be, that whosoever shall go out of the doors of his house, into
the street, his blood shall be upon his head; -- and whosoever shall be with
thee within this house, his blood shall be upon our head, if any hurt be upon
him. Others there be, which I omit. But the first argument, or proof of unity,
Matthew. xvi.18
are those words of Christ to Peter, I say unto thee that thou art Petet, and
upon this rock, I will build my Church, etc. Upon which words he does descant
thus: Super illum unum aedificat Ecclesiam suam, etc. that is, Upon him alone
he does build his Church, and gives him charge to feed his sheep. And though,
says he, after his resurrection, he gave the same power to all the Apostles;
-- nevertheless to declare this unity, he appointed, unam Cathedram, (one
Chair) and by his authority established this original of unity, which should
begin from one. So then, from those words of Christ, he fetches a mystery of
unity; in that, though Christ gave the same power unto the rest, yet he first
uttered it, of one. Super illum unum aedificat Ecclesiam suam: that is, in
address of speech, to commend unity to us, in a mystery: but upon the rest, as
well, in truth, or reality of deed. That he intended it so, and so barely; his
words immediatiatly following are very express, when he says: The rest of the
Apostles were verily what Peter was, having obtained (or, endowed with:) equal
share of honor, and of power: sed exordium ab unitate proficiscitur: that is,
but the beginning of this honor and power, must be in, or from unity: (to wit,
when it was at first given to one alone; when Christ spoke those words unto
Peter;) Primacy was given unto Peter, that one Church, and one Chair might
thereby be testified.

This might be illustrated, by what others say of it, to the same purpose. S.
Augustine had just such a conceit (be it understood with respect) upon those
words of Christ: Ego sum Pastor bonus; Pastor ergo bonus Christus. That is: I
am the good Shepherd; Christ then is the good Shepherd. It follows: Quid
Petrus, etc. What was Peter? was not he also a good Shepherd? Did not he also
lay down his life for the sheep? What was Paul? What the rest of the Apostles?
What those Bishops and blessed Martyrs, who succeeded after those times? were
they not all good Shepherds? etc. and then after a long Parenthesis, concerning
false Martyrs and mercenaries, he returns to his former speech; of Peter, Paul,
and the rest, that they were all good Pastors. He stands upon Peter, to prove
it of him more particularly, that he was a Shepherd, and a good Shepherd. Both
these, from those words that passed between Christ and him: John xxi.15, 16,
17. and then concludes, Ergo Pastor (Petrus scil.) and bonus Pastor (nihil
quidem ad potestatem and bonitatem Pastoris Pastorum:) sed tamen ipse and
pastor bonus, and caeteri tales pastores boni. That is: Why then Peter he was a
shepherd too, and a good shepherd (though not to be compared for power nor for
goodness to the Shepherd of shepherds:) yet even he a good shepherd too, and
all that were like him, they also good shepherds. Then he addresses himself to
Christ: Quid est ergo, quod pastoribus bonis commendas unum pastorem (he does
mean Christ himself) etc. that is, What is it that to good Pastors, thou
(Christ) do commend one good Pastor? What, but in that one thou do teach
them unity? He has more to the same purpose: so glad were they of any thing,
that had but the show of an argument for Unity.

St. Cyprian therefore, as St. Augustine of those we have spoken, makes a
mystery of the words, not a grant of any power or jurisdiction. Can any thing
be more plain then these words, Pari consortio praediti, and honoris and
potestatis? And so S. Hierome, that Episcopus, sive Romae, sive, Eugubii, etc.
ejusdem meriti, ejusdem est and Sacerdotii. Which words (as others before him)
the Author of the Labyrinth, does endeavor to elude, Labyr. p. 222.
by saying that it is spoken of the office and power Episcopal, in it self;
which is alike in all Bishops: but not of the Popes power, as he is Pope; an
additional, and supereminent power, given him, by Christ. But how little to the
purpose this is, may easily appear, by the context of St. Jerome's words, and
by the occasion: and I desire the reader to take notice of it, that is not yet
fully acquainted with their manner of dealing.

Two things St. Jerome did propose to himself in that Epistle. First, to assert
the right of Priests above Deacons (which gave occasion to the Epistle) by
their institution: and secondly, to justify the customs of other Churches and
Countries, against that pretended custom of the Church of Rome. After he has
done with the first, he falls upon the second. Now, the question was not, of
the power of Bishops, by virtue of their ordination or consecration; which
every man must in reason understand, to be the same in all, if it be the same
order or degree: but in general, whether any Bishop by his See, or otherwise,
had any more power or authority, then another: and particularly, whether the
customs and orders of the Church of Rome, were to be preferred before other
Churches customs, (for the Bishops sake:) and obliged men to imitation and
conformity. Nec altera Romanae urbis Ecclesia; (there he begins:) altera totius
orbis existimanda est. Neither (says he) must we make any other account of the
Church of Rome, then we do of all other Churches of the World. What, no
peculiar privilege, no prerogative of that Church, above the rest? How would
that be taken now, think you? But why so? The Churches of France, of Britanie,
of Africa, of Persia; the Churches of the East, of India; and all the barbarous
Nations, (that is, never subject to the Roman Empire: so they were called:)
they worship one Christ, (wherein, with that which follows of one rule,
consists the unity of the Catholic Church:) they have one rule of truth, (or
faith: to wit, the same Creeds: the same Scriptures:) If the question be about
authority, the whole world is greater then one City. (Authority then, is now
the business in question:) Wherever a Bishop is, whether at Rome, or
Eugubium; at Constantinople, or at Rhegium, or Alexandria, or Tunis; as the
Priesthood is the same, so is the merit, (he intends Authority:) They are all
Successors of the Apostles: (did not he intend to say, as well as the Bishop of
Rome, is St. Peter's?) He goes on: But you will say, How comes it to pass, that
in Rome, a Priest is not ordained without the testimony of a Deacon? What have
I to do with the custom of one Town, (or City?) Replies he, Why do you take the
part of (or justify) paucity, (or, a few) from whom (de qua ortum est
supercilium in leges Ecclesiae: (...), the character of the Church of Rome, or
Bishop of Rome, in ancient Fathers:) pride (or usurpation) upon the rights of
the (Catholic) Church is proceeded?

Could any man, that had studied it never so much, speak more plainly? Let the
Reader, if he please, read the Author of the Labyrinth; where I refer him
before; and see manifestly how far these men will venture with their sophistry,
and brazen countenance, to persuade their Readers, that light is darkness, and
black white. But if St. Hierome, says he, should intend it so, he must
contradict, and condemn himself. Why so? Let any man produce any passage of St.
Hierome, where he does so fully express himself for the Pope of Rome's
Supremacy and Infallibility, as he does here against both. If he does in some
places speak honorably of that Bishop, and ascribe somewhat to him, as St.
Peter's Successor; we say (and it is most true) both he and others, were many
times, put to it by adversaries (schismatics and heretics) and glad were they
to strengthen themselves and their cause, with the authority of that See; which
indeed, to do it right, did for a long time continue very orthodox in all
things; (that one of usurpation, or supremacy, tenderly first attempted, then
by degreees obtained and practiced; excepted:) and a great support to them that
were so in all parts of the World. Which was the greatest occasion, through
other Churches compliance, upon this consideration, of her greatness and
super-eminent authority. They that are well versed in antiquity, and will judge
rightly, will observe it, and acknowledge it. But why should not we interpret
(as others) St. Hierome, by St. Hierome? those passages in him that are more
doubtful and obscure, by those that are more full and express?

But we return to St. Cyprian, our chiefest aim at this time. I take it to be a
very considerable matter, as any in the whole controversy; in what sense St.
Cyprian (and others after him) affirmed, that the Church was founded upon St
Peter: whether by that speech, he did intend any Supremacy, or Infallibility:
yea, or no. For that indeed, as I said before, is a speech that seems, of all
alleged in this argument, to import most, though nothing that extends to his
Successors. Besides what has been said already, I further argue: If Cyprian
and his Colleagues in this cause, even then, when they withstood Stephen, Pope
of Rome, with that liberty, as we have seen; condemned his opinion, despised
his authority; (as they begun, so they continued, resolute and constant, as
long as they lived, in their opposition, of which more afterward:) but, if
even then, whilst they pleaded their cause against him; they did put him, or
others, interessed in the same business, in mind of those words of Christ to
Peter, thereby to aggravate his cause, or crime, as violator, or breaker of the
unity of the Church: surely, it must be granted, (deny it who can, and
reconcile them to reason, and common sense, in the act:) that they had no
thought of Supremacy, or Infallibility (for else, had they not shamefully,
ridiculously prevaricated, in their own cause?) granted to the Pope or Bishop
of Rome, by those words of Christ unto Peter. But so they did: Cyprianus, in
his Epistle to Quintus, concerning rebaptization: Nam nec Petrus, says he,
quem primum Dominus elegit, etc. that is, For neither Peter, whom the Lord
chose first, and upon whom he built his Church: when Paul did contend with him
about the circumcision, did upon that, insolently vindicate, or arrogantly
assume any thing unto himself, that Primacy did belong unto him; and that he
ought to be obeyed by them, that were but newly chosen, (St. Paul, he means;)
and came after. If any should answer, that St. Cyprians intention by these
words, is to commend St. Peter's humility, not to question his right: grant the
words in themselves, will bear that sense; how can it be his sense, whilst his
practice was openly, professedly contrary? That is it that I urge, and aim at,
by these words.

But for the sense of the words, (without this consideration) let us take
another passage of the said Cyprian, and I think there will be little question.
They are words (those I intend) that were spoken by Cyprian, at a meeting of
the African Bishops, about this business of rebaptization, which had caused the
breach with the Bishop of Rome. Superest, ut de hac ipsa re, quid singuli
sentiamus, etc. It remains, says he, that we all speak what every man does
think: not judging any body, or putting him back from the right of communion
(Ecclesiastical) in case he be of another opinion (which Cyprian told you
before, the Bishop of Rome had done:) For none among us does make himself the
Bishop of Bishops, Labyr. p 334
(the author of the Labyrinth, will tell you the Bishop of Rome was so styled,
by some:) or does compel his Colleagues with a tyrannical terror, to the
necessity of obedience; since every Bishop, according to the freedom of his
liberty and power, has his opinion free, as he that cannot be judged by
another, neither has any power to judge others himself: but let us all wait the
judgment of our Lord Jesus Christ, who alone has power to prefer us in the
government of his Church; and to judge of our actions. It does clearly appear,
that St. Cyprian aimed at some body, by these words. And who should that be,
think we; (for I know there be, who have attempted by their sophistry, to elude
the sense, even of these words:) but the Bishop of Rome? with whom they were
then at variance about it, and he with them: even to excommunication; threatened
at least, and in some part, if not altogether executed. Whereas, of them that
he spoke unto, he had not the least occasion to suspect, that any of them
would, or could attempt any such thing. But we need not many words; Bar. to. 1.
a.d. 258.. 42.
since Baronius himself does freely acknowledge as much as we desire; to wit,
that by those words Pope Stephen was intended.

Well, we have heard what St. Cyprian did write to Quintus his friend. Now let
us hear what Firmillianus, a man of grear renown for parts and piety, Bishop of
Caesarea, and Metropolitan, highly commended by Baronius, did write unto him
about the said business. Atque ego in hac part, just indignor ad hanc tam
apertam, etc. And here (says he) I can do no less then profess my just
indignation, for the open and manifest folly of Stephen, (Pope Stephen, he
would have said:) that he, who does so boast of his See, and does pretend to
Peter's Succession, upon whom the Church is founded, does bring in many rocks,
and set up new structures of many Churches, whilst he does avouch by his
authority* right baptism to be there. They that so freely yielded to the Pope
at that very time when they stood upon terms of defiance, as it were, with the
Bishop of Rome; that the Church was founded upon Peter; certainly, they did not
think they did yield any great matter unto him, when they yielded so much. And
since Cyprian had so many who joined with him in that division: and that none
of them were accounted schismatics or heretics for it: it must needs follow,
that no such article of Faith was then known, as either Supremacy, or
Infallibility. The like may be observed concerning the Asian Bishops, who were
excommunicated by Victor, Pope of Rome: who for all that, neither living, nor
dead, were ever accounted Schismatics, or the worse Christians; but Pope
Victor, generally, much condemned (it is a known history:) for his rashness,
and want of charity.

But here again, I must desire the Reader to take notice of our adversaries way
of dealing; let him give it the right name, as he shall see occasion. I said a
little before, that Cyprian continued in his opposition, to his lives end: and
a little before that, that though St. Augustine excepted against Cyprians
opinion of rebaptization, which was the occasion of the quarrel; yet I did not
find any where, that he did except against him, that he durst (though otherwise
of himself, as St. Augustine does observe of him, a very meek, humble, and
charitable man:) so freely reject Pope Stephens judgment, with such language,
as you have heard: this certainly, is a great argument, that not Cyprian only,
but St. Augustine, were ignorant of any duty that other Bishops did owe unto
him, more then to any other. This Bellarmine, it seems, was very sensible of;
and therefore to prevent the use that might be made of it, somewhat he thought
must be done. In his fourth Book therefore De Romans Pontifice, Chapter 7. he does
propose, An peccaverit Cyprianus mortaliter, non obediendo Pontifici: that is,
Whether Cyprian did sin mortally, in not obeying the Pope. A very seasonable
question, certainly: For else, what becomes of the Popes Authority, if such as
Cyprian might withstand him, and without sin, deal with him as he did? Now he
does resolve the question out of two places of St. Augustine, two ways. First,
out of his Book De Bapt. c. Don. c. 18, and 19. That Cyprian sinned venially
only; and that it was a blemish in a fair soul; which he did expiate by his
martyrdom. But Bellarmine is not satisfied with that answer; but argues
against it, that it is more likely, he did sin mortally: in that he did so
little regard the Popes judgment, (though not definition:) and not only so,
but opposed him so contumeliously. And therefore for a second resolution, he
does produce another passage out of the same Augustine (Epist. 48.) where the
Father says, some doubted whether those Epistles, (of that argument) were
right Cyprians: But secondly, that it is possible St. Cyprian might repent
before his death, and be of another opinion, though no record of it be extant.
Who would not say, that does look no further then Bellarmine, that he has
acquitted himself very well, and done the Pope great right? But if you look the
places by him quoted in St. Augustine, it is quite another thing. For there, in
neither place, does St. Augustine speak of the Pope, or of St. Cyprians manner
of dealing with him, whether good, or bad, not one word, or syllable: but only
of the opinion ( rebaptization) which St. Cyprian maintained, which he says
was a naevus in him, sufficiently expiated (by his other excellent parts,
humility, charity, etc. he had said before:) by his martyrdom. So that in very
truth, Bellarmine, instead of answering, has made the objection much stronger.
For if the opinion was a fault in Cyprian; (though truly, before the definition
of a general Council, no very great fault, or error: as may appear by what St.
Basil writes of it in his Canons:) yet an error, or fault, (because so
pertinacious in the defense of it:) acknowledged by St. Augustine (a great
admirer of that Saint:) much more would he have thought himself bound, to take
notice of his so manifest disobedience to the commands, and contempt of the
authority (that grand article as we are now told, of our Faith;) of Pope
Stephen: had he apprehended him guilty of any such thing. And though St.
Augustine had said, that St. Cyprian was more bitter and right down, in some
expressions, then he needed to have been: that had not helped the Popes cause:
he might have said so perchance, though Cyprian had written to his inferior.
But even so much he does not: not in those places (neither is there any errors
in the citations) to which Bellarmine does refer us. What kind of dealing this
is, I leave to the reader to consider. It was worth the while, even so: but it
makes for us too, and that we are now upon, not a little.

I have done with St. Cyprian; but before I leave him, I must not omit to let
the Reader know (or put him in mind at least) that in those words we have
considered of, and began with, there is notable variety in the Editions of
Cyprian. For those words, super illum unum aedificat Ecclesiam suam: and illi
pascendas man^^^ oves suas; (which Pamelius in his Annot. upon the 55 Epistle,
does make such reckoning of:) nor those ( unam Cathedram constituit:) nor those
[ Primatus Petro datur: -- and Cathedra una] nor lastly, those as material as
any ( qui Cathedram Petri, super quem fundata est Ecclesia, deserit:) are to be
found in all Editions. I have one at present printed at Paris, A. D. 1512.
sumptibus Magistri Bartholdi Rembolt; dedicated by Robertus Fortunatus, to L.
Ruricio Blesensi: in which none of those things are to be found: And they that
have seen Erasmus his Editions, say as much of those: and which is most
observable, Gratianus also does so exhibit them in the body of the Canon Law.
Since therefore this variety does proceed from ancient Manuscripts; nor cannot
be conceived casual (as often it happens) but intended and wilful: we have
great reason to believe, that some to favor the Pope, did add those words of
purpose; but that any should leave them out, of purpose, since those
Manuscripts were neither written, by, nor in the hands of Protestants, we have
no reason at all. However, for my part, as to Cyprians opinion in this
particular of St. Peter's primacy; or, of the Church being founded upon him; I
confess ingenuously, I can make no great advantage of this diversity: because,
primatus is acknowledged by others; and granted by Protestants: and, that the
Church is founded upon Peter, in that sense we have showed, is St. Cyprians
assertion in other places that are not questioned. But this use at least, we
may make of it, that since it does plainly appear that such tampering and
adulterating has been used; we may suspect it has been done, where it is not
suspected; or at least, not discoverable by such evidences.

This book of St. Cyprian, de unitate: (that is the right title: for it has
another too in some Editions:) which has given us so much occasion: happily
puts me in mind of a book of St. Augustine bearing the same title, To. 7. p.
621.
de unitate Ecclesiae. Now that which our adversaries chiefly ground the
necessity of supremacy upon (on which infallibity does depend:) is unity: no
Catholic Church without unity; no unity without a Pope, so instated and
empowered, as they maintain. And this is their continual Plea. I ask therefore;
if without the Pope, so and so qualified, absolute, universal etc. there can be
no unity; how comes it to pass; nay, how possible, that St. Augustine should
write a book of Unity (Unity of the Catholic Chuch) of purpose with much
accuracy (as indeed it is) and in all that book not so much as mention the
Pope, or Bishop of Rome; no one word of Universality, or supremacy, or
infallibility in all that book? Uni. V. Card. Perron. p 50. etc.
True it is, unity, at large, is a large subject. For there is unity of
communion, internal, and external: unity of doctrine, of discipline and
government: unity of rites, and ceremonies; and the like: and besides all these
(though it comprehends all these in some degree:) there is that, which we may
call Catholic Unity; properly opposed to schism and separation. I call
Catholic unity, the acknowledgment of a Catholic Church, with actual
communion with it, and all the members of it, under one and the same head,
Christ; which does include unity of Faith, or soundness of Doctrine, in the
main fundamentals, necessary to salvation, according to St. Augustine his
declaration in that book chapter 4. which I wish the Reader, if he be at leisure,
to peruse. This is the unity, of the breach whereof, the Donatists were guilty,
who did not acknowledge a Catholic Church, or which in effect does amount to
it, did acknowledge no other true Catholic Church, but their own. So that St.
Augustine writing against them in that book, his business was to prove, that
there was a Catholic Church, diffused throughout the whole world (or the
greatest part) according to the promises of God by his Prophets in all ages:
which he does fully and copiously, by clear and manifest places, and
testimonies of Scripture. His occasion therefore I confess, did not oblige him
to treat of all kind of Unity in that book: No: but if all true Catholic Unity
depend of subjection to the Pope, and communion with the Church of Rome, as we
are told, and that this was the Faith of the ancient Church: Why should not St.
Augustine have gone that way rather, to prove them schismatics, which of the
two (if it were indeed the Faith of the ancient Church, and that Faith grounded
upon clear Scripture:) would have been the most compendious and ready way? But
is it not strange, and indeed if that had been St. Augustines Faith, and the
Faith of those times, as we said before, incredible; that in all the book, not
any mention is made of Pope, or Roman Church? I might say, and that would be
sufficient, of either Pope, as universal Bishop; or Roman Church, as the
Catholic Church. But indeed which does add to the wonder, of either Pope in
general; or Roman Church, in general: as if he had avoided it purposely; for
some cause best known to himself; but probably if for any cause, because he saw
how ready both Pope and Church of Rome were, even then, to take to themselves:
to usurp and to arrogate in leges Ecclesiae (as St. Jerome before:) against the
rights of the Catholic Church. In the tenth Chapter of that book, St.
Augustine does very particularly enumerate all the Christian Churches,
mentioned in the Scripture; he does begin with the Church of Antioch: at
Jerusalem; item at Athens, Iconium and Listra; the Churches of Corinth,
Ephesus, Philippi, Thessalonica, Colossus, Pontus, Galatia, Capadocia, Asia,
Bithynia; Smyrna, Bergamus, Sardis, Thyatira, Philadelphia, Laodicea: besides
the Churches of Achaia; of Galatia, and between Jerusalem and Illyricum, and
the like not particularly expressed (as he does observe) but included in those
general words. Had he added the Roman to these, it would not have taken away
any thing of the weight of our observation we chiefly aim at, but that he
should not mention it, I think may justly be wondered at; though I will not be
very confident, but that my eyes, or memory, (though I have read the book more
then once, and since that looked over him again of purpose:) or my Edition
(which is that in 8vo. Lugduni apud Sebast. Honorat. 1562. as most commodious
for use:) do not deceive me. For that St. Augustine does quote some words out
of St. Peter's Epistle, or some out of the Epistle to the Romans; that I hope
will not be taken as an express mention of the Pope or Roman Church. In the
15th Chapter, he does mention Ecclesias fundatas per Apostolorum labores; and
again, Apostolice labor fundatas, in the same Chapter: in general: and Chapter
16, he does make particular mention of Optatus Milevitanus, and Ambrosius
Mediolanensis: as men whose credit and authority was very eminent in the
Catholic Church, besides innumerabiles nostrae communionis Episcopos,
including doubtless in that generality the Bishop of Rome among the rest: but
not any special mention of him. Moreover, it is observable, that in this very
book, Chap. 18, and 19. Augustine does upon occasion, insist upon those words of
Christ to Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church: and does expound
that rock, by that mentioned Matthew. 7 24. I will liken him unto a wise man
which built his house upon a rock; that rock says he, are they which hear the
word of God, and do it. So little did he think of St Peter's prerogative, at
that time; as granted unto him by those or any other words of Christ.

That the unity of the Catholic Church does consist (as was before intimated)
in the Public profession of the main fundamentals, (whereof one is, that
Christ is the head of the Church) is excellently attested by St. Irenaeus one
of the ancientest, now extant; Iren. lib. 1. c. ii 3. de qo.
who after a short account of a Creed, not much different from the Apostles
Creed, in substance: This faith says he, the Catholic Church having received,
she keeps all the world over, even as if she dwelt but in one house; she
believes it, as having but one soul, one heart: and she does agreeably teach,
preach, and deliver it, as having but one mouth. -- So the Churches in Germany,
in Spain, in France, in the East, etc.

I have mentioned diverse books (besides this last of St. Augustine. De Unitate
Ecclesiae:) which because when there was occasion, and the subject was proper,
they make no mention of the Popes Supremacy, or infallibility; I conceive it
may be inferred from their silence, that they knew it not; (it was a thing
unknown in their time:) or at least, believed it not, I have one more, and he
shall be the last of my authors, to this effect; of whom I shall say before
hand (because I would have the reader to judge, as well as I:) that if my
judgment fail me not extremely, he alone might have been sufficient, to have
done the deed abundantly.

The author I intend, is, Vincentius Lirinensis: who lived about the beginning,
or before the middle of the fifth Centurie. To whom Bellarmine does give this
testimony. Scripsit opusculum, parvum mole, sed virtute maximum; de profanis
vocum novitatibus. De script. Eccl. p. 149.
Libellus extat, and utilissime legitur. The subject of the book is, as himself
does propose it, and set it down at the beginning; how a man certa quadam, and
quasi general ac regulari via Catholicae fidei veritatem, ab haereticae
pravitatis falsitate, discernere:) by a certain, and as it were general, and
regular way (or method) may discern the truth (or verity) of the Catholic
faith, from the falsehood of heretical depravation (or adulteration.) Is not
this the great controversy, between us and the Romanists? And which I am now
upon? Is not this the chief subject of the late Archbishop (of blessed memory)
his book; and of the answer to it entitled Labyrinthus Cantuariensis? Let us
hear then, what this so much approved and commended author, not only by
Bellarmine, but by many others, of that side besides, does deliver; and, what
is observable, not as his own sense only, but as the sense of the ancientest
and worthiest of those times, whom he professes that he sought unto for their
advice, as many as he could have access unto. Nay in his third and last summary
or recapitulation, he does affirm; (fuisse semper, and esse hodieque
Catholicorum consuetudinem) that it had ever been, and was then, the Custom of
the Catholics, so to do; or to go the same way, which he does here propose,
and commend.

First, then, Vincentius lays down these two grounds; Dovinae legis
authoritatem: tum deinde Ecclesiae Catholicae traditionem: that is, the
authority of the Divine Law (or Gods Word) and then, the tradition of the
Catholic Church. Not but that the Scripture is of it self perfect and
sufficient: (as he does acknowledge:) but because men are very apt to vary in
the exposition of it. Well: Tradition of the Catholic Church; What is that?
That is, says he, the intelligentia, or sensus, (his own words) the sense, or
exposition of the Catholic Church. But what Catholic Church? The present
Church, or Roman Church? No such matter. In ipsa Catholica Ecclesia, etc. In
this Catholic Church, says he; we must follow, Universality, Antiquity, and
Consent. First, it must be the sense of the whole Catholic Church, all the
world over. Secondly, it must be the sense of the ancient Fathers of the
Church: and Thirdly, there must be a consent of those ancient Fathers.
Vincentius goes on: What shall a Catholic Christian do, if some one particular
Church do forsake the communion of the general, (or universal) Faith? What, but
prefer the soundness of the whole, before the contagion of a part. But what if
the contagion attempt the whole? (he says of the heresy of the Arrians
afterward: pene totum orbem contaminaverat, etc.) Then he must have recourse
to Antiquity. What if Antiquity it self has been tainted? (It seems he did
suppose it possible:) not only two, or three particular men; but a whole Town
or Province? Then he must stick to the definitions of general Councels: ( Si
qua sunt universaliter antiquitus, universalis Concilii decreta:) and in his
third recapitulation: Si quid esset antiquitus ab omnibus Ecclesiae Catholicae
Sacerdotibus, universalis Concilii auctoritate decretum: a hard matter this:
and therefore he speaks of it doubtfully, Si quid, and Si qua: But what if the
matter is such, as has not been defined by any such Council? Why then, the
consent of ancient Fathers, ( recurrendum ad sanctorum Patrum sententias, in
his third recapitulation:) of several ages, and places, who have always been
reputed orthodox; that must be our refuge and remedy in such a case. And here
Vincentius his Rule, or direction, does end: which, because he would not be
mistaken, in a business of such weight; he does set down the summary of it
three several times, with some variety of words, but not any at all of the
matter: In the beginning, about the middle, and at the end of this book: which
Bellarmine told us before, is of no great bulk; neither indeed is it. His
diligence therefore, is the more observable. All the rest of the Book, is but
an explication, or exposition of all the particulars contained in this Rule. In
all those three recapitulations, or summaries, his last resolution after
Scripture, is, the sense, and consent of the Fathers.

Let us hear, I pray, before we proceed, how this does agree with the doctrine
of the late Archbishop of Canterbury. And for the Rule, Relat. p 336.
which governs me (says he) if I cannot be confident for my soul upon the
Scripture, and the Primitive Church expounding and declaring it, I will be
confident upon no other. I have all the reason in the world, to be confident
upon this rule, for it can never deceive me.

But now to Vincentius again: I ask in the first place, Did Vincentius, or
those he had consulted with, know any thing of the Infallibility of the Pope,
or any particular Church: (or of the greater part of the present Church, I
might add: but we are not upon that now:) was any such thing known or believed
generally, or by many, in those days? Certainly, he that will say so, must also
believe, though Vincentius for some reasons, spared the name of the Pope, or to
set down the opinion in express terms; yet his intention was to confute it, by
this book; his Rule here delivered, being so diametrically, repugnant, and
contrary. If any should reply, that all he had written of this subject, is not
extant: true it is indeed, that the greatest part of the second Book (the whole
consisted of two) is not extant, nor has been these many ages. But what is
wanting (as does clearly appear by his own account) was but a further
prosecution, or confirmation of some particulars by him delivered, by some
examples; as particularly of the Ephesian general Council against Nestorius,
which Council was held in his time. The particulars of that Council, was the
whole subject of the second Book: and he gives us a particular account of those
particulars, (what they were, and how prosecuted:) in that which remains of
it. So that this evasion is sufficiently prevented. Those three reiterated
recapitulations, or summaries we spoke of before, the like whereof I do not
remember in so small a book; may not one say, there was a providence in it?

Now let us go on with Vincentius his method, or some particulars of it rather,
not before spoken of; for his Rule, I said before, was ended. But these
definitions, (says he) of general Councels (if such have been, or can be had:)
or this consent of ancient fathers (our last refuge) must it be expected, or
sought, for every thing that we believe in all doubtful points?

So the Romanists tell us, and it is an article of Faith with them, that
whatsoever is proposed unto us by the present Church, or Pope; fundamental, or
not fundamental; must be believed with equal certainty of Faith: else, that all
that we believe (a horrible, Laby. p. 15.
damnable doctrine) will do us no good. All points defined by the Church (the
present Church) as matters of Faith, (says the Author of the Labyrinth:) are
fundamental; that is, necessary to salvation to be believed by all those to
whom they are sufficiently propounded to be so defined. And again, It is
manifest, that all points defined by the Church, Ib. p. 16.
are fundamental, by reason of that formal object, or infallible authority
propounding them, though not always by the matter, which they contain. And
again: It is manifest, that if the Church be disbelieved in any one point,
there can be no infallible faith of any thing.

But what says Vincentius Lirinensis? Quae tamen antiqua sanctorum Patrum
consentio, non in omnibus divinae Legis quaestionibus, sed solum certe
praecipue in fidei regula: (what the ancient Fathers call fidei regulam: and
even the Council of Trent, principium illud, in quo omnes qui fidem Christi
profitentur, necessario convenient: The Reader, I hope need not to be told,
that is not a stranger to antiquity:) magno nobis studio investiganda est, and
sequenda. And again: Ut ad unam Ecclesiastici sensus regulam scripturae
caelestis intelligentia dirigatur; in ijs duntaxat praecipue quaestionibus,
quibus totius catholici dogmatis fundamenta nituntur.

This is plain and express; This consent must be expected in fundamentals
only. And so the Reverend Archbishop; That the whole Church cannot
universally err in the doctrine of Faith ( fidei regula, in Vincentius:) is
most true, and is granted by most Protestants: so you will but understand its
not erring in absolute fundamental doctrines. p. 139.
And elsewhere: Now therein there can be no necessity of an infallible
certainty in the whole Catholic Church, p. 3^7.
and much less in a general Council, of things not absolutely necessary in
themselves. For Christ did not intend to leave an infallible certainty in his
Church, to satisfy either contentious, or curious, or presumptuous spirits. Let
the Reader judge who come nearest to the faith of the ancients, in this main
fundamental. Take all Vincentius Lirinensis together; consider every part,
compare it with what is maintained and delivered, by the said judicious
Reverend Author, and lay aside the age, and other circumstances of time and
persons; you would think Vincentius had intended a vindication of that
excellent piece, against the false doctrine, calumnies, sundry shuffl^ngs and
impertinencies of this confident anonymus antagonist, the author of Labyrinthus
Cantuariensis.

But I have not yet done with Vincentius: I insist the longer upon him, because
he is so generally commended, by those, whose malice, and uncharitableness,
would make us, if they could tell how, worse then Infidels, though in very
deed, upon a right and unpartial trial, we may justify our title of Catholic,
(and that indeed is it we must trust to, for salvation: which I wish they would
better consider, that call the Romanists, Catholics absolutely, in opposition
to Protestants: it is a dangerous kind of civility; for if they be, the
Catholics; we must be Heretics, or Schismatics:) much better then they can.

Vincentius does suppose (a supposition though somewhat strange, yet not
without all ground, as may appear by what has been said before of the
corruption of ancient books; and others, forged and supposititious) that an
heresy may spread and prevail; and by prevailing, attain to prescription of
age and antiquity: in a word so far prevail, that it may have the opportunity,
to corrupt and adulterate ancient books; to suppress some and forge others:
What now? Surely now (in such a straight: such a pinch as this:) or never, we
shall hear of an infallible Pope or Church: now, or never; who will not say as
much? Alas poor man! neither he, nor any of his time, that he advised with; nor
any before them, were so happy; they knew of no such thing. What a ready
satisfactory answer had he had, had he known of it, or any body that he knew?
For want of this knowledge (the happiness, or happy discovery of latter ages)
he is forced for a Remedy, to send us to Scriptures; or to the decrees, (if any
be to be had) of general Councels, and there to leave us. But that he does
advise, to prevent this straight, not to give errors or heresies this advantage
of time or growth; but as soon as they begin to appear, presently fly to the
Scriptures and the consent of Fathers, in their expositions. But the Reader
probably may desire (in a matter of such moment) Vincentius his own words,
which therefore I have set down whole; out of a very good edition, as I
conceive; set out in Paris (I guess Petrus Pithaeus might have a hand in it:)
in Quarto, apud Sebustianum Pinellum: A.D. Vincent Lirinen. Commonit. Lib. 1 p.
63.
1586. with diverse other several tractates of others. Of that edition page 63.
I find it thus: sed neque semper, neque omnes haereses hoc modo impugnandae
sunt, sed novitiae recentesque tantummodo, cum primum scilicet exoriuntur,
antequam infalsare vetustae fidei regulas, ipsius temporis vetantur angustijs,
ac prius quam, manante latius veneno, majorum volumina vitiare conentur.
Caeterum, dilatatae, and inveteratae haereses, nequaquam hac via adgrediendae
sunt, eo quod prolixo temporum tractu, longa his furandae veritatis patuerit
occasio. Atque ideo quascunque illas antiquiores, vel schismatum, vel haereseon
profanitates, nullo modo nos oportet, nisi aut sola, si opus est (that is, if
no definitions of general Councels can help us:) Scripturarum authoritate
convincere; aut certe jam antiquitus, universalibus sacerdotum Catholicorum
concilijs convictas, damnatasque vitare. Itaque cum primum, etc.

Relation. p. 228.
But again it is the opinion of that Reverend Prelate (of blessed memory) that
infallibility in fundamentals necessary to salvation, is the privilege of the
whole Catholic Church: derived from her (though not with like certainty) to
the representative in General Councils. He disputes it at large p. 228, etc.
This the Author of the Labyrinth calls an erroneous supposition: and does
endeavor (he had reason, Labar. p. 244.
since nothing can be more contrary to their doctrine of the Popes
infallibility) to confute it both there and elsewhere. Let us hear what the
commended Vincentius Lirinensis says to this. He takes his occasion from the
words of the Apostle; O Timothee, depositum custodi, devitans profanas vocum
novitates. Quis est hodie Timotheus (says he) nisi vel generaliter universa
Ecclesia; vel specialiter, totum corpus praepositorum (the Catholic universal
body of the Church, Relat. p. 229.
and Clergy in the Church: are the very words of the Archbishops, though he
makes no mention of Vincentius, who I believe was not in his thoughts, in all
this business, though mentioned by him, upon other occasions:) qui integram
divini cultus scientiam vel habere ipsi debent, vel alijs, infundere. This vel
twice repeated, may trouble some Reader perchance. For how can they alijs
infundere, which they have not themselves? But so they spoke in those days; vel
for and; ordinarily. For example: De vita, vel obitu sanctorum, qui Deo
placuerunt: the title of a book in Isidorus Hispalensis. Lex Alamannorum, quae
temporibus Chlotarij Regis, una cum principibus suis, Episcopis, and ducibus,
and comitibus, vel caetero populo constituta est: The title of another, in the
Codex Legum antiquarum, set out by Frider Lindebrogius. To return to
Vincentius: Christi vero Ecclesia sedula and cauta, depositorum apud se
dogmatum custos, nihil in his unquam permutat, nihil minuit, nihil addit:) can
this be said of the Roman Church? Yes, by them who by their Sophistry, will
make a man believe, that twice two, is not four; or that the whole is not
bigger then part of it, and the like) -- denique quid unquam aliud Conciliorum
decretis enisa est, and a little after, haereticorum novitatibus excitata,
Conciliorum suorum decretis Catholica perfecit Ecclesia, etc. It is a very
material point, and therefore I thought this notice would not be unseasonable,

What I aimed at, out of Vincentius, is at an end: with what success the Reader
must judge. But should I leave Vincentius here, I may perchance hear of it, as
though I had been partial in the business, concealing some things that made for
the Pope. Truly I know nothing that does so, really. But because men that are
passionately addicted to a cause, are very apt to catch at any thing that has
but a little show: let us see, whether any thing can be found of that nature.

In a place, having magnified those Confessors, who did manfully oppose
themselves to the Arrian faction, when it raged everywhere, and carried all
before it: Neque hoc sane novum (says he:) si quidem mos iste, semper in
Eclesia viguit, ut quo quisquis foret religiosior, eo promptius novellis
adinventionibus contrairet. This will scarce be granted now, that any Priest, or
Prelat, may oppose errors and heresies, till they have been declared such by
the Pope. Well, that any might, he says: and he will give you an instance.
Exemplis talibus plena sunt omnia. Examples says he, are obvious everywhere,
but one shall serve our turn, which shall be taken from the Apostolic See,
that all men may clearly see, with what eagerness, study, and contention, that
blessed Succession of the blessed Apostles (that is, that part of the Apostles
Succession, except he should intend Peter and Paul, who both; as many ancients
are of opinion, were Bishops of Rome: however here is nothing of Peter
particularly:) did defend the integrity of the Faith (or religion) once
received. I think so much has been acknowledged before, that the Bishops of
Rome did very good service in those days, to uphold the true faith. But then a
little after, it follows; Tunc b. m. Papa Stephanus, Apostolicae sedis
antistes cum caeteris quidem collegis, sed tamen prae caeteris restitit, etc.
that is, Then Pope Stephen (of bl. m.) Bishop (or ruler) of one of the
Apostolic Sees; (or be it, of the Apostolic See, (...):) with the rest of his
colleagues, indeed; but more then the rest, did oppose; thinking it (as I
conceive) fit and reasonable that he should outgo all others as much in his
zeal for the Faith, as he did in the authority of his place: or, of the place:
for the credit of Rome, domina gentium, the Mistress of nations and head of the
world, as anciently called; added much to the credit of the Bishops.

I think we may conclude (which is all can be made of it, for ought I know)
that he that so spoke of the Bishop of Rome (as many others did in those days
with all civil respect:) had no quarrel to him, no intention to do him wrong,
to deny him his cue: not his Supremacy then, or infallibility; had he known or
believed any such thing: which does not a little confirm what we concluded
before upon those pregnant evidences, that he knew no such thing belonging unto
him.

In his second book, after an account given of the general Council at Ephesus
(where no mention is made of the Pope:) and diverse named (quorum in illo
Concilio, vel tanquam judicum, vel tanquam testium, scripta recitata sunt:)
whose writings, as either judges or witnesses, were there read: he does add:
Sed ne sola Graecia, aut Oriens tantum, etc. that is, And to the end, that not
Greece only, or the East alone, but the Western and Latin world also, might
be certainly known always to have been of the same opinion, the letters of St.
Felix Martyr, and St. Julius Bishops of Rome, written to certain persons, were
there read. And to the end, that not the head of the world only, but also the
sides, etc. And two or three pages after, Quae omnia licet cumulate abundeque
sufficerent -- ne quid deesse beatae plenitudini videretur, ad extremum
adjecimus geminam Apostolicae sedis auctoritatem; unam scilicet sancti Papae
Systi, qui nunc Romans Ecclesiam venerandus inlustrat: alteram decessoris sui, b.
m. Papae Celeslini, etc. and then a little after; Quibus Apostolicis,
Catholicisque decretis, etc. that is To these Apostolic and Catholic decrees,
which might abundantly suffice, we have in the last place, that nothing might
be wanting to such a plenitude (as an overplus to a full measure) added a
double authority of the Apostolic See; the one of holy Pope Systus, who
worthily, and virtuously does now govern the Roman Church; the other of his
predecessor of bl. m. Pope Celestin. And then: These Apostolic and Catholic
decrees whosoever shall oppose, first, it must needs follow, that in so doing,
he does insult over the memory of St. Celestin: (he does insult? Why not, he is
a Schismatic, an Apostat, an infidel; ipso facto: according to the language of
those times?) and secondly, that he does deride the definitions of holy Systus.
Truly by the tenor of these expressions, I think a man may justly suspect that
Vincentius did not use so much cautelousness, without some cause; and that he
had somewhat in his thoughts, which made him write so warily. Especially, if it
be considered withal, that before any mention of those testimonies, (of Felix,
or Julius, or Systus, or Celestin.) he does argue from 1 Cor. 12 28. And God
has set some in the Church, first Apostles, Secondly Prophets, thirdly
teachers, etc. The necessity of submitting to the universal consent of Fathers
(present, and ancient, when they agree; but of ancient Fathers, if they do
not:) wherein he makes the Unity of the Church to consist. Hos ergo in
Ecclesia. Dei, divinitus per tempora and loca dispensatos, etc. Quod si quis ab
eorum sententiae communione desciverit, etc. and that in all this, no mention
of Church or Bishop of Rome is made. Except those words that follow, though
applied there to another, might have some reflection that way: (which is not
impossible:) Et ne quis forsitan, praetermissis caeteris, se solum audiri, sibi
soli credi, arrogaret, etc. that is, And lest perchance any body passing by the
rest, should arrogate unto himself, that he only must be heard: he only must
be believed.

This comes very near to St. Cyprians censure of Stephanus Pope of Rome before
spoken of. So that for conclusion, I shall repeat what I said before, (and I
speak it from my heart, according to thar measure of judgment wherewith God
has endued me:) that if the Author had intended purposely, to write against
the opinions of these times, (some beginnings whereof he might have seen in his
days, and fear the progress*) I do not know (but that he did forbear openly to
profess it:) how he might have written more pertinently, more pregnantly.

After this consideration of the reasons, grounded upon humane ratiocination;
and then, authority, whether of Scripture, or consent of Fathers, upon which,
as clear and convincing, (which if they be not, they must be acknowledged
impertinent:) Supremacy and Infallibility, are obtruded, as Articles of Faith,
necessary to Salvation; by our adversaries: we now proceed to the consideration
of some reasons, and arguments of our own, why we should not believe it: First,
from the nature of it, or doctrine it self, as it is set out unto us, by them
that maintain it; full of intricacies, of repugnancies, and contradictions.
Secondly, from the uncertainty of the persons. And lastly, from the different
opinion of other Roman Catholics (generally, so acknowledged, notwithstanding
their dissent:) about it.

First then we say; this Infallibility, so earnestly contended for, which if
certain and evident, would prevent, or soon allay all distractions, and
disturbances of thoughts; is a thing so perplex, and intricate in it self; so
full of confusion, and uncertainty; that he had need to be a right Oedipus; (if
he look into the nature of it, and do not take it upon mere trust:) that can
tell what to make of it, to receive any comfort, or satisfaction from it.
First, we observe the variety of terms, wherewith, the better to comply with
variety of opinions, and to conceal their own differences; yea divisions; they
set out this assertion, (or article of Faith, as they make it) unto the world.
Sometimes it is called the Infallibility of the Church: sometimes of Councels,
and sometimes of Tradition: though under that variety, one thing by most, be
intended; and that is the Popes Infallibility. The Infallibility of the Church
Catholic (with due restriction) even Protestants do maintain: of Councels,
many Romanists, that cannot endure to hear of the Popes: and Tradition is a
very ambiguous word, in the writings of ancient Fathers; being taken sometimes
for the doctrine of the Gospel, and most fundamental points of our Christian
Faith. Specious words therefore; but that we may say of them -- atrum Desinit
in piscem (Annulus Piscatoris; I need say no more:) mulier formosa superne. The
Church first, (the Catholic Church:) mulier formosa superne, we may say of it:
Labyr. p. 33
but then, there is no need of any special mention of the Pope, in speaking of
the authority of the Church: because this authority is always chiefly supposed,
as being Head of the whole Church; says the author of the Labyrinth. Councels
(general Councels) venerable names, even with them that do not hold him
infallible: but apparet totam firmitatem conciliorum esse a pontifice, says
Bellarmine: and take tradition (as sometimes) for Scripture; what more sacred?
But, Id solum pro Dei verbo veneramur, ac suscipimus, quod nobis Pontifex ex
Cathedra Petri -- definiendo proponit: that is, We receive and reverence that
only for the word of God, which the Pope out of Peter's Chair, does propose unto
us by his definitions; here is the ater piscis; or venom in the tail, that
spoileth all. The Author of the Labyrinth, does many times profess, that no
more is required of any Protestant, but that he should believe the Popes
infallibility when he has the assistance or concurrence of a General Council:
whereby he seems to grant somewhat toward peace, and accommodation of
diferences: but in effect, as he does explain himself, he grants nothing at
all. For besides what he writes in some places, where he seems more directly to
contradict himself, as where he has these words: Hence also it follows in
proportion (upon allegation of Christ's promise as in the former times:) that
the Bishop of Rome, Labyr. p. 103.
being Pastor of the whole Church, and intending to oblige the whole Church by
his definition, cannot (in the common opinion) err for the same reason:
besides this, I say, which is more direct; the opinion which he with others,
maintain of infallibility, in the conclusion, though not in the means or
premises, (which neither he, nor any body else does pretend to reconcile to
sense, but are glad to fly to Gods omnipotency for it: does altogether void the
use, or expedience of any Councels, or indeed of any counsel at all: so that
they may be thought to deal far more ingenuously, who plainly write and
maintain, that whether the Pope use any endeavor or no (to find out the truth)
it is not at all material, let him but define, he will be infallible, as some
of them have openly professed. So that a pretense of general Counsels, is but
a mere mockery; but no small argument to us, or to any that will judge
indifferently, that they that are put to such shifts, are not unsensible of the
badness of their cause.

Now if that be the common opinion, both of them who openly profess it, and of
many others who cunningly rather insinuate, then absolutely declare, that the
Pope in his definitions (laying aside the concurrence of Councels) is
infallible: it will be some work to find out, what it is, that he does define
as Pastor of the whole Church, by his definition: (as the Author of the
Labyrinth does express it:) and what he does define and avouch as a private
person, p. 242.
if the subject be matters of Faith. A Pope may be an heretic; (it is granted
by diverse, who nevertheless maintain his infallibility.) Liberius in
persecution might yield: Marcellinus for fear, might commit adultery; Honorius
might fall into heresy, and more then all this, etc. So the Rhemish Annot.
upon Luke 22. v. 31. and yet continue in actual possession of his chair. May
not he probably, write, and write peremptorily like a Pope, to maintain his
errors? And though he do not write, will not his private judgment and opinion,
he being a public Person, and the Oracle of the world by his place, be looked
upon by most men, who do not understand the niceness, and punctilios of Pope as
a private Doctor; and, Pope as Pastor of the Church: or, Pope in the Chair, and
out of the Chair, as others express it; and intending to oblige the whole
Church: and the like to be looked upon I say as public definitions.

And what are the Decrees of Popes, and Decretals? The chiefest part of the
Canon Law: are they not to be looked upon as public definitions? Yes,
certainly: Consistories, Courts, Councels, Decrees: So we are told, and in
reason it ought to be so. Now it will be proved by and by, that those Decrees,
and Decretals, contain abominable false doctrine, rejected and condemned for
such; by a great part, if not greater part of Roman Catholics: which the
Author of the Labyrinth, and other late English writers of that side, do
profess to disclaim and abhor. But first of repugnancies and contradictions.

Those Decrees, (we say) have many irreconciliable contradictions, where what
one Pope had decreed, is repealed by another, as false and erroneous: p. 472.
So that of necessity one of the Popes must be acknowledged to have erred.
Learned Erasmus in his Annotations upon 1 Cor. 7. v. 39. ( liberata est a lege:
cui autem vult, vubat:) has many pregnant instances, to which not a few more
might be added if there were any need of it here. But we have enough besides,
if I be not much mistaken. I will instance in one particular, where those
Decrees are contrary to the doctrine of these times, maintained and asserted by
other Popes. The administration of the Communion or holy Eucharist, under two
kinds, as instituted by our Savior; our adversaries hold it, to be a matter of
indifferency in it self; and he that shall hold otherwise, will be acounted an
heretic; and if he will not conform to the practice of these days,
established by the Popes order and authority, he will be condemned for a
schismatic. Nor do we grant possibility of Salvation to any (horrible words:)
that out of private heretical persuasions, hold it ought to be received by all:
or out of contempt of the Churches order to the contrary, Labyr. p. 317.
do receive it in both kinds. So the Author of the Labyrinth. Now we say,
former Popes have been of the same opinion as we are: and have publicly
defined the contrary for wicked and sacrilegious, and as a manifest breach of
Christ's institution. I will set down Pope Gelasius his words.

Comperimus autem, quod quidam, supra tantummodi corporis Christi portione, a
calice sacri cruoris abstineant. Qui procul dubio (quoniam nescio qua
superstitione docentur obstringi:) aut integra Sacramenta percipiant, aut ab
integris arceantur: Decret. 3. de cons^cr. Did. 2. c. 12.
quia divisio unius ejusdemque mysterij, sine grandi sacrilegio non potest
provenire.

Here, first it is apparent, that Gelasius pronounces the receiving under one
kind, to be receiving of a portion only: and secondly that the Sacrament is
not entire, or perfect, if either kind, (Bread or Wine) be omitted. Thirdly,
and lastly, that the division of this mystery (by receiving in one kind only:)
is grande sacrilogium: great (or intolerable) sacrilege. Is this plain, or no?
Or if it be not, what words can be devised by the wit of man, that can be
thought plain to a prepossessed mind, or resolute obstinacy? But let us hear.
Bellarmines first evasion, which he sticks too, in his books De Romans Pont. l.
4. c. 10. is, ( Gelasius in eo canone, logui solum de sacerdote sacrificante:)
that Gelasius speaks there only of the Priest that does officiate; (or,
sacrifice, as he will have it:) and not of the people that receive. But let any
man soberly consider with himself, whether it be probable, if Gelasius wrote
this of Priests particularly, whether he would have used such an indefinite,
unlimited word ( quidam, and no more) as would in all probability, be
understood otherwise, then he intended; especially when this mistaking of his
sense, must of necessity give great offense. But whether Priest, or people be
intended; if that be yielded; what then? Does not he say plainly, that they
that receive in one kind, receive but a portion? That the Sacrament (not
Sacrifice:) is not whole and entire; except it be received in both kinds? And
lastly, that this division of it, is grande sacrilegium? Are not his words
absolute and general, without any restriction, or limitation; as any can be
devised or imagined? But Bellarmine has another answer besides, in his books
De Eucharistia: and that is Baronius his answer, Lib. 4. c. 26. p. 693.
who slights the former, as impertinent, and a mere device ( frigidam
solutionem, etc. he might well say it:) But what is it then, that he says?
Truly, that, which upon consideration, will appear as impertinent every whit,
as the former* Baronius therefore, he will have this ( quidam) to be intended
of some Manichaeans of those days; to which purpose, to prove that there were
Manichaeans in those days, who did refuse the cup; he does produce a passage of
Leo, the Pope, which indeed does evince so much, and that is all that can be
made of it. Well; suppose it was intended of Manichaeans: what then? Why then,
says Baronius, if they did forbear, or refuse the Calix, or Wine out of
superstition: (because they condemned all use of wine, as unlawful) why then
he might well say, that this Divisio unius ejusdemque sacramenti, non potest
sine grandi sacrilegio provenire: this dividing of one and the same Sacrament:
(to wit, embracing one part of it, and rejecting the other; whereas both parts
Bread and Wine, make one entire Sacrament:) could not be practiced without
great Sacrilege. He might say it of them it is true; but it is the same reason
of any other, that should do the same, that these did, though they do it not
for the same reason: though it be not superstition, in them (they do it not,
because they think the use of wine unlawful:) yet it is Sacrilege; because
they divide that, which of its own nature, and by Christ's institution cannot be
divided. Wherever that division is, there are not integra sacramenta; Gelasius
says: it is but portio corporis sacri, not integrum corpus. What then is the
difference whether the Manichaeans be understood, or any others? And whereas
Baronius and Bellarmine, and out of them the Author of the Labyrinth, does
argue, because Leo does say, such Manichaeans there were in those days, that
did refuse the Wine; and by consequent did receive in one kind: that therefore
receiving in one kind was then, ordinary: no such thing does follow from the
words of Leo; but this only, that the Manichaeans did attempt such a thing, to
bring it in use; and were it seems connived at, by some Priests of those times:
which therefore, is by Gelasius taken notice of, condemned; and for reasons
which he does there allege, inhibited for the time to come. Leo's words are,
that, ad tegendam infidelitatem suam, nostris audent interesse mysterijs:
because they would not be accounted Manichaeans, (that is, to avoid the Laws,
and censures of the Church:) they would come to the Communion, but with this
temperament (between true Christians and right Manichaeans:) that they would
receive the bread, but refuse the cup: (which was one of Manichaeus his Tenets,
that Wine ought not to be drunk: dicentes fell esse Principum tenebrarum, cum
vescuntur uvis: says St. Augustine:) by which signs they may be known from
others says Leo (ut nobis hujusmodi homines, ex his manifestentur indicijs:)
What are those indicia, I pray, by him mentioned, but their forbearing the Cup?
If therefore they might be known what they were, by those indicia: must it not
follow, that they were only Manichaeans, who received but in one kind, in
those days? I know not what is sense, if this be not. Which is quite contrary
to what Baronius, and Bellarmine would gather from the words.

And whereas Bellarmine in the same place does further argue, because neither
Epiphanius, nor Augustine, Bell. De Euch. l. 4 c. 24 Quarta ratie. etc.
who write of the Manichaeans, lay it to their charge, that they received but
in one kind; that therefore it was then ordinary so to receive: it is an
argument very unworthy such a man, as he is generally believed; though they
that know him (his parts otherwise, and abilities, we deny not) will think it
is very like him. For the Manichaeans, by the account those Fathers give us of
them, were rather Infidels, or Heathens, then Christians. In lieu of a
Communion, or Eucharist, coguntur electi eorum velut Eucharistiam conspersam
cum semine humano sumere, says St. Augustine: which afterward he calls
rightly scelestum mysterium. Would any body (but in a fit of frenzy, or
dementation) draw an argument from thence (from what those miscreants did:)
that therefore the Communion was then administered in one kind, among true
Christians? Truly I should scarce believe my eyes, were they not pretty well
used to such sights.

But to return to Gelasius, and his words: should any now forbear the cup, out
of any such superstitious conceit; because all use of wine, upon any occasion,
is vicious: what would his punishment be, to force him to take it under both
kinds (the high privilege of Priests and some Kings, if I be not mistaken:) or
to deny him the communion altogether, until he had renounced his superstition?

Besides all this, to make this matter more clear and evident: (though I think
greater evidence then what has already been produced, no man can reasonably
require: In the same Distinction, (as called) c. 7. there is a Decretum, or
Epistle of Pope Julius, as the title does bear. In that Epistle, the Pope takes
notice of diverse abuses, in the administration of the Eucharist. One is, that
some had a custom to dip the Bread in Wine, and so to give both kinds thus
contrived in one, for the whole Eucharist, which they called Intinctam
Eucharistiam. Julius tells them, ( Probatum in Evangelio testimonium non
recipit:) It was contrary, or not agreeable to Christ's Institution: (seorsum
enim panis, and seorsum calicis commendatio memoratur: Decr. 3. Did. 2. De
censor. c. 7.
) because by that Institution, the Bread ought to be given asunder, and the
Wine asunder. He concludes therefore, after diverse other abuses mentioned; De
caetero, aliter quam praescriptum est faciens tamdiu a sacrificando (there is
no hurt in the word, in that sense they used it:) cessabit, quamdiu legitima
poenitentiae satisfactione correctus, ad gradus sui officium redeat, quod
amisit: a direct suspension, (if not deprivation, because of the word amisit:)
till reformation and amendment.

May not we now, with all the confidence that clearest evidences and
unquestionable records can breed in any man, conclude that Popes have
contradicted one another in this point? I hope it will be granted; or we must
never hope to carry any thing (though never so visible and palpable:) as long
as some have the face to affirm; and others the facility, to believe, what best
suits with their occasions, and main design, (to uphold the cause) quo jure,
qua injuria: be it right, or wrong. Of which kind of dealing (though I intended
Decretals only) I will give the Reader, before I pass to other matter, a
further trial upon this very subject.

The Reverend Archbishop, and now blessed Martyr, had objected that by Christ's
Institution, the Sacrament was administered in both kinds, and that his
institution and example had the force of a precept. To which purpose he does
produce words of a certain Catechism, printed at Paris, The Institution of a
Sacrament, is of it self a command: and again, Institution is a Precept. Now,
Relat. p. 259.
That both kinds, in the Sacrament, were instituted by Christ; he proved by the
very confession and acknowledgment of the Council of Constans, in those words:
Non obstante Christi institutione. Two things then we have; that the Cup is
Christ's institution: and that Christ's institution (though there be a precept
too, besides the institution, as the Bishop does observe:) has the force of a
precept. To this the Author of the Labyrinth does reply: Laby. p. 27^.
To show that the practices of the Church were contrary to Christ's institution,
the Bishop should have made it appear, that Christ did so institute this
sacrament of his last supper, that he would not have one part to be sacrament,
without the other: or, that he would not have one part to be taken without the
other. What; though both kinds be acknowledged Christ's institution; and that
institution has the force of a command, or precept; yet is all this nothing,
except Christ have said expressly, that he would not have one part to be
sacrament without the other; or, that he would not have one part to be taken
without the other? Why then, if I say to a thief, making profession of
Christianity, it is written, Thou shall not steal: may not he answer as well:
yea, but show me where it is written, Thou shall not steal for thy need; or,
when opportunity does offer it self: and so the adulterer, where it is written,
Thou shall not commit adultery, though thou have no wife of thine own; or,
though the woman make some advantage of her adultery, which she and her
Children stand in need of; and the like. This it is, to be resolved, not to
yield to any thing, whatever comes of it.

But hear him again: Our Savior (says he) gave it in one kind only to the two
disciples at Emmaus (Luke 24) as both S. Augustine, S. Chrysostom, S. Hierome,
Theophylact, and others, of the ancient switness: Ibid. p. 318.
whose example the Church following, etc. Who does read this, but would expect
in those Fathers here quoted, to find somewhat expressly, concerning communion
in one kind? But if you look, not one word in any of them will you find,
concerning one kind, or two: but this only, that those Fathers are of opinion,
that by those words, breaking of bread, the Communion is intended. Now breaking
of bread in common speech among the Hebrews, implying drink also, as no man
ever denied, or doubted, (as (...) in the Greek does imply meat also, and the
like in other languages:) to bring them for witnesses, and to make them say
peremptorily, that the Eucharist was administered in one kind by Christ; because
by breaking of bread, the Eucharist is intended: what kind of dealing is this?
let the Reader judge. I shall add only, that Maldonat, who does earnestly
contend for this sense, that by breaking of bread, the Eucharist is intended in
this place, urging many reasons, and alleging the very same Fathers their
authority for it; yet of the Sacrament administered in one kind (which, had he
seen any ground for it, he had not omitted, certainly:) he has not one word.
Nay, those words of his, fractionem panis, non ipsam actionem frangendi, sed
totum illum actum conficiendi, administrandique Eucharistiam appellari: may be
thought not improbably, to imply the contrary, and to aim at some confutation.

But why do I say, not improbably? For certain it is, that he could intend it
no otherwise; and as certain, that the Author of the Labyrinth, did not well
understand what did belong unto himself as a Priest; if, as probably, he be a
Priest. For though the Romanists do administer unto the people under one kind:
yet they do not hold that right consecration of the Elements, that is not made
under both. And therefore (as is well observed by a learned Romanist, whom we
shall name afterward, who has written a learned discourse of this very
subject;) Neither the Council of Constance, nor that of Basil, nor of Trent, by
which Councels, administration under one kind was established (or confirmed;)
would make use of this place of Scripture to confirm their doctrine, or decree;
as, wisely foreseeing what would be objected. And is this the man, that durst
undertake such a work, as the confutation of the Archbishop of Canterbury?
That learned, and judicious piece.

Now to sum up what has been said hitherto upon this subject of infallibility,
considered in it self; and briefly to supply what has not yet been said of the
intricacy of it: First in the very title or terms, there is obscurity, or
craft, which every body does not understand; whilst some call it, or the same
man perchance, sometimes infallibility, of the Church; sometimes of Councels;
and again, of tradition: one thing being intended, to wit, the Popes. Well; the
Popes infallibity; yes; but not as he is a private person or Doctor (how can he
be so whilst he is Pope? but as he is the chief Pastor of the Church; not in
his ordinary doctrine, or in the Schools; but as he does teach the whole
Church in his Pastoral chair: not in the premises, but in the conclusion: not
in matters of fact, but in matters of Faith: and in matters of Faith, (as I
conceive this is, whether the Pope be above a general Council; or a general
Council above the Pope:) whether as matters of Faith: or, by way of Canonical,
or Ecclesiastical Constitution: Laby. 262 3.
for which last I refer the Reader to the Author of the Labyrinth. And again,
the voice of the Church (that is the Popes:) in determining controversies of
Faith, not simply divine, though by immediate miraculous inspiration: and their
Decrees, rightly styled the Oracles of the Holy Ghost; (Labyr. p. 253.) but, in
a manner divine. Well: an intricate business we say; and they that maintain it,
are much put to it: and yet, such an article of Faith, as without it, no
salvation; here is ground enough for any man to doubt the truth of it; so much
I hope will be granted. But upon their own grounds of humane reason, or
ratiocination, that Christ as wise, or good, was bound: etc. (before spoken
of:) what will follow, I leave to the Reader to judge.

But, an intricat thing in its own nature, full of repugnancies and
contradictions, that is some prejudice to the cause certainly: but that is not
all. Though it were granted true, that every true, lawful Pope, is (with such
limitations and restrictions:) infallible; yet we are as much to seek, and more
too, in the person; whereof according to their own doctrine and definition,
there can be no assurance, that such, or such, is a true Pope, and by
consequence infallible.

First, he that came in, or got possession of the place, by bribery and Simony,
he is declared by the sentence of many Popes no lawful Pope* Si quis pecunia,
vel gratia humana, vel populari, seu militari tumultu, sine concordia and
canonica electione ac benedictione Cardinalium, Episcoporum -- fuerit
Apostolicae sedi inthronizatus, non Apostolicus sed apostaticus habeatur:
liceat Cardinalibus -- invasorem etiam cum anathemate -- a sede Apostolica
repellere: etc. So Nicholas Papa II in Concilio Romano statuit: Did. 79. c. 9.
Si quis. And Pope Paschalis Caussa 11. q. 1. declares all Simoniacal persons to
be heretics: veluti primos and praecipuos haereticos, ab omnibus fidelibus
respuendos, etc. Omnia enim crimina, ad comparationem Simoniacae haeresis,
quasi pro nihilo reputantur. Other Decrees, and Canons, of Popes there be to
the same purpose which I omit. I shall only content my self with Platina (a
man bred in the Court of Rome and thoroughly well acquainted with their ways.
Plaet. in Silu. 3o.
) his words in one of the Popes life's; (which book he delivered himself to the
Pope: Eo enim tum Pontificatus devenerat etc. That was the case (or condition)
of the Popedom (or, Popeship) in those days; that no holy life, or learning;
but largition (or bribery) and ambition, all good men being oppressed, and put
down, were the only means, to obtain that high dignity: which custom, would to
God, our times had not retained: (utinam aliquando non retin. nostra temp. I
wish they would once leave, or give over: or perchance he means, They did not
always so: the expression is somewhat ambiguous, but that which follows, makes
the other more probable:) But this is but little: if God prevent it not, we
shall see worse hereafter. Of what consequence, this may be, I leave to the
Reader to consider.

The next thing is, their doctrine and definitions, concerning the intention of
the Priest, in consecrating: by which it does infallibly follow that no man can
be so sure, that he that now sits, shall sit, or ever sat, as Pope; is in holy
orders; and by consequent, Relat. p. 271.2 3.
whether true Pope; and if not Pope, certainly; then what certainty of his
infallibility? This is very strongly pressed, and very particularly proved from
their tenets, and definitions by the most Reverend Archbishop: to which the
Author of the Labyrinth does endeavor to say somewhat: but whether, what he
says, may be called an answer, let any man judge, whom prejudice, and
partiality, has not altogether bereaved of his judgment.

His first answer is, by way of retortion: No man, says he, can infallibly be
sure of any man, that he is truly baptized: Labyr. p. 282.
therefore it is possible, for ought he knows, that none are. How then can he
believe a Catholic Church, which must consist of persons rightly baptized?
This indeed, were an argument of some force against them that hold that the
validity of a Sacrament depends of the intention of the Priest, which is their
doctrine: but of no validity at all against us, who believe no such thing; and
protest, as the Archbishop does, against the manifest, intolerable
uncharitableness, and absurdity of the opinion. What did he mean then, to
bewray so much absurdity, and impertinency in his retortion? Though in very
truth there is besides a vast difference in the business, or comparison. For
that all Priests, all the world over, or greater part, should be such Devils,
and in this one particular too, is altogether incredible; and then it will not
concern the Catholic Church, if some here and there be not truly baptized: but
in this case, of the Popes being baptized, yea, or no; whose Infallibility is
said to be the Churches Rule, and Oracle; and therefore should be very well
known, and certain: if some Priests sometimes, may be supposed to be so wicked;
that is enough to make every Pope questionable. And that the Reader may not
think we suppose strange things, not easily to be believed: (therefore also it
will the better appear, what horrible doctrine, this doctrine of intention is:)
I will impart to the Reader, what I find recorded by my F. (of bl. m.) in his
Adversaria, in these words: Presbyteri novum exemplum furoris.

Audivi saepe a senatoribus, and Praesidibus hujus amplissimi ordinis, anno
1598. aut 1599. Presbyterum fuisse vocatum in jus in Provincia Conomanorum, and
mox huc Lutetiam adductum, qui fassus est se per annos jam septem vel octo, in
consecratione panis mystici, semper pro nomine benedicto Domini Jesu, nomen
(horresco referens) (...) pronuntiasse. Erat enim sortilegus, and ex voto se ad
id daemoni malo obstrinxerat. Aiebat Praeses Thuanus, censuisse ordinem,
gravissimas quasque poenas ab eo exigere: sed ordinem Ecclesiasticum hominem
repetiisse, and quid de eo statuerit, nesciri.

The sum is; A Priest was questioned in Paris for a Sorcerer, who confessed
that instaed of the name of Christ, at the consecration of the mystical Bread;
having bound himself to him so to do, he had used some seven or eight years
that of the Devils. Intention is not here mentioned; for it seems he had the
boldness, and opportunity both to perform by direct utterance; what some
others, more probably, commit intentionally only. God be thanked, such a thing
cannot happen in our Churches, where we are bound to speak audibly, in a tongue
which is understood. So much of his first answer.

Ibid.
Then: Secondly, I answer, says he: That both a general Council, and the Pope,
when they define any matter of Faith, do also implicitly define that
themselves are infallible; and by consequent, that the Pope in such a case, and
also the Bishops that sit in Council, are persons baptized, and in holy orders.
Well: If I be out of my wits, God restore me: but I am certainly, and I must
acknowledge it, if any man can make good sense of this. The question is, (it
matters not what the Bishops are:) whether he that sits, as Pope; be true Pope;
that is, truly baptized, in holy orders, etc. which by the doctrine of
intention (as is abundantly proved by the Archbishop:) established by Popes,
as matter of Faith; cannot be known. How then can it be known, that he that
sits as Pope, and Decrees, and Defines, is Infallible? Yes, says our
Labyrinth-maker: it may be known; because when he does define any matter of
Faith; he does also define (implicitly) that he is Infallible; therefore
baptized, and in holy Orders. But (I can hardly keep my self from exclaiming:
Dei hominumque fidem!) what is the definition of such a one (whether implicit,
or explicit:) to the purpose; until we know that he is right Pope, and by
consequent (as you would have it:) Infallible? He that sits as Pope, (many have
done, it is well known, and granted; yea, for a long time, that were no true
Popes:) takes upon him to define matters of Faith, (who should, but he that
sits in the Chair for the time, whether true Pope, or no?) therefore, he is
Infallible, etc. Is not this Petitio principii; as manifest, and palpable, as
any can be?

Ibid.
His third answer is; That it is not necessary to believe the Infallibility of
the Proposer, (or Pope:) prioritate temporis: but it suffices to believe it,
prioritate naturae. He that does understand this, to apply it to the purpose;
let him speak, and brag; I will not envy him, but admire him. For my part, I
think, if instead of this, he had put in two, or three words of Welsh, or some
other unknown language, it might have done as well; or better. But I will
expect what men of better capacities, will say to it. This shall serve, (though
much might be added from the uncertainty of the true Pope, in times of schism,
when diverse Popes set together, though not in one place; which has often
happened:) to show how fallible and uncertain, this doctrine of Infallibility
is, in the persons, or subject of it.

Our next business (as we proposed it before) will be to show, that this
Infallibility of the Pope, in his Decrees and Constitutions, which we are told
is the common opinion; is rejected by others (of the same profession,
otherwise: to wit, Roman Catholics:) as impious and diabolical: not very
likely then, that there is such great certainty of it, that it should be
obtruded as an Article of Faith, and necessary to Salvation. Bonifacius the
VIII. Pope of Rome, did set out a Decree, or Declaration, entered into the body
of the Canonical Law, whereby he does establish himself absolute Lord and
Monarch of the World, challenging temporal, as well as spiritual power, over
Kings and Kingdoms; in these words, among others: Nam veritate testante,
Spiritualis potestas, terrenam potestatem instituere habet, and judicare, si
bona non fuerit. Sic de Ecclesia, and Ecclesiastica potestate, verificatur
vaticinium Hieremiae: Ecce constitui te hodie, super gentes and regna; and
caetera quae sequuntur. (ut evellas and destruas, and disperdas, and dissipes,
and aedifices, and plants:) Ergo si deviat terrena potestas, etc. He
concludes: Porro subesse Romans Pontifici omni humanae creaturae (al. omnem
humanam creaturam:) dicimus, definimus, and pronunciamus omnino esse de
necessitate Salutis. Some will reply perchance, that these be general words, by
which he intended not to challenge to himself absolute temporal Dominion; but
only to magnify the spiritual power, (to which purpose, I must acknowledge,
that some ancient Fathers, have some high expressions of Episcopacie, in
general:) and prefer it, before the temporal: Though the words will scarce
bear this sense, (...) that we had Suarez before, a great Author among them,
his acknowledgment to the contrary; yet I would not much contend ab^^^ were it
not for the testimonies of their own Historians, concerning (...) Boniface:
whereof one of them, does so write of him: This (...) was very expert in all
things that belong to Courts: and because he had not his fellow for this kind
of knowledge, ^
he did so unmeasurably arrogate unto himself, that he reported himself to be
Lord of the whole world, as well in things temporal, as spiritual. This I think
makes it out of doubt, what he intended by those words.

Bill. de R. P. l. 5. c. 5.
Besides, we could tell you of Nicolas the II. of that name, Pope of Rome, two,
or three hundred years before this Boniface, but not many years before
Hildebrand, the grand assertor, or rather founder of Popish Omnipotency; who
decreed, and defined, D^cret. 1. di^t. 22
the very same in effect, in that Decree of his, registered in their Law; where,
having pronounced all Sees, and Dignities Ecclesiastical to be founded by the
Church of Rome; he further adds: Illam vero solus ille fundavit, etc. that
is: But her, (or it) (the Church of Rome) he only (God, or Christ) has
founded and erected upon the rock of Faith, then beginning; who has committed
unto his blessed Claviger (or Key-keeper:) the right (or disposition) of the
earthly both, and heavenly Kingdom. This is objected by some, as though he had
intended the same as Boniface. But Bellarmine does answer not improbably, that
by those words he did not intend, any temporal or terrestrial dominion
properly; but merely alluded to the words of Christ: Matthew. xvj.19. And I will
give thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven; and whatsoever thou shall bind on
earth, shall be bound in Heaven: whatsoever thou shall loose on earth, shall be
loosed in Heaven. Well, be it so: yet, Bellarmine must grant, that either Pope
Nicholas speaks nothing to the purpose; or so much at least, he does here
assert to Peter and his Successors, as their proper privilege, that unto them
only, the Keys of Heaven; that is, the power of binding and loosing, was given
by Christ, Which he does not here only affirm; but afterward, in this very
Decree, does define it Heresy to deny it: Qui autem Romans Ecclesiae privilegium
-- hic proculdubio in haeresin labitur: -- hic est proculdubio dicendus
haereticus. Now it is certain, that it is the Doctrine of the ancient Fathers
(generally:) that nothing was given to St. Peter by these words, (but only
that it was given to him first, for unities sake: in which sense some say, soli
Petro:) but was given to the rest of the Apostles. And certain it is, that many
Roman Catholics, (the greatest part, I believe) are of the same opinion, as
the ancient Fathers were in this particular. How then the Popes infallible in
their Decrees; and their Infallibility, how much regarded among them generally,
by whom to us Protestants, it is proposed as an Article of Faith; this may well
go for one instance.

But in the next place; What shall we say to Hildebrand, or Gregory the VII.
who does decree and declare, that if a Prince, or King be excommunicated, all
his Subjects are discharged of their Oath; and not only, so, but does strictly
forbid, that any fidelity (or obedience) shall be performed unto them? His
words are; Nos sanctorum Praedecessorum nostrorum statuta tenentes, eos qui
excommunicatis, fidelitate aut sacramento constricti sunt; Apostolica
auctoritate, a Sacramento absolvimus; and ne iis fidelitatem observent, omnibus
modis prohibemus; quousque ipsi ad satisfactionem veniant. This is so punctual,
that it will admit, (I think:) of no evasion: And that this Doctrine is
impious, heretical, destructive to all Kings, and Princes, has been declared
by diverse Edicts of Kings and Princes, with the joint concurrence of their
Clergy, Bishops, Archbishops, etc.

But that which is most horrible, beyond which professed Atheism, and
Infidelity cannot go; is that of Urban the Second, whereby he does declare them
to be no homicides, who through zeal for the Church, shall murder any man, (
King, or Prince, you may be sure; who are most subject to those
Excommunications:) that stands excommunicated. Yet nevertheless, he does order,
Decr. II. a. 23. q 5. p. 823. c. 47.
that some kind of penance, for Disciplines sake, in case they have not done
it out of mere zeal, should be enjoined them. And this, he says, is the Ordo;
course, order, or appointment of the Church of Rome. But it will not be amiss,
to set down his own words. Urbanus II. Godfredo Lucano Episcopo.
Excommunicatorum interfectoribus (prout in ordine Eccles. Romans didicistis:)
secundum intentionem, modum congruae satifactionis injunge. Non enim eos
homicidas arbitramur, quos adversus excommunicatos, Zelo Catholicae matris
ardentes, aliquos eorum trucidasse contigerit. Ne tamen ejusdem Matris
Ecclesiae disciplina deseratur, etc.

The word arbitramur, might seem to qualify the matter somewhat, as though it
were but a declaration of his opinion, not an absolute determination. But here
the Author of the Labyrinth, does offer himself very seasonably: I am very
willing to make some use of his authority; but the rather, to do the Reverend
Archbishop some right, which I did propose to my self, to do upon all
occasions, that should offer themselves, as I told the Reader, at the
beginning. Though therefore it be some digression from the present matter; yet
it is not besides my first intention, and purpose. The question is, about a
place of St. Jerome, where he does use the word arbitramur; in what sense there
to be taken. Before we resolve the question, and produce Jeroms words; let us
hear, what the said Author of the Labyrinth, does make of it, which may stand
us in some stead upon this particular occasion of Pope Urbanus his words.
Labyr. p. 364.
[As for the word arbitramur (says he) which the Relator catches at, as if S.
Jerome thereby delivered only his own private, and but conjectural opinion, and
not any matter of Christian belief; we answer, Arbitramur does not always
signify opinion, or doubts, but simply a man's sense, and judgment, in
whatsoever matter or question propounded, as every common Lexicon might have
informed him. Does the word signify no more then mere opinion, in that Text of
St. Paul, Phil. 2. Non rapinam arbitratus est, esse se aequalem Deo? etc. And
would not the Bishop (think you,) have been shrewdly put to it, to find a proof
for justification by Faith only, should that of Romans 3.28. have been wrested
from him in that manner: St. Paul is here only at his arbitramur, we think
that a man is justified by Faith, without the works of the Law? He delivers not
a point of Faith, but only his private opinion, etc.]

Thus he; and that this interpretation of the word arbitramur, does very well
agree to Urbanus, as Pope, that is, as supreme Judge, (so they would have it)
in all such causes; no man can doubt. But however, what construction soever we
make of this arbitramur, is not much material, since his order and appointment
how they shall be used, that have, or shall commit such a thing; not as
execrable murderers, or parricides; but as men, who perchance in this act of
Zeal, might have some other consideration (as happily some private revenge, or
expectation of reward, and the like,) besides Zeal; and therefore some
arbitrary petty penance, to be enjoined them; and no more: this does absolutely
pronounce them no murderers, no parricides. And this is the Doctrine, all, or
most that of late have attempted upon the persons of Kings, and Princes, have
gone upon, and acted by. And this, one great mystery of Jesuitism, (though I
hope, (...) 129.
all that go under that name, are not conscious of it:) which they call the
directing of the intention: by the help whereof, they provide themselves
assassins, against all occasions. Never was Doctrine devised, more pernicious
to Kings and Princes: and for this one point (were there no other) all the
Canon Law, whilst this remains in the body of it, deserves to be banished
from all Christian Common-weals, where the Popes authority is established by
Law. For how can they punish them legally, who have such a plea provided for
them, (which they commonly make use of) justifiable by the Popes Law?

Now I have done with Pope Urban, whose arbitramur made us think of the
Labyrinther; the Reader will give us leave to do the most Reverend Archbishop
some right, by a further account, (upon this opportunity) of his adversaries
way of dealing. First, it is most clear by a manifest antithesis. in St.
Jerome's words between credimus, and arbitramur; that St. Jerome by arbitramur,
intended conjectural opinion only, and not matter of Christian belief, as the
said Labyrinther would have it. As we believe (says St. Jerome) the external
torments of some; Devils and Infidels:) So (arbitramur) we think (probably)
that the sentence of the Judge against the wicked, yet Christians, whose works
are to be tried and purged by fire, may be moderated with some mercy. His words
are: Et sicut Diaboli and omnium negatorum atque impiorum, qui dixerunt in
cord suo, Non est Deus, credimus aeterna tormenta: sic peccatorum, atque
impiorum, and tamen Christianorum, quorum opera in igne probanda sunt, atque
purganda; moderatam arbitramur and mistam clementiae sententiam judicis. Now
for those instances he uses, to prove, that arbitramur is so taken sometimes
as he would have it; could the man be so ignorant, or impertinent, as to
believe, that if the Archbishop would prove any point of Religion out of the
New Testament, he would go by the Vulgar translation, (because authorized by
the Council of Trent:) and not rather by the original Greek, which only with
us, is authentic? There, no arbitramur is to be found ( Romans III.28. but
(...)? which they that read Theophylact (not to mention any other) will say, is
very well and truly translated, we conclude: which is our translation. Whilst
the Labyrinther therefore thought to make himself some sport with the
Archbishops words, S. Paul is here only at his arbitramur, etc. (See Relat. p.
349.) he has made himself very ridiculous to any man, that is not a mere
stranger to these things.

But we return to the Pope; Not his temporal, but very spiritual power and
supremacy, has been and is opposed and impeached by many professed Roman
Catholics, men of great credit, and authority among them; who have written
against it, maintained the government of the Church instituted by Christ, to be
Aristocratical; and that Councils, (General Councils,) are above the Pope; may
question, condemn, and depose him (contrary to Pope Boniface his definition
before spoken of) as they see cause. The Council of Constance and Basil, have
determined it, one way: The Council of Lateran another way: great banding there
has been, among the learned of that side, about the authority and validity of
those Councils, and their actions: some asserting the one: others as much
opposing it.

Cardinal Cusanus, a man, besides his authority, of great learning and
reputation in the world; has written accurately against the Popes Supremacy,
both Spiritual, and Temporal, applying all the promises of Christ, made to
Peter, to the Catholic Church; in his books entitled, De Concordia Catholica.
Bellarmine does speak of him with great respect: vir doctissimus and
diligentissimus: and, ob ejus viri eruditionem, in the same place: and
elsewhere doctus and pius. And though the same Bellarmine says of him, and
produces somewhat of his, to prove, that he did change his opinion in some
things, hefore he dyed: yet, as to the main of his book, that he ever was of
another opinion, nothing is alleged by Bellarmine. Th. Campegius Bononiensis,
Episcopus Feltrensis; De auctoritate and Potestate Romans Pont. Printed by Paulus
Manutius, A. D. 1555. does justify the Decree of the Council of Constance, and
makes no question of it, but a Pope may be an heretic, and eo nomine, worthy
to be deposed.

In the year 1612. a book was set out in Paris (much noised, and as much
commended in most places:) under this title, De Ecclesiastica and Politica
potestate liber unus. Ecclesia (in the title Page) est Politia Monarchica, ad
finem supernaturalem instituta, regimine Aristocratico, etc. consisting of 18
Chapters, or Paragraphes; the first whereof is, Infallibilis potestas
decernendi, aut constituendi canones toti Ecclesiae, quae est columna and
firmamentum veritatis, non uni and Soli Petro competit; S^^bone
idque praxi Ecclesiae comprobatur. And though the book was questioned, and
condemned afterward, by some part of the Clergy: yet the Author (one of the
Doctors of the Sorbone) instead of being terrified, grew so confident, that
upon it, (some friends it seems he had, that wished well unto that cause:)
whereas before he had concealed his name, he now durst openly make himself
known, which troubled the Clergy not a little.

How many more could we name, if need were? Apparent therefore it is, that this
infallibility, so earnestly contended for, has not yet taken effect, even
among them, that are acknowledged by the abettors of it, good Catholics; how
then, an article of faith, and necessary to salvation? And again, how suitable
to Gods providence (upon their own grounds:) that a thing so intricat in it
self; subject to so much opposition and contradiction among them, who agree in
other things; should be made by God the main Article of Religion, without the
belief whereof, no salvation can be had!

But though this absolute power and supremacy of the Popes, be obtruded by the
abettors of it as the Article of Articles, without which nothing can be right
in matters of Faith; nothing, available to salvation; and many are content, for
some politic ends, the opinion should pass current among them, that will
entertain it, upon those terms: yet how easily, many that apparently submit
unto it, can dispense with themselves, when occasion is; has appeared by
sundry public actions, and proceedings of whole Nations, and Kingdoms, at
several times.

In the year of our Lord 1524. or thereabouts, Caesar, says Thuanus, (Charles
the V. Emperor of Germany, and King of Spain:) ut injuriam sibi a Clemente
illatam, ulcisceretur; nominis Pontificii auctoritatem, per omnem Hispaniam
abolet (Henry the VIII. did not much more in England) exemplo ab Hispanis,
posteritati relicto, posse disciplinam Ecclesiasticam, citra nominis Pontificii
auctoritatem, ad tempus conservari. The same was agitated ( quod Senatus
urgebat, says Thuanus) and very near effected in France, had it not been for
the opposition of one, that was very great and powerful; when the Pope stood
off, and would not acknowledge Henry the IV. lawful King of France.

What the matter was in France, about the year 1640. others may know better
then I, that were then in the Country, eyewitnesses of what passed. Sure I
am, that by Books then printed, it does appear, that there was much talk of a
Patriarch, then to be constituted: and that it was verily believed, by many,
that it would be so. Which gave occasion to a Book, entitled, Apotrepticus,
adversus inanem Optati Galli ad Illustriss. and Reverendiss. Ecclesiae
Gallicanae Primates, Archiep. Episcopos, Paraeneticam. A. D. 1640. written of
purpose, and as I conceive, by authority; to allay the jealousies of men; and
to prevent disorders, that might probably ensue upon it. In that Book, among
other things, you shall find notable instances, quantum distet a pia Francorum
erga R. Sedem observantia, fastus and contemptus Ibericus.

Long before that, in the year 1626. was printed a Book or Writing, in Paris,
under this title; Cardinalium, Archiepiscoporum, Episporum, caeterorumque, qui
ex universis Regni Provinciis, Ecclesiasticis Comitiis interfuerunt, de
anonymis quibusdam, and famosis libellis, sententia. Lut. Paris. apud Anton.
Steph. A. D. 1626. Cum privilegio Regis. In which, among other things, I find
this clause, so contrary to the Popes, and Jesuits doctrine, rhat nothing can
be more: At injustam est, quod ad restituendam haereticum Principem (add etiam
infidelem: the Prince Palatine, that then was, is intended:) bellum susceptum
sit. Infidelis sit, sed a Deo constitutus, a quo potestas omnis data est: etc.
This whole Book, or judgment, was inserted (it had such approbation:) in the
Mercurius of those times, and in a Book consisting of four Tomes, then printed,
and entitled, Des affairs du Clerge de France: 1626. nay, it was enrolled in
the public Records, or Registers of the Kingdom. But the Jesuitical party
prevailing, this Book or Sentence was disavowed, and disclaimed by a great part
of the Clergy; and a large Book set out against it, Par Francois, Cardinal de
la Rochefoucaut, Grand Ausmonier de France. However, it may easily appear by
these Writings, upon what doubtful terms, the Popes authority stands in that
Country; and how many enemies it has. So that in very truth, this business of
Infallibility ascribed unto the Pope, is looked upon by the generality, rather
as a device to amuse the simple and credulous; then as a thing seriously to be
entertained, by any that know how the world goes, and can discern between the
inside and outside of things.

If all this we have said hitherto, be not enough to satisfy the Reader, that
it is so indeed, I will propose one instance more to his consideration; and, if
that will not do it, I shall leave him, peaceably, to the liberty of his own
judgment.

As we Protestants (as many as go under that name) by the Sentence of the
Church of Rome, partly for false doctrine, which they charge us with, in
matters of Faith; but especially, for not acknowledging the Pope our head, nor
yielding obedience unto his commands; are proclaimed Heretics, and solemnly
anathematized, at certain times, in Rome, (as I take it:) So are the modern
Grecians, though not for the same points of Doctrine, yet for others, and
particularly, for not acknowledging the Supremacy of the Pope. And whereas the
Reverend Archbishop does endeavor to free them from such errors, so
fundamental, as should make them no Church; Labyr. 6.7.
the Author of the Labyrinth, will not hear of it: he will prove them,
whatsoever any body thinks to the contrary, Heretics, and disputes it at
large. And elsewhere, that they are Schismatics; in more then one place. He is
peremptory in it: p 233.8.
We have proved (says he long after:) that the Greeks Error in that point, is
fundamental, and sufficient to unchurch them. I make not any great wonder at
it; for ordinarily they dare speak of them no otherwise, because of the Popes
sentence. I said ordinarily: but they dare when they please. Witness he (no
obscure man, Jacobus Goar, ordinis Fr. praedicat. S. Th. Lector; and in Orient
Missus Apostolicus:) who has set out in Paris the Euchologium, in Greek and
Latin, with Annotations. In his Epistle to the Reader, he speaks of the Greek
Church, in these words: Una est Orientalis Ecclesia; una est Occidentalis: unum
Deum authorem omnium suspicit, ac veneratur: pones externos venerationis ritus,
haec ab illa discrepat, quia unus ac idem operatur in ea Spiritus: Deus ergo
Opt. Max. cum sit omnium, quem utraque Ecclesia profitetur, objectum, etc. I
think this is plain language; it needs no Comment: a free and clear vindication
of the Greek Church. Yet I must acknowledge, that the Author, in the beginning
of his Epistle, was so wary, as to provide himself (if occasion should be:) a
refuge, or evasion; by a cautious Parenthesis; de primaeva illius aetate; vel
de sana, quae tempore hoc restat, heu modica licet, loquor: but it is apparent,
that notwithstanding this Parenthesis, he speaks afterward of the Greek Church
in general; visible, and conspicuous, and commonly known, under that name. No
other construction (to make sense of them:) can be made of his words. Yet for
further evidence of the matter, and the better to prevent the subterfuges of
brazen confidence; I referr the Reader to the Approbations, (the two last of
the three:) there following, where the same thing is averred, without any
limitation or exception: Ut in Ecclesia Catholica (Ecclesia Orientalis, and
Occidentalis, the two Churches before mentioned:) cum rituum diversitate,
Sacramentorum societatem, vel potius unitatem esse, omnes intelligant. But the
other, more clearly, and fully; Ut omnes sciant, Ecclesiam Orientalem and
Graecam, suos adhuc primaevos ritus, fideliter asservasse, nec ad ejus
splendorem aliud deesse, quam Romanae fidei unitatem, and cum Romano capite,
adeo peroptatam unionem; quod annuente Jesus Christo, Capite Romanae, seu
Graecae; praestabit istud opus, etc. Here the Greek Church is acknowledged a
Church, wanting nothing to full perfection or splendour, but unity with the
Roman Church, in the same Faith, and under the same Head; but acknowledged a
Church nevertheless, under one, and the same Head, Christ Jesus.

Is not this strange Doctrine? Can any thing be more contrary to the
definitions of Popes, and Church of Rome; then that any Church should be
acknowledged a Catholic Church, which has no dependence from the Pope? Is not
this the very Doctrine of Protestants, so rigorously condemned in them, and for
which, more then any other point, they are branded as Heretics, and
Schismatics? Now let the Reader speak, what reckoning those men make of the
Popes Infallibility, and his Definitions, that do so point blank oppose them,
and reject them, when they please. What the Author of the Labyrinth will reply
to this, were worth the knowing; if he be not one of them himself, who would
have us to believe that; and that too, (to terrify us, silly people, into a
belief,) under pain of eternal damnation; which himself thinks himself too wise
to do, truly and really. The Book to which those Approbations (made both by
Readers, and Professors in Divinity:) was printed in Paris, A. D. 1647.

I have been the longer upon this point of Infallibility, and made choice of
that (as was partly said already, in the Epistle to the Reader,) to insist upon
it before any other: or indeed, in this, instead of all the rest: because it is
the point (of late years, especially) most pressed, as the Point of Points, and
Article of Articles, by the Patrons of the Roman Cause. As therefore the
Reverend and blessed Archbishop said well, speaking of them of that party, If
this be true; (that the Pope is infallible:) why do you not lay all your
strength together, all of your whole Society, and make this one Proposition
evident? Relat. p 266.
For all controversies about matters of Faith are ended, and without any great
trouble to the Christian world; if you can but make this one Proposition good,
That the Pope is an infallible Judge: So, the same reason will hold with us
Protestants also, why as many as deal in Controversies, we should make it our
chief business, to make it good and evident, that he is not.

Now truly, I think they have done what they can, they have so applied
themselves to it, of late: and because (it seems) upon accurate perusal of
former grounds and arguments, they begin, (as we may guess probably:) to
mistrust, or to despair: some of them have devised new ways, new props and
fences to uphold this tottering building, which were not thought of before: or
at least, disused and laid aside. Witness a Book entitled, Schism Dispatched:
or a rejoinder to the Replies of Dr. Hammon, and the Lord of Derry, 1657. This
man has a way by himself, of his own devising; or reviving, at least: though
he send us to the Dialogues of one Rusworth, p. 45.
which he styles The rich Storehouse, of this kind of dealing. This I do not
understand: I never heard of such an author: and it is possible, the better to
cry himself up, (which is the artifice of some:) he might borrow another name.
But be they two, or one: if they go one way, we may speak of them, as one,
without wronging them. This author then; Popes, and Prelates, their testimonies
he makes nothing of; nay, disclaims them; as insufficient proofs and evidences;
( the bare words of a few particular men, so he speaks of them:) Scriptures, p.
98.
Fathers, and Councels (in this business) he slights, as much: p. 42.
calls them in scorn, wordish testimonies; and gives you his reasons, why he
does not account them good evidences: But I stand not upon this (says he, such
kind of evidences:) having a far better game to play, etc. Oral Tradition, and
the testimonies of Fathers of Families; is the only thing wherein he places
Infallibility: which to make good, he has so many chimerical suppositions, and
does so please himself in his impertinencies, as must needs beget wonder, in
case the man (as probably) be of any account, and reputation in the world. For
my part, by this extravagant kind of dealing, I cannot but suspect of him, that
he is one of the fraternity of the new (pretended) lights: no friend to ancient
Books, or Learning. Woe to Colleges, and Libraries, if they should prevail:
Atheism, and Mahometisme will get well by it. Others, of approved worth and
abilities, have met with this man; who I think have done him more credit, then
he deserved. I do not judge his parts: but I account his way so ridiculous, that
I should hardly have thought it worthy of an answer, or so much as notice.

But since I have taken notice of this man, who does less concern us; I must
not omit to acquaint the Reader, what is done by the Author of the Labyrinth,
upon the same occasion: who, though not in the same way, yet he also (upon the
same occasion) does bewray not less diffidence and difficulty. For, being put
to it by the Reverend Archbishop, he has no remedy, but he must quit all those
pleas of Scripture and the rest; (as necessary;) and wholly betakes himself to
Motives of Credibility. Labyr. p. 55.
He says plainly, other Arguments are but ad hominem ex principiis concessis,
against Sectaries: and that the Church, without the help of the same, is
sufficiently proved to be infallible. Where the Reader may observe, how he
confounds the Church, referring us to Bellarmine, de notis Ecclesiae; with the
Churches Infallibility: it being one thing, to believe the being of a Church,
upon some Motives of Credibility (in part:) and to believe, that the Church is
absolutely infallible. And again, one thing, to believe the Infallibility of
the Catholic Church, in fundamentals necessary to salvation, and to the
constitution of a Church: (which Protestants do generally grant and believe:)
and to believe the Infallibility of the Pope, as Head of the Church; the only
thing, (as we have observed before) all these goodly words and pretensions
drive at. A mavelous Infallibility, and well worthy the first place among the
Articles of Faith; which to maintain, the assertors of it are put to so much
shuffling and confusion.

Now should a man go about to examine his motives of probability, as he does
marshal them; sanctity of life, and miracles in the front; efficacy, etc. I do
admire, with what face, he durst mention sanctity of life, when so many of
their own Authors have made known unto the world, the Epicurean, Atheistical
lives of so many Popes, scarce to be paralleled by any heathenish History:
whose examples (as Supreme Pastors, and Governors of the Church upon Earth,
according to their opinion:) must needs be more considerable, and of more
influence, to do good, or evil; generally: then the lives and sanctities of
thousands, yea millions, which may not so easily be judged of: and if believed,
of little consideration, in comparison. Besides I refer the Reader to what
has already been said, and shall be yet afterward, of the atheistical life of
their Clergy, by their own confessions.

And for miracles: what will he answer to so many Fathers, who so often
disclaim them: and particularly, to St. Augustine: as when he says:
Romoveantur ista etc. that is: Let these, either fictions of lying men, or
prodigies of deceiving Spirits, be removed. August. De ^^^t. Ecc. c. 16.
For all those things that are reported of that nature (by the Donatists and
others who endeavored to justify their cause, by such proofs) either they
are not true; or if in very deed, some wonders have been done by some
heretics, we ought to take heed of them the more; since our Savior, after he
had warned us etc. And a little after, What signs soever of that nature, are
done in the Catholic Church, therefore they are (approbanda:) to be approved:
(to be liked, and well thought of:) because they are done in the Catholic
Church: but the Church is not thereby proved, (or manifested) to be Catholic
(or, a true Church) because such things are done in her. This must be
understood of miracles, since miracles generally ceased. For of the miracles of
the Old Testament, or done by Christ and his Apostles, it is quite another
case. And truly by what I have read; (who have been somewhat curious to satisfy
my self in this point: whereof I may perchance, give a further account to the
world, at another time:) and by what I have learned by the relation of others,
I am clear of opinion, that the pretended miracles of the Church of Rome, where
they make one good Christian (and it must be some of the meanest sort; or such
at least, who naturally, are very credulous:) they make many more atheists. I
will not say, of the better sort of men; but, of the more rational, and
intelligent, among them. I justify them not; for their be other motives and
considerations, to keep them in the Faith of Christ, if they made that their
business. But we consider men, as men. For when they see so much imposture
(though not comparable now, to what it was, before the reformation; men are
somewhat more wary, now:) so much fraud and juggling; (witness many of their own
books and Authors:) on the one side: so much credulity, simplicity of others,
who are ready to embrace any thing in that kind; who also build some kind of
faith, and devotion upon such things, without further examination: it must
needs make them who look no further into the true grounds of Religion, and hear
miracles (even of these times:) cried up, as a great Argument, or motive (as
our Author would have it) of credibility; to think of Religion accordingly.

Yet, for all this, I do not deny; nay, I verily believe, that in all places,
at all times, (more, or less) some strange things do happen from strange
causes; which may be called miraculous, or supernatural events, or operations;
for which no reason from the ordinary course of nature, can be given: which
supernatural operations having been acknowledged, not only by the wisest, and
most religious of former times; but by the best, and most learned naturalists
of this learned age (even since the restoration of learning:) whose profession
has given them greatest advantage and opportunity, to understand the truth of
these things: I must look upon it, as an argument of great ignorance, or
sensuality (Plato, the Philospher, will give the reason, why sensuality:) in
any man to make a question. So much for miracles.

I might proceed to his third motive: efficacy, purity, and excellency of
Doctrine; (as he expresses it:) and so to the rest; were it not too much
besides my purpose. I shall only, in discharge of my conscience, such an
opportunity offering it self, declare the apprehensions (not without much
grief) of my mind, and most retired thoughts: that this one point of Doctrine,
the worshipping Images, as it is taught and practiced (though practiced much
worse, then taught: yet, even taught:) in most places, where Popery is
established; I verily believe, not in its self only, damnable; but the great
and abominable scandal of Christianity: for which, they that pretend to
antiquity, may with as much color, or reason pretend, that the Alcoran was the
work of some one of the ancient fathers; or, an abstract of their Doctrine. By
antiquity, I understand the first six hundred years. And my opinion is (by what
I have found, at least) that they, Protestants I mean, that read Bellarmine and
others, (if men of any judgment:) upon this point, will rather be confirmed in
their opinion, if they doubted before; then otherwise. Nay it is able to make a
man a Protestant, that is not; to see what ways they go, what shifts they are
put to, to maintain so wretched a cause.

I have said to his Motives, as much as I mean: that which I aim at, is to make
the Reader sensible, what a sad thing this Infallibility is, which by their
Doctrine should be the chiefest Pillar of the Church; the ground, and
foundation whereof, is so full of uncertainty and contradiction. But yet I must
not pass by a manifest blasphemy (as I apprehend it) of this subtle Architect
of the Labyrinth; (a right Title to his Book, had he but left out
Cantuariensis:) where he says: As therefore Moses, our blessed Savior, and
his Apostles, Labyr. p. 57.
were proved infallible by their works, signs, and miracles, without Scripture:
so is the Church (the present Church; for of the ancient and primitive, there
is no question made) without help of the same, sufficiently proved infallible,
by the motives of credibility: does not he thereby ascribe as much to the
miracles and holiness of the present Church (the Roman, as he names it:) as to
the miracles and holiness of Christ and his Apostles? If this can be excused, I
am well content: I would not make him worse, then he is; I profess, I do not
see, how it can.

But to return to Infallibility, such as is avouched by the more sober: Of all
points of Popery, which we believe erroneous; this we have reason to account
the most odious, and intolerable; because by it, we are put off from all hopes
of peace and reconciliation, in Religion: which they that do not wish heartily,
and daily, privately, publicly; according to their places and professions, pray
for fervently; they know as yet but little of true Christianity. For what grief
of heart must it be to a true Christian, to see the Church of Christ, the body
of Christ, so divided, and set against it self; Church, against Church; member,
against member; with all fierceness, and animosity: whereby so much advantage
is given to Turks and Mahometans abroad; to Atheism and profaneness, even
where Christ is professed?

Truly, my judgment is: He that looks into many of our controversies, not as
they are stated, and aggravated by too many, on both sides: but into the true
nature of the differences, as stated by the more sober and moderate: he will
not apprehend such an impossibility of reconciliation, as the prejudice of
some, and the interest of others, would make us believe: but confess, that in
some points of greatest consequence, the difference is more in words, and
speeches; then in reality of matter: for which I appeal to the Acta Ratisbon.
A. D. 1541. and what Phil. Melanchton, Bucer, and other German Divines, have
written of the same subject. However, if not a perfect reconciliation; yet a
charitable, and brotherly toleration, (so far as may stand with the peace and
safety of every place:) though in a different external communion, would be
comfortable. But as long as this Doctrine of Infallibility, under the pretense
whereof, grossest untruths and abuses are, and must be countenanced; what
hopes? what possibility? Great reason therefore, that we should apply our
selves most to that, and bend all our strength and forces against it, to make
all men sensible, (if possible) how little there is of truth, or probability,
in the opinion, at large: but to make it an Article of Faith, a Fundamental of
Christian Religion, necessary to salvation, without which, all other Faith, or
belief, is but Infidelity; how much of horror, and impiety!

But what then? if no Infallibility in the Church; (I would not leave any thing
unanswered, that I think fit to be taken notice of:) what becomes of Christ's
promise, that he would build his Church upon the Rock, against which the gates
of Hell should not prevail:) Is there nothing of Infallibility in this? Yes,
surely, as long as there is a Church, a Catholic Church, there must be some
infallibility: For if the Church fail, in the main fundamentals, it cease to
be a Church. The Rock upon which Christ promised to build his Church, according
to the interpretation of most Ancients, is Christ himself; or which is
equivalent, Matthew. xvj.16.
Peter's Confession of Christ, that he was Christ (the Messiah:) the Son of the
living God. This we say, is the Rock especially, and precisely, against which
Christ has promised, the gates of Hell shall not prevail: which has been
proved before, by many testimonies. And do not we see the accomplishment of it,
in all parts of the world, where Christ is professed, with admiration? Is it
not strange, and (but through the mighty power of God,) incredible, that the
Catholic Church, being so divided into so many factions, and professions; so
many different opinions, maintained with so much eagerness and animosity, as
greater between greatest Enemies can hardly be conceived; yet all agree (some
very few excepted, if any:) in this main Fundamental; as here delivered by St.
Peter, and all the necessary consequences of it. The same Gospel every where;
the same Creeds; and the same Canons of the four first General Councels; which
Councels, (the first, third, and fourth at least) were chiefly called upon this
very occasion, to settle the right belief (though sufficiently declared in the
Scripture, in the substance of it, necessary to salvation:) of this Article of
Christ's person, against Heretics; so that it is not possible to devise any
thing against the true Faith in that point, but may easily be found and
convicted by what has been determined by those Councels, and their Creeds. And
I cannot look upon it otherwise, then as a Providence, that notwithstanding the
Church of Rome and their adherents, are so vehemently set for the maintenance
of their opinions; whereof the chiefest, is the Popes Supremacy, and
Infallibility, as grounded chiefly upon those words of Christ (before cited)
Upon this rock I will build my Church, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail
against it: they should nevertheless (as already intimated) with many ancient
Fathers and Protestants, apply them to the Creed and the contents of it. Quare
Symbolum fidei, quo sancta Romans Ecclesia utitur, tanquam principium illud, in
quo omnes, qui fidem Christi profitentur, necessario convenient; ac fundamentum
firmum and unicum, contra quod portae inferi nunquam praevalebunt, totidem
verbis, etc.

So St. Hilary: Unum igitur hoc est immobile fundamentum una haec est foelix
fidei petra, Petri ore confessa, Hilar. de Trin. lib. j. and lib. vj.
Tu es Filius Dei vivi; tanta in se sustinens argumenta veritatis, quantae
perversitatum quaestiones, and infidelitatis calumniae movebuntur. And in the
sixth Book, Super hanc confessionis petram, Ecclesiae aedificatio est. -- Haec
fides Ecclesiae est fundamentum, per hanc fidem infirmae adversus eam sunt
portae inferorum. So the Apostle himself, after he had told us, that the Church
is the ((...)) the pillar and ground of truth: he does presently after confine
this truth, to that fundamental Article concerning Christ: God was manifest in
the flesh, justified in the Spirit: seen of Angels; preached unto the Gentiles;
believed in the world; received up into glory: which does b^iefly comprehend,
what is more fully and plainly expressed in the Creeds.

We are to believe, that there will be a Catholic Church in the world, to the
worlds end, whatsoever becomes of the Pope or Church of Rome, wherein this
fundamental Doctrine, will be preserved, sound and entire: and in the
profession of this Doctrine, and acknowledgment of a Catholic Church, under
one Head Christ Jesus, the true unity of the Church chiefly consists. That of
Campegius, whom we have mentioned once or twice already; (he was one of their
own Bishops:) Tria sunt, quibus non praeest, sed subest Papa: credenda;
scilicet, articuli fidei: agenda, praecepta moralia; medicamenta, Sacramenta:
His stantibus, quae tollere non potest Papa, non labitur fides, nec Ecclesia,
licet ipse labatur. This is the summary (made by himself) of what is more
largely delivered by him, Chap. 23.. 18. of his Treatise, De potestate Romani
Pontificis: wherein he shows himself very zealous for the Pope and his
authority. But if it be so, as he says, (as indeed it is:) what need is there
of this Infallibility, so much contended for? But we have said enough of that
before. All we intend here, is this only, what Infallibility it is, that we
maintain, well worthy the notice, and observation, (and of Gods providence
therein, toward his Church:) of all men; grounding it with antiquity upon the
texts of Scripture, upon which they would ground the Popes Infallibility.

But without it, cry the Patrons of Infallibility, there will be Schisms and
Heresies: no time, no place will be free: men will not know what to fasten
upon. This has some appearance of plausibility, or probability, at first
hearing; but upon further search and inquiry, it has nothing in it, but bare
appearance. For first, Heresies there will be, there must be: He that has
assured us by his promise, that the gates of Hell shall not prevail against his
Church; has also foretold and wa^ned by his Apostles, Oportet esse haereses:
There must be Heresies. Might we be as bold with God Almighty, as our
Adversaries, (whose words have been produced at the beginning:) we might
perchance reason with him, whether it were so suitable to his Wisdom, or Divine
Power, and Providence, to permit it. But God forbid we should take that
liberty. We acknowledge his Goodness, yea and Providence, that he would warn us
so long before, that we might not wonder, or be dismayed at it: We think our
selves bound to do what lies in us, according to our places, and callings, to
hinder it, to prevent it: but withal, as much our duty, to submit with
humility, when it does so happen. Do not we see, how it fared in the beginning
with Christ's Church; in those infant-days of it, when, if ever, a man would
have thought it should have been most secure? Neither indeed, was
infallibility, then, wanting; certain infallibility, as long as any of the
Apostles lived; which was for a long time: yet for all that, when were there
more divisions, more heresies; either for the fervency of the abettors, or for
the quality of the Doctrine more scandalous and offensive? And at the same
time, the persecutions of Infidels, as hot, and destructive: those, in the
bowels of the Church; these, round about; raging, and spoiling; and every day
threatening utmost ruin and destruction. And this, not for a short time, but
for some hundred of years after Christ. Where was then Providence? if we should
go upon the same grounds our adversaries do; we might say. But providence we
acknowledge; great providence; those very heresies, did conduce to the
settlement of the Doctrine of faith; and the Church Catholic was enlarged by
those persecutions and devastations: The blood of Martyrs was the seed of the
Church: (as of old well observed:) and was not this a mavelous providence,
and an effect of Gods mighty power, and omnipotency? Why then may not we trust
the same power, and providence? Why must infallibility be granted; or all
yielded to be lost? But sure enough it is; peace and unity (goodly pretenses to
work upon them, that wish well; but had rather believe, then take the pains to
search:) may be alleged; but they that have eyes and will make use of them,
see well enough what it is, that is aimed at. Let supremacy be but granted
(such as is required, and challenged:) I dare say, the Plea of infallibility,
will soon be quitted; if the quitting of the one will conduce, to the obtaining
of the other.

This of the Council of Trent, I, a little before, took notice of; puts me in
mind, of somewhat I observed long ago; and because I have the books by me;
(which I wish I could say, of all I have had) at present, I will acquaint the
Reader with it. It is not improbable, but some may be affected with it, as I
was. I have a French Bible, in two volumns in 8vo. printed at Rouen, in France,
par Jean Crevel, au Portail des Labraires:) A. D. 1611. It is a translation, as
the title page does bear, of the Latin Bible set out by the Theologues, or
Divines of Lovain, in Flanders. In this edition of the said French translation,
after the license, or approbation; and a Latin Epistle of one Jacobus de Bay;
who in the first lines does mention, Sacri Concilij Tridentini Patres; and does
also give the Reader an account, that this translation out of the Latin was
made, or at least, revised by some Theologues of Lovain: and after St. Jerome
his Epistle to Paulinus, concerning the books of the Bible, which is usally set
out before all Bibles of the Vulgar edition: there follows a small parcel,
not consisting of above three or four pages (but in a small Print) entitled, A
Summary of all, contained in the Old and New Testament. The contents of the
Old, as there comprised, are not many: but of the New, they are long enough,
and contain many particulars, besides those that concern Christ's person and his
office. It concludes in these words: Other foundation then this, no man can lay
in the Church of Jesus Christ, upon whom (or, upon which:) it is founded: so
that St. Paul, does wish him lost, sunk, and cast away by God (or, from God,)
yea, though it were an Angel of Heaven, who shall preach any other Faith, or
salvation, then by Jesus Christ, in the Catholic Church. There is not one word
there, but a Protestant may subscribe unto, with a good conscience: Nay, had
any Protestant Doctor been to make such a Summary, (as I doubt not, but some
have had occasions) I do not know how he could do it more pertinently, more
substantially, to satisfy the most judicious and intelligent of that
profession. A strange thing, that for all this, we must be thought no better,
then miscreants and infidels. But then comes in this new divised article, which
certainly was hatched in hell, and fostered by the suries of hell; by men, who
care not how many they send to hell (according to that horrid speech of one of
the Popes Vassals, entered into the body of the Canon Law, That though the Pope
should be never so wicked and by his wicked example, Gra^. Dec. Did 40 si Papa.
should draw after him innumerable people and Nations into hell, there to be
tormented aeternally; yet must not he be rebuked, or judged by man:) for their
own ends, and the interest of that cause which they have undertaken: even, that
new article we have spoken of before, in the words of the Author of the
Labyrinth; That whatsoever is proposed by the Church as matters of Faith, is
fundamental, etc. and that, If the Church, (that is the present Roman Church:)
be disbelieved in any one point, there can be no infallible faith of any thing.
So that if we cannot believe, that the Communion ought to be administered in one
kind only; or that images are to be worshipped; indulgencies purchased with
money, to deliver souls out of purgatory; or otherwise advantage the dead: and
other like points proposed unto us by the Church of Rome, to be believed as
matters of Faith; with like assurance, as we believe that Christ came into the
world to save sinners; though otherwise never so orthodox, and in our lives,
never so upright and innocent (as men:) yet all this will do no good: to hell
we must: the Pope who is infallible, has so decreed it. But do all Romanists
think themselves bound to believe it really?

What Sancta Clara did aim at, or who set him at work, or whether he himself
(as most likely:) more then can be gathered by any man, from his own profession
and manner of dealing, I know not. However this advantage we may make of his
book, entitled Deus, Natura, Gratia: as the third edition Lugduni, A. D, 1631.
which has the approbation of so many Doctors of that side, does represent it:
We may learn by it, if we knew it not before, that it is not the opinion of all
the Roman Catholics, that there is no salvation to be had in the faith and
communion of Protestants: which is so confidently affirmed by the Author of the
Labyrinth. Yet to do him, and others of that confederacy no wrong, though
sometimes they are very peremptory, and make great use of their confidence
among women especially, and other illiterate people, when they maintain without
exception, that there is no salvation for Protestants, Labyr. p. 301.302.
that live and die in that belief: yet they can mince them atter when they
please, and change it into few, or none; as our Author speaks; and again,
except in case of invincible ignorance: which does much alter the case, and
gives hopes to every Protestant, that is verily persuaded, nor ever made any
question (though ever willing to be better informed, and in case of error, to
embrace the truth;) of his being in the right way; that he may be one of those
few.

But, since we are upon a considerable point, whereof, as I said before, the
Romanists use to make great advantage; I desire to pause upon it a while, and
take a view of those reasons given by the Author of the Labyrinth, Lab. p. 301
etc.
why the Roman Church and Religion, must upon our own grounds, be the safer way
to heaven. I am very confident the Reader will acknowledge, it was well worth
the while, if not give me thanks, when I have done. First then, for the
salvation of many, in their communion, upon our grounds, he does thus argue: In
the Catholic Church, it is evident, that many being to depart out of this life,
do receive the Sacrament of Penance. These, according to che Doctrine of the
Roman Church, are saved; because by virtue of this Sacrament they receive the
grace of justification, whereby of Sinners, they are made the Sons of God, and
Heirs of Eternal life: nor can they be denied to be saved according to the
Doctrine of Protestants, seeing they believe in Christ their Redeemer, they
confide in Gods goodness and mercy, for the pardon of their sins; they truly
repent of them, and truly purpose for the future, to amend their lives: which
is all that Protestant Doctrine requires, to make men partakers of Christ's
sanctifying grace: and is also necessarily required by Catholics, to make them
fit subjects for the Sacrament of Penance. Who can therefore doubt, but all
such persons are saved, both according to the Doctrine of Catholics and
Protestants too? I say who can rationally, and with charity doubt, but that
Catholics (generally speaking) being taught, that Faith, Hope, true
Repentance for sins past, and a Purpose of amendment, are necessary to the due
receiving of the Sacrament of Penance; do not omit to exercise those acts,
with all necessary diligence and sincerity, especially, when they are to
prepare themselves, against the dreadful passage of eternity?

I have set down the passage at large, that the Reader might be the better
satisfied. Now, if I be not mistaken, here is not dangerous only, but horrible
Doctrine delivered; giving such virtue to the opus operatum of the Sacrament of
Penance (as they call it) that whoever are made partakers of it, at the point
of death, though they spend all their life, in all manner of debauchery, and
villainy: in open defiance of almighty God, and all laws of men, as long as they
live; and by their example, and allurements, undo never so many: Yet, if they
receive but the Sacrament of Penance, before they die; they are sure of
justification, and life eternal: what encouragement, may this be to the
wickedest of men, to continue in wickedness? that I say not, to the best of
men, to become wicked. I do not make any question, but Gods mercies may extend
even to such; (God forbid, I should:) even at the last, if they repent them
truly: but to promise them, to warrant them before hand, that by the bare (if
all the rest does infallibly follow) performance of the outward act, they may
be sure, and secure, that God will give them grace, truly, and effectually to
repent: (for he does not propose it conditionally, in case they truly reptnt,
etc. but absolutely, these; without any exception:) I would not willingly
believe that the Church of Rome, would countenance such wretched Doctrine: Sure
I am, it is very contrary to the Doctrine of Protestants. We do not think that,
to believe; or, to repent; truly, and really; is a mere voluntary thing; which
a man, by any outward performance, has at his command, when he will. We have
not so learned the Scriptures. And I am sure it is contrary, (this of Penance
particularly, as always accompanied with true repentance, and justification;
and consequently, salvation:) to the Doctrine of the ancients. Witness for one
St. Augustine: (or whoever is the Author:) Si quis autem positus in ultima
necessitate aegritudinis suae, voluerit accipere poenitentiam, and accipit, and
mox reconciliabitur, and hinc vadit; fateor vobis, non illi negamus quod petit;
sed non praesumimus, quia been hinc exit. Non praesumo, non vos fallo; non
praesumo. Agens paenitentiam, and reconciliatus cum sanus est* and postea, been
vivens; securus hinc exit. Agens poenitentiam ad ultimum, and reconciliatus; si
securus hinc exit, ego non sum socurus -- poenitentiam dare possum, securitatem
dare non possum. -- Numquid dico, damnabitur? Non dico. Sed dico etiam
liberabitur? Non. Et quid dices mihi? Non praesumo: non promitto: nescio. What
can be more contrary then this is, to the Doctrine of the Labyrinth? He says
plainly, and repeats it again, and again (to make men the more sensible) that a
man at his death, if he desire it, may obtain penance; and may be reconciled,
by the outward act: but whether really, effectually; he knows not, he doubts
it; Yea, though the party be secure, he cannot be secure. So in the Church of
England, if any before death, upon confession, and profession of true sorrow,
and repentance, receive absolution; we hope well, in the judgment of charity:
nay, we make no question, if their repentance before God was true, and sincere:
their trust and confidence in God, through Christ, and in Christ; by right
application of his merits, and satisfaction; sound and perfect: no question,
but all is well. But to pass an absolute judgment; we leave that to the judge
and searcher of hearts: and have too much occasion to believe, that many; very
many, (through Gods just judgment, for their long contempt of the means, and
his grace:) are deluded at that time, persuading themselves that they repent,
(it is likely, most do, after a sort, when they see they must die) and that
they have made their peace with God; when God knows there is no such thing. The
Author therefore of the Labyrinth, does much wrong the Reverend Archbishop,
when he would put it upon him, that he was of the same mind, for saying that a
Donatist (an honest plain Donatist; those are the Bishops words; by which he
means certainly, one that has lived in the fear of God:) if he repent truly of
his sins, etc. might be saved. This he might say; but the inference very false,
that therefore he believed, a man might repent truly, when he listed. If this
be the Romanists, their readiest way to salvation, because they trust to their
penance, at the point of death; when they can sin no longer; there is no
occasion we should envy them: but rather wish heartily, God would make them
more sensible of their errors and danger.

But now let us see (which indeed I did chiefly intend:) how he does prove,
very few; or no Protestants, living and dying in that faith, can be saved. And
first of all (for which we must commend his moderation) he does wave that part
of our charge, or indictment, Labyr. p. 302.303.
upon which most others go; that we are heretics: Not that this is a point of
our belief (says he) that many Protestants shall be damned precisely, upon the
account of being heretics; because heresy is an obstinate, and wilful error
against faith, which we cannot easily, much less infallibly determine, whose
errors are wilful: but, because there are none, or surely very few among them,
but are guilty of mortal sin, against Gods commandments; and because the
ordinary means they use and prescribe, is not according to our Principles,
sufficient to expiate, and blot out such sin. It Is well known, that though
Protestants to obtain salvation, believe in Christ* trust in his merits, and
repent of their sin; (God be thanked so much is acknowledged:) yet they do it
not purely out of a perfect love to God, so as to hate sin above all evils,
merely as it is an offense against the Divine Majesty, and to prefer God and
his holy commandments, before our selves, and all other creatures (for this is
a very hard and rare act, even among the best of Christians) but at best, upon
inferior and lower motives (as the manner of most men is to do) viz. in
consideration of the Beatitude of Heaven, as it is their own particular good;
or, for the avoiding of the pains of Hell, as it is their particular, and
chiefest harm. Now according to our Doctrine, such kind of repentance as this,
is no sufficient remedy, to blot out sin, unless it be joined with the
Sacrament of Penance, viz. Confession, and Priestly Absolution, etc. which
Protestants reject. I say, without the Sacrament of Penance, actually and
duly received, all Catholics hold, that neither Faith, nor Hope, nor any
Repentance, or sorrow for sin, can save us, but that only, which is joined
with a perfect love of God, whereby we are disposed to lose all, and suffer all
that can be imagined, rather then to offend God; yea, though there were indeed,
neither Heaven to reward us, nor Hell to punish us; which being a thing so hard
to be found; especially amongst such as believe a man is justified by Faith
only; it follows evidently, that in our Doctrine, very few, or no Protestants
are saved. The conclusion therefore is undeniable, that our Church is a safer
way to salvation, then that of Protestants.

I could not tell how to express him better, then in his own words; and my
desire is, that he may be perfectly understood; that so the Reader may judge
the better of what I have to answer. The matter we are upon, is of great
weight; and the reason here used, not ordinary. The substance of all he says,
as I take it, is this: That which must bring us to Heaven, must be, either a
perfect Love of God: etc. or the Sacrament of Penance: viz. Confession, and
Priestly Absolution, etc. but neither of these, (or very rarely:) is found
amongst Protestants.

Here again, in the first place, I must say, If it be the Doctrine of the
Church of Rome, that the opus operatum of the Sacrament of Penance, (so
called) which they that have lived in perpetual contempt of God, and all
Religion, may have before they die, if they desire it; is equivalent to that
perfect kind of Love of God, by him described, which few in this world (he
says himself) attain unto; and equally available to salvation: it is a
horrible Doctrine, tending to the overthrow of all piety and godliness among
men. I will not further dispute it now: let the sober Reader consider.

Secondly, It is false, that the Church of England (and I believe it may be
said of most other Protestant Churches:) has not the Sacrament (take the word
in a large sense, we should not contend about it:) of Penance: viz.
Confession, and Absolution. Witness that excellent Rubric of the Common Prayer
Book, in the Visit. of the Sick: Here shall the sick person be moved to make a
special confession of his sins, if he feel his conscience troubled with any
weighty matter* After which confession, the Priest shall absolve him (if he
humbly and heartily desire it) after this sort. So, now; and so, before, in the
former Books; with very little alteration of words.

Thirdly, Whereas he lays it to the charge of all Protestants in general,
that what they do, they do it not out of a perfect love of God, etc. had he
said no more then perfect Love of God; we should not much oppose it; for who is
it, that dares affirm of himself, or of any other, that he loves God
perfectly? There is indeed a new kind of Divinity, lately much cried up by
some, commonly known by the name of Theologia Mystica: which does pretend to
great perfection. But of that Divinity; the original, and qualities of it, (as
having more of delusion in it, then perfection:) we have had occasion to
consider elsewhere: whither I shall referr the Reader, if he please. Treatise
of Enthusiasme, chapter 3.
But for such perfection of love, as he does here describe, and does
appropriate to his own party; is it not a speech both presumptuous, and
uncharitable in a high degree, so peremptory to make Protestants incapable of
it? Does he not thereby arrogate unto himself, what is proper to God only, to
judge of the hearts of men?

But is it not strange, that he that could see the very thoughts and hearts of
Protestants, whom he was less acquainted with: should be a stranger to the
published speeches and declarations of his own friends, and fellows, in this
business? For first, Cor. Jansenius, a man (were it but by the hatred, and
opposition of the Jesuits:) well known: he lays it to the charge of
Protestants, this very thing, (the want whereof, is here objected unto them:)
that by their Doctrine, they do not allow of any acts of justice, or piety, to
be acceptable to God; which are grounded upon the consideration of a reward:
(that is in effect, which do not proceed from pure love:) to which he does
oppose the exhortations of Christ, as Matthew. 5.12. for great is your reward:
and elsewhere. And the words of S. Paul, concerning Moses, Hebr. xj.26. for he
had a respect unto the recompense of the reward. And of David, I have inclined
my heart to perform thy statutes always: It is in the Original, (...) unto the
end: so our English translation; and du Muis, the late learned Professor of the
Tongues in Paris, likes it better so: propter retributionem; so the Vulgar;
which is not amiss; ( Psalm. xix.12. for in keeping of them, there is great
reward: the same word in both places:) but that is not our business. As
Jansenius, so Ludovicus Tena, a very famous man, upon Hebr. xij.2. Looking upon
Jesus -- who for the joy that was set before him, etc. he also charge the
Lutherans with the same, as contrary to sound Doctrine.

But again, Bellarmin, de Poenit. lib. 2. c. 17. Contritionem imperfectam, sive
attritionem ex timore poenae ortam, bonam atque utilem esse: (that is the
argument of the Chapter:) he lays it to the charge of Luther, and other
Lutherans; that they did once teach that contrition, which arises from a
servile fear, made men but hypocrites; and rather added to their guilt, then
took away. Himself, both by Scripture, and sundry testimonies of the Fathers;
does prove the contrary.

By this that has been said, let the Reader judge, whether this man had any
reason to deny Protestants, a possibility of Salvation, because they serve God
only with a servile fear: for that is the effect of his words. As for that he
does add, That without the Sacrament of Penance, actually and duly received,
all Catholics hold, that neither Faith, nor Hope, etc. yea, though there were
indeed neither Heaven to reward us, nor Hell to punish us: etc. how this does
agree with Bellarmine; Contritionem charitate formatam, reconciliare hominem,
etiam antequam actu Sacramentum suscipiatur: and again, Extra Sacramentum
facile fieri posse, at sine confessione and satisfactione, per internam cordis
poenitentiam quis justificetur: but especially with that De Poenit. l. 2. c.
17. where speaking of diverse kinds of fears, he has these words: Tertius est
timor poenae, quem Deus ipse peccatoribus comminatur, sed cum timore
offensionis divinae, ita conjunctus, ut licet homo vehementer poenam timeat;
magis tamen offensionem Dei, quam poenam illam timeat. Atque hic timor servilis
dici solet, secundum substantiam, sed absque servitute, etc. and this he proves
to have been the fear of holy men, and Saints.

And it is the same reason of that, which they call amor servilis, or mercedis
intuitu; which many call scornfully, but foolishly, mercenary love. What our
Author thinks of it, he has told us. But how will he reconcile himself to the
Council of Trent (could he be ignorant of it?) which peremptorily does define
this Doctrine, to be contrary to true Religion; and does anathematize them,
that make it sinful for a justified man to have a respect, in what he does
well, unto the reward? Hear their own words: Unde constat eos orthodoxae
religionis doctrinae adversari -- qui statuunt in omnibus operibus justos
peccare, si in illis suam ipsorum socordiam excitando -- cum hoc, ut imprimis
glo^ificetur Deus, mercedem quoque intuentur aeternam. So Session 6. c. 11. but
chapter 16. of the same Session, with allegation of other Scriptures, more fully:
and then in the 31. Canon of the said Session (what will the Labyrinth-maker
say to this?) Si quis dixerit justificatum peccare, dum intuitu aeternae
mercedis been operatur, anathema sit.

Truly, my opinion is, and this opportunity being given me, I profess it; they
that will not allow us to have a respect unto the reward, (whether Pap^sts, or
Protestants: for I cannot but acknowledge, that I have heard such things
delivered out of Pulpits, more then once:) besides, that they must forbid us
the reading of the Scriptures, where it is so often recommended: they would do
well to take it into consideration, that this one speech of one of the ancient
Masters of the Jews, as it is recorded in their Talmud, Be not ye as hired
servants, that serve their Masters for a reward, etc. was that which first gave
ground, to the Sect of the Sadduces, who made that construction of their
Masters words, that if no reward must be looked for, or aimed at; then none to
be believed, to either good, or bad; and consequently, no resurrection, no
immortality. Such Doctrine, I doubt, is more likely to produce such fruits,
then to advance true piety, and godliness. As for some sayings of ancient
Fathers, that may seem to countenance it, they may easily be answered; and it
will appear a great mistake, if the matter be thoroughly examined, and the
homonymie, or ambiguity of words cleared. I have done it elsewhere: but that is
not our business here.

I did think it well worth the Readers notice, and consideration, upon what
account (chiefly) the Author of the Labyrinth, whom we must suppose to be no
mean man by his undertaking (if he were not set on, and made choice of by
others; as is very probable) against such a work; does maintain the Roman
Faith, to be the safest way; the plea of heresy against Protestants, being
laid aside, and in his judgment, not pleadable, or justifiable: in which
account, if our Author (as I think he is:) be grossly, and foully mistaken; then
I hope they will be more wary hereafter, how they deny Protestants heaven, and
ingross it to themselves, and their party.

As for his second Argument, whereby he does undertake to prove, that
Protestants standing to their own Principles, neither have, nor can have any
thing necessary for salvation; and this upon this ground, because their faith
is not firm, sure, and without doubt, or hesitation; or in a word infallibly
sure: because it has been the chiefest subject of all our debate hitherto, to
prove their infallibility, a mere fiction; and that we stand upon the same
ground, as antiquity has done: it will be needless further to insist upon it.
When they have answered what is opposed against them, and alleged for us, out
of Vincentius Lirinensis, (which one Author having had that approbation from
their side, generally, as it has had; they cannot in reason refuse, to be
tried by him:) and others; we shall think our selves bound to give them a
further answer.

These two arguments, in case it be not yielded, (as he says many Protestants
will not) that salvation may be had in the Roman Communion, our Author thinks
sufficient, to prove the Roman faith, the safer of the two. But in case it be
yielded by Protestants, that salvation (which they will not yield to us in
ours:) may be had in their Church, then without any more ado, he thinks that,
a very clear, and undeniable proof, that theirs is the safest way. Now because
I am one of them, who verily believe, and think it very necessary, (as
afterward we shall have more occasion to argue:) to be believed by all men,
who build their faith upon certain grounds: that the Roman Church, is yet, a
true Church, Rel. p. 281. etc. I^. 301 etc.
as to the essence of a Church; and consequently, that it is possible for them,
who err ignorantly, with other limitations fully declared by the Reverend
Archbishop; to attain salvation in the said Church: I think fit to say somewhat
to that too, before I leave this argument, which to them that content
themselves with a mere superficial view (whether for want of parts, or care:)
appears most plausible; and which our adversaries, make most use of, as their
best weapon.

Relat. p. 285. and 296.
Now first of all, to take away much of the plausibleness of it, the Reverend
Archbishop, as diverse had done before, does well represent by a clear testimony
out of St. Augustine, that this very way, those notorious schismatics, the
Donatists of old, did go. Come to us, come (said the Donatists:) all ye that
will not perish for ever, with your false teachers. Would you be sure, that we
are in the right, and they in the wrong? Behold, they acknowledge our Baptism,
to be a true Baptism: we deny theirs to be so. How sacred and holy must that
be, the holiness whereof is acknowledged, even by sacrilegious enemies? Is not
this the very argument, and the same ground of plausibleness? The Donatists
denied the Baptism of Catholics to be a true baptism; and did actully
rebaptize them, that came to them from the Catholics: the Catholics did
acknowledge the Baptism of the Donatists to be true baptism; and did not
rebaptize them that came from them: upon this, the Donatists ground their
advantage, that their communion must be the safest way to heaven. Let any body
tell me, where the difference is; or acknowledge, the advantage they make of our
grant, is of no more force then was the grant of the Catholics, which those
Schismatics made such boast of. If any shall except, that it is not the same
case, because, what is granted by us to the Romanists (a possibility of
salvation in their Church:) and that which was then granted to the Donatists
(the truth, or validity of their baptism, which they denied to the Catholics)
is not the same thing: I must answer, that it is a very frivolous exception.
For though it be not altogether the same thing in express terms: yet in
substance of matter, they are reducible to one thing; in this question
especially: and there is as much ground of advantage, or plausibleness in the
one, as there is in the other. The ground is the same; and the way of arguing
the same. The question between the Donatists, and Catholics of that time, was,
whether it were a sufficient proof, that the Baptism of the Donatists was the
truest of the two, and the safest way to heaven, because theirs was
acknowledged true by the Catholics; not, the Catholics true, by them. Now the
answer to this, was; that the argument did not hold, because there were other
things in question between the Catholics and Donatists, of great consequ^nce
to salvation, besides Baptism: wherein if the Donatists were convicted, or
sufficiently proved to be out of the way, their Baptism (except upon plea of
ignorance:) could do them no good. The question between the Romanists, and us,
is about possibility of salvation, in either Church. We grant a possibility in
theirs; they not in ours. Therefore theirs the safer way, by our grant? No: For
as we grant a possibility in general; so we limit it, to such and such; and in
such a case only: so that we make it a matter of great hazard, and peril, at
the least, not therefore the safest way, (certainly;) by our grant, and
according to our suppositions, as the Author of the Labyrinth would infer: nor,
at all the safest way, (let them make the most of it:) except they can prove,
that our limitations, and restrictions, are groundless; which is the main
original business; to wit, which Church is orthodox; and which guilty of schism
and heresy.

Now to this parallel of the Donatists, and Romanists in this business of
salvation; which takes away much of the plausibleness of the argument, in their
hands; and turns the advantage on our side rather; (though they that are wise
men, will not much rely upon such arguing:) because we may say, they imitate
the Donatists (those archschismaticks:) therein: to this parallel, I say,
Labyr. p. 306.
the Author of the Labyrinth, taking occasion of some other use the Archbishop
makes of the Donatists words, and arguments, does answer somewhat, and will
needs prove, that the orthodox Catholics, for all that, (notwithstanding that
plea of the Donatists:) might not embrace the baptism of the Donatists, and
their communion with it; (that is, in effect, forsake the Catholic Church:)
without sinning. This I think he might very well have omitted; there was no
need at all of it. Yet to make somewhat of it, We suppose (says he)
Protestants grant, a man may live and die in the Roman Church; and that none of
his errors shall hinder his salvation, whatsoever motives he may know to the
contrary. Now upon strange suppositions, strange things may be built: but as
the suppositions are but imaginary, so the building. What ground, I pray, could
he have for such a supposition, so contrary to all that is delivered by the
Archbishop, in this business of salvation? himself does afterward acknowledge
the impertinency of his proceedings, ( You will say perhaps etc.) and has no
other way to help himself, but by referring us to his first argument, (the
impertinency, and invalidity whereof, I hope we have sufficiently proved) as
not to be answered or doubted of. But afterward, when the Reverend Archbishop
does again insist upon it, and quote their very words, our Author, or Labyrinth
architect, does endeavor a more direct answer, but cannot tell how, not here
neither, except he may take it for granted, that the Protestants; at least, the
most learned, Ibid. p. 315
most wise, and most considerable among them, do grant them possibility of
salvation, notwithstanding any thing that we believe, or do: which, as he does
here deliver it, is most notoriously false. For this does amount to an absolute
general grant: whereas, that which is granted, is but to some, and with danger,
and peril. So that the parallel, stands firm, and in full force, to what it was
intended.

And now we have done with their arguments, whereby they would prove their
communion the safer way; because many have been much taken with this kind of
arguing; I will see how we can requite them, with somewhat of that nature. But
I will be but short; rather hint, then argue.

That which is least doubted of, may (plausibly) be thought the safest. All
that Protestants do positively believe as necessary to salvation, is granted
and believed by the Romanists. But the Romanists do believe many things as
necessary to salvation, which the Protestants do believe to be false, and
inconsistent (of themselves without diverse suppositions) with salvation:
Therefore etc.

Again: Without baptism, (ordinarily) there is no salvation. Want of the
Sacrament also of the body and blood of Christ (in them that are capable:) is a
great want, to say no more. But by the doctrine of the Church of Rome,
concerning the intention of the Priest, no Romanist can be sure, that he is
baptized; or ever received the communion. Therefore etc.

Again: Protestants do wholly rely for salvation, upon the merits of Christ,
and mercy of God: The Romanists (Council of Trent etc.) adscribe much to the
merits of good works: But Bellarmine their great Champion, does confess, that
it is safest to trust wholly to Gods mercy: if therefore Bellarmine be in the
right, the Protestants, (at least in this one point of highest consequenee:) is
the safest way.

Again; charity is the chiefest of Christian virtues, without which no man can
be saved. But there is more charity, apparently, to believe that they that
worship Christ as a Savior; believe of him and other mysteries of faith, what
is written in the Gospels, or in the ancient Creeds; and apply themselves in
sincerity of heart, according to their powers, to keep his holy commandments,
etc. may through his merits, be saved: then to deny (no article of Faith
obliging:) a possibility of salvation to such; which, probably, may proceed
from want of charity. Therefore etc.

Again: By the Roman faith, when a man has done all that he can, yet still he
is left uncertain, whether he shall be saved, or no: but by the Doctrine of
most Protestants (though I will not justify all that has been written by some
Protestants, in this point:) a man that lives in the true faith, and serves
God, with an upright heart, to his power; may be sure of his salvation.
Therefore etc.

Diverse other things of the same nature may be found, which may plausibly be
alleged, and with as much truth; as, that ordinary plea, so much insisted
upon, that the Roman communion must be the safer way, because a possibility of
salvation is granted in it, by Protestants: which possibility, rightly
understood, with all its limitations, and restrictions; does in very deed
evince the contrary; that it is not the safer way. I have been in a Labyrinth;
yet I hope, not erred much from the main purpose. But I am now got out.

What I had to say concerning infallibility, is now at an end. If it does
appear clearly, by what has been said, that it is not, neither directly, nor
indirectly, by any necessary consequence, grounded either in reason, or
Scripture, or consent of antiquity: but rather the contrary: which nevertheless
is proposed unto us by our adversaries (and that too, sufficiently cleared:) as
a main fundamental article of religion: then, upon this, we may ground
certainly, that they that have erred in this main point, of all other, most
inconsistent with reformation of Doctrine; might err as well in diverse other
points, of Doctrine and discipline, wherein reformation has been required, and
thought necessary. What those points are, there will be no need, neithe^ is it
my intention, to give a particular account of at this time: the point of
Supremacy, and Infallibility (as already said) if so grossly mistaken, and
rigidly obt^uded, as we pretend to have clearly proved, is enough (that done)
to show the necessity of a reformation, as our title does promise. Neither did
we intend any more, at the first. Yet since it is so fallen out that two
particulars; the forbidding of marriage to men in orders; and mutilation of the
sacrament; though I had no design to insist upon those particularly, more then
any others; yet since it is so fallen out, occasion offering it self, that so
much has already been said of them; for the better satisfaction of the Reader;
I shall be willing to make up here, before I proceed to other matter, what may
be wanting to either; and that is, to the first, the forbidding of Marriage; of
which somewhat was said at the beginning. Of this later, the mutilation of the
Sacrament, though there will be occasion again, before we have done, and much
more might be added to that; yet I am clear of opinion, that they that will not
acknowledge by what has been said, that the forbidding of the Cup, in the
judgment of Pope Gelasius, is a sacrilegious mangling and abusing of that
Sacrament; if an Angel from heaven; or the present Pope now sitting, should
aver it to their faces, and upbraid them for their obstinacy; they would
study some evasion.

As for the first, the marriage of Priests, and Clergy men; because I did not
think fit, to stay the Reader so long, upon a subject that came in by the by,
only, and as it were, accidentally, in that place: I shall here add somewhat,
though but very little, in comparison of what the subject will bear; Yet more I
am confident, then the Author of the Labyrinth, or any other, that will deal
plainly (let them try it, when they will) shall ever answer. I will not fetch
the business so high, as from the Scriptures, what was the Doctrine, or
practice of the Apostles, so far as may be gathered by their writings: I shall
content my self, with what is granted by Cardinal Perron, and others, Resp. an
R.P. 711.712.
that in the time of the Apostles, Bishops might be married, or married men
might be Bishops (so they did not marry after they were Bishops:) and use their
wives freely. Whether this continued in the Primitive times and diverse ages
after; or no; shall be my inquiry. Secondly; whether the forbidding of marriage
to Clergy men, has not been the occasion of far greater evils, (so judged of
by antiquity) which have been wickedly and irreligiously countenanced; or at
least, tolerated, by the Court of Rome.

To our purpose then: there is no body, but has heard of the Council of Nice,
the first General Council, and that of most authority with all men: what was
done there, or rather forborne to be done (for it was then proposed, and
followed by some, that it might be made a law, that no married men should be
admitted to holy orders:) upon the advice, and grave remonstrance of
Paphnutius; (a man of great fame, for his holiness of life, and sufferings for
the faith; who himself was never married:) ancient Historians are very
particular, in the relation of it, and all agree in their relation: and the
relation is entered into the body of the Canon law, with many other particular
records, and attestations of the same nature: so little doubt was then made of
the truth of the story. But this was such a dead blow to the cause, which must
be maintained, what shift soever is made: that Turrianus, first, as I take it;
then after him, Baronius, and Bellarmine; and others since, have made bold to
question it, and to deny it to be a true story. Let no man wonder at it. There
were a sort of men anciently, whose profession was, (...) (in their own words:)
(...); and on the contrary: that is, in the Poets expression, Qui facere
assuevit, Patriae non degener artis, Candida de nigris, and de candentibus
atra:) to make white to appear black; and black, to appear white. It was
objected to Socrates the Philosopher, by his enemies; but most wrongfully: It
is most true of those men, then, and since that, called Sophists, who made it
their study (and it is almost incredible, to what perfection many attained) to
discourse of any subject, suddenly; to maintain any cause; good, or bad; true,
or false; it was indifferent to them: they would undertake, if you would have
them, to commend Thersites for the most accomplished man, even for those
things, that Homer made him infamous, that ever was: that snow, was black; and
fire, cold: and such things have been attempted by latter wits too; but, I
doubt, meanly performed, in comparison. Julian his commendation of baldness,
though full of excellent learning otherwise, has much of that strain. Let us
not therefore make a wonder of it, if Baronius and Bellarmine, who were sworn
to the cause, and made it their study a long time; have ventured upon things of
the same nature. But truth, is truth for all that: and Sophistry (to say no
more) is sophistry. And they that will take pains (with some help, if they want
it;) may be satisfied, and plainly discern the false play and juggling, that is
used in the business, by those great Champions of the Pope. He that will be
fully satisfied (in this particular we are upon:) let him read Geor. Calixti,
De conjugio sacerdotum, tractatum. He shall find there all their arguments (if
they deserve the name) with candor, and ingenuity, as well as diligence,
particularly sifted, and solidly answered. He was (he will find him, if I be
not much mistaken) a learned, judicious, moderate man, as any that of late,
has meddled with controversies: That is my judgment of him. I shall not
therefore need to say much of this business: that which I chiefly intend, I do
not find in him. But yet somewhat (though it may be found elsewhere) for their
sakes, that have not all books, at command; or perchance not the leisure, to
make use of them they have.

That the relation then, we have spoken of, may be blasted and exploded, if
possible; Socrates the Historian (who they say, is the original avoucher of
it:) his credit is called in question. Diverse things are laid to his charge,
wherein it is pretended, he is wilfully false, or ignorantly mistaken. This
indeed, is the way to persuade men, there is no truth in the World. For if this
be enough, because some things may be objected, to question all; whom shall we
believe? And suppose he were the first; they were not babies, nor fools (so
many after him:) that trusted him: but men whom we trust (Protestants, and
Papists) in very great matters. But see the blindness of prejudice, and
partiality. In other things, that are not controverted, but especially, where
some advantage (plausibly) may be made of his words; I know no Author more
frequently alleged: and then his authority is good, and current. I know there
be other objections too, against the relation in Socrates: but they are all
answered: I shall not here take notice of them: What need we, though they were
not? Gelasius Cyzicenus of whom Perron in a place, where he does make some use
of his authority, for the Pope, does observe, that he lived (when the Cardinal
wrote) above eleven hundred years ago, and the very next age after the Council
of Nice: this man has written an abstract of the acts of the said Council: I
know not of any exception, against his fidelity: we are beholding to the
Vatican Library, for the Copy; printed at Rome, and at Paris: this man has the
very same relation; with little alteration of words: which is a clear argument,
that Socrates and Sozomen (who wrote at the same time almost) had it, whence he
had it: and he professes, he had collected his abstract, from the very Acts,
then extant: and what can be more certain? Or must we prove, that the sun is up
in our hemisphere, at noon day?

I said, they deliver it, Socrates and Sozomen, who lived together: and
Gelasius Cyzicenus; the next age after: (not to mention Cassiodore, who lived
about the same time, or a little after: nor Suidas whose age is not certainly
known: nor Niceph. Callistus, who lived not much above 300 years ago:) with
little, or no alteration of words. Yet the diligent Reader may observe: that
some things are expressed more fully, and clearly, by Gelasius and others, then
by Socrates: as that particularly, he should say, he feared, that by that law,
chastity would be violated, (for that he accounted, the lawful company of man
and wife, Chastity:) so Socrates and Sozomen; but Gelasius adeth, (...) etc.
good and commendable chastity: not only by men only, but by women also, if
they should be bereaved of their husbands. Which (if nothing else) does make it
improbable, that they had it from Socrates. But we have Gabriel Vazquez, for
learning and judgment, not inferior to the best of that side; who does not
only acknowledge the truth and sincerity of the relation, questioned by
Baronius, and Bellarmine: yea, and Perron, three Cardinals; but does very
freely and ingenuously assert it, and vindicate it, answering the objections
(or rather cavils:) made against it, by others: for which he is deservedly
commended, by him, whom I commended but a little before, Georgius Calixtus.

Now the business in agitation at the Council, was plainly this, Not whether
married men, in general, should be allowed to be Priests or Bishops: (for then
we had been told, that such were allowed, upon condition they would forbear
their wives, from that time; and so indeed it was in the Latin Church
afterward:) but, Whether they that had wives, should be allowed to live with
them, to lie with them, (...):) and the Council of Gangres (a Council of great
antiquity, and authority:) does pronounce Anathema, to them, that refused to
receive the Communion at the hands of such: (...): conjugati: is their words.
But here again our Sophisters play their parts. They tell us, (...), is a
praeterit, not a present: which therefore must be translated, qui uxores
habuit; not, habet: he that had wives; not; he that now has. Could we presume
that all, that may read this, have some knowledge of the Greek; it would be very
needless, if not ridiculous, to make any answer. But because the contrary is
more probable; it is well, that this very word is in the New Testament, and
there translated (as of necessity it must:) by the present, (...). iis autem
qui matrimonio juncti sunt, praecipio: So the vulgar: which is sacred with
them: yet I doubt, whether that would serve the turn; did not that which
follows of necessity require a present: And unto the married ((...)) I command;
1. Cor. vii.10.
yet not I, but the Lord: Let not the wife depart from her husband. But
besides, if there were any ambiguity in the word; yet the matter of the Canon
does require a present tense, or signification. For the Canon was made against
men of that age, who generally would not allow husband and wife to live
together; and avoided the company of such; but not of those who had been
married and continued widdowers. Besides, Socrates does express the matter by
the present (...). and Balsamon upon the place (...). As for the Latin
translations, some follow the present tense; and so it is entered into the body
of the Canon Law, by Gratian: some render them by the praeterit, through
ignorance, or of purpose, to fit it to the Roman climat: though even in the
Latin some praeterits include the present also: as they that translate uxorem
duxit: which is as proper of them whose wives are alive, as of them whose wives
are dead.

After these, (to pass-by many things between) let us see, Whether they come
off better with the Canons of the Council of Constantinople in Trullo: which
was an Apendix or second part, of the sixth Ecumenical Council. The Graecians
called it (...). Balsamon gives the reason. It has always been of as great
authority with them, as any other (for so they maintain it) General Council:
and many Canons of it, are received into the body of the Canon Law, by Gratian.
And certain it is, though generally it was not received by the Roman Church;
that Pope Hadrianus, the first of that name, did highly approve of it; or
egregiously dissemble with Therasius, Patriarch of Constantinople, (and indeed
Baronius says little less, if you will believe him) in a letter to him, where
he speaks very honorably of some Canons of it. Besides that, the seventh
Ecumenical Council, (in so great esteem, with all worshippers of images) did
allow it. However, both Baronius and Bellarmine, do what they can to undermine
the authority of it. Now by those Canons, Bishops indeed were sequestered from
their wives, if they had any; Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons, were allowed to
marry? if they pleased, before ordination; and after ordination, if then
married, they are so far from being sequestered from their wives, that if upon
pretense of piety, they did refuse to live with them, or would put them away,
they were suspended from their charge for a time; and if they persisted, to be
deposed. So were those (Bishops or Patriarchs) who should attempt (
conjunctione cum legitima uxore, and consuetudine privare, as the words are
translated in the Paris edition of Balsamon) to bereave them (Priests, or
Deacons) of the society, or company of their lawful wives; they also to be
deposed. By the same Canon the Roman Church is noted, as having a contrary
order, not agreeable to Apostolical constitutions. And this very Canon, is in
the body of the Canon Law: Did. 31. Cap. 13. But, however the Council had so
ordered it, as we have said: yet it was not constantly observed. For in the
days of Leo, the Philosopher, (so surnamed:) Emperor of Constantinople, who
reigned some two hundred years after; Priests, and Deacons usually, as does
appear by a Constitution of the said Emperor against it, had two years liberty
after ordination, to consider, whether they would marry or no.

That which I have more to say of this business in general, is: Calixtus does
cite diverse Authors, who wrote before the Reformation, but of no small credit
to this day among the Romanists; and among others, Thom. Aquinas; who all
agree, that this Prohibition of marriage, to men in holy Orders, is merely
juris positivi, and Ecclesiastici, which therefore may be abolished, or
repealed, by the same power by which it was enacted. But even since the
Reformation he does name some, who have made bold to maintain the same. To
those I add, Tho. Compegius Bononiensis Episcopus Feltrensis, who has written
a book De caelibatu sacerdotum non abrogando: and very earnest he is for it,
that it ought not. Yet even he, does confess, that for the first four hundred
years, there was no such law, that obliged any in sacred orders: that Syricius,
Pope of Rome (which has been the constant and common opinion, before this late
breach:) was the first Author of it, and that it may be repealed. Besides, he
quotes Abbas Siculus (insignem Canonum interpretem, as he styles him:
Panormitanus, he means;) whose judgment is: That it were very expedient for the
saving of souls, that they that would contain and merit (by works of
supererogation, he means:) might be left to their liberty: but they that would
not, might marry: since that experience has made it apparent, that the
contrary of what was intended by the law of Continence, has insued; for that
they do not live spiritually, or purely; but, to the great prejudice of their
souls, are contaminated (or, defiled) with unlawful copulations; whereas they
might live chastely with a wife, Besides, he does put a case in law, how it may
fall out, according to the rules and Maxims of the Canon Law, and definitions
of Popes upon it; that a Priest may be married, and compelled to live with his
wife.

Now I ask; if the marriage of Priests and others of the Clergy be not
unlawful, in it self; which is generally granted: and the prohibition of it be
the occasion of so much scandal and wickedness, as even among heathens would be
abominable: and this too, certain and acknowledged; witness the account we had
before, from Petrus Damianus; the complaints of so many others; Zealous
Papists, otherwise; in all ages: for this seven or eight hundred years, at
least; besides daily experience: is not this prohibition, a sin, a wickedness
not to be excused, but by them that care not what becomes of the world, and all
religion; so they have their wills and ends? But what if Popes, even by their
laws and definitions, make that, which in its own nature, and by the law of
God, is horrid and abominable; less criminous, and more tolerable, then that
which by the law of God is acknowledged lawful? Yea, we might say, honorable?
Is not fornication in its own nature, and in any man, a great and scandalous
sin; and if notorious, and without bounds, able, and likely to draw the curse
of God, and his severest judgments, upon any nation? How much then more horrid
and intolerable, and of more dangerous consequence in Clergymen, whose
function is holy; whose persons are in some degree sacred; and their lives to
be a rule and example unto others? What is horrible, and abominable, if this be
not?

By the Canon of the Concilium Neocasariense, a Priest, if he marry (after
Ordination) he is to be deposed. Well, be it so. It is enough for us to know,
that in the time of the Apostles, there was no such Law: and that Popes have
dispensed, even with Bishops, that were married, and had children: whereof we
have a notable example: Did. 28. c. 13. De Syracusana: by the tenor of which
Dispensation, it does not appear, Decr. p. 93.
but that they might still live together; as they did in Africa and Libya, when
the Canons of the Sixth Council were made: However, it does clearly appear,
that they did live together (as Gratian there observes) when the party before
his election, was but Priest, or Deacon. Sive ergo presbyter, sive diaconus,
sive subdiaconus fuerit; apparet quod in praefatis ordinibus constituti, licite
matrimonio uti possunt, says Gratian. But this by the way only. By the said
Canon, a Priest (as I said before) that married after Ordination, was to be
deposed: but if the same were convicted of fornication, or adultery; by the
same Canon, it was not deposition, that would serve his turn: he was utterly to
be cast out of the Church (as an Infidel:) or to do solemn penance, before he
could be reconciled to the Church: which made him incapable, even of the lowest
charge in the Church, for ever. The words in Gratian are translated: Quod si
fornicatus fuerit, vel adulterium commiserit, extra Eccelsiam abjici, and ad
poenitentiam inter Laicos redigi oportet. It is in the Greek, (...). Some are
of opinion it should be read (...), not (...): and by (...), would understand,
mysteria: Call. (obj.) p. 236.
Sacramenta: as though the Communion only were forbidden to such by those
words. But besides that (...), for (...), is not very usual; and that it does
not agree with that which follows, to do public penance, which in those
days, such was the condition of that penance, was the highest punishment the
Church could inflict for greatest crimes: Balsamon, Bals. p. 766.
who was best acquainted with the language, does explain it, (...)^ That,
Basil. tom. 2. p. 771.
he shall be ejected from the company of the faithful. It does also appear, by
St. Basil, in his Canons; where the sentence is reversed, or mitigated, in
these words, (...), But in the 32* Canon; as also in the Canon of the African
Church, cited by the same Balsamon, there may be some question of the sense.
But we may not digress so far.

That was the Religion of those days: how is it now? How the Church of Rome
dispensed, or connived in most scandalous times; (and where such dispensation
or connivance is, how can it be expected otherwise, at any time?) we heard
before from Petrus Damianus, the Popes Agent. A further account we might have
had of the state of those times from the said Damianus, had it not been
suppressed by the Pope, as we read at large in Baronius: and yet by that
account which is in Baronius, I do not know it could be much worse in Sodom
and Gomorrha. Now let us hear another case from authentic Records; and then
tell me in good earnest, what account the Pope makes of Fornication, and by
consequent of the Scriptures; and what we may think of them, that maintain such
Doctrine.

The Archbishop of Lions, Legate to the Pope in those places; asks counsel of
Innocentius the Third, what course he should take with those Priests, that had
more concubines then one. A question of hard resolution in those times it
seems; we may guess what times they were. But that the Archbishop struck at,
was this: Who they were, that were anciently called digami, or bigami; is not
certain, or generally yet agreed upon, among the Learned. There be three
Interpretations of the word, (nay, no less then seven, reckoned by the Civil
Lawyers:) but two opinions only that are much questioned: whether they, that
had married two, or more Wives successively; or, they, that had divorced from
one, and married another. Both opinions have very learned abettors; and it is
not easy, absolutely to determine, which is the truest. Hard indeed it is to
believe, that they should be made incapable of holy Orders by the ancient
Church, who had married two Wives lawfully, one after another: or to believe,
that that was S. Paul's meaning, 1 Timothy 3.2. But it will not much concern us to
know, as to our present occasion. Whoever they were, that were intended; it is
certain they were declared irregular, and incapable of ordination. Now, the
Archbishop, it seems, had some thoughts, that Priests (or Bishops perchance:
but they must not be named: yet Pet. Damianus, in his Letter to the Pope, upon
the like occasion, made no scruple to name them: neither is the unworthiness of
men, any just exception against the holiness of any place, or the reverence
that is due unto it; whereof we have many examples in the Scriptures:) who kept
diverse Concubines at one time, might be brought within the compass of
irregularity, under the notion and title of the Bigami. This he proposes to
the Pope; without whose authority, it was in vain to think he could bring any
such thing to pass: witness Petrus Damianus, and what opposition he found, when
he attempted, though authorized by the Pope, to apply some remedy to the
exorbitancie of those times. But the Pope was not of that mind. His resolution
of the case, therefore, is, that he shall proceed with such, as guilty only of
simple Fornication. Now they that know, what a petty business, this matter of
simple Fornication, is made by diverse Canonists; will easily believe, that no
great punishment was intended to those notorious whoremasters, or fornicators.
But you shall have his own words, lest mine may be suspected. Decretal. 1. tit.
2. De Bigamis.
Sane postulasti per Sedem Apostolicam edoceri, si Presbyteri, plures
concubinas habentes, bigami censeantur. Ad quod duximus respondendum, quod cum
irregularitatem non incurrerint digamiae, cum eis, tanquam simplici
fornicatione notatis quo ad executionem Sacerdotalis officii, poteris
dispensare. What is this (can any sober man think of it otherwise?) then to
abolish the Law of God; and to establish (in St. Paul's language) the doctrine
of Devils? Is it possible, 1 Timothy 4.3.
that any man that is called a Christian, and makes profession of it, can be of
another opinion? Truly, I should not believe it: but that the same Apostle does
tell us in another place, of strong delusions to befall some men from God, who
give more credit to (pretended) signs, and lying wonders, (the miracles of
these times, as I take it:) then to the truth: by which, 2 These. 2. 11.
I think the Word of God (the public reading whereof, is strictly forbidden,
it is well known, where public Stews are permitted:) may probably be meant.
But how these pretenders to Antiquity will reconcile this definition or
determination of Pope Innocentius, with that Canon of the Council we have
spoken of, by which a Priest, if he marry after Ordination, is to be deposed;
but a Concubinarius or fornicating Priest, is to be cast out of the Church, as
an arrant Infidel; I leave it to them to consider it.

There is an account, or report somewhere extant, of the state of Monasteries
in England, in the year of the Lord 1538. delivered by the Visitors, under this
title: Breviarium compertorium in Monasteriis, etc. a short abstract whereof
has been set out in Latin, which I have. I have looked upon it often, with
great indignation (such a Prior, by name; or, such a Friar; one, or two
Concubines: some, eight, nine, ten, twelve* or thirteen; and besides, a
Sodomite, etc.) as suspecting that matters might be made worse then they were
found, to please the King; or out of spite to the profession: and I would much
rather think so still. But I must needs say, since I read Petrus Damiani (so
irrefragable a witness) and compared him with the report of others, who
themselves were of the same profession: but especially, what a light account
was made of such abominations, by those that should have withstood them by
their authority: and lastly, how averse they were (those in power, and most
accountable) from the only true effectual remedy; my charity is much put to
it; I cannot tell what to think. And these are the fruits of Pope Syricius
(according to the common opinion) his Definition: recorded Decr. did. 83.
which, whosoever reads, if he be not a stranger to the Scriptures, may justly
suspect, it was made in opposition to the Scriptures, and S. Paul's Doctrine,
particularly: as speaking of marriage, with all manner of scorn, and contempt;
whereas the Authors of those Canons, of the Sixth General Council, by which
they forbid a Bishop to live with his Wife, they use much tenderness, to
prevent all suspicion, as though they did it in contempt of Apostolic
Authority (whether holy Scriptures, or those Constitutions that were then
called Apostolicae Constitutiones; as Balsamon does interpret them:) whereas it
was done by them (so they profess) upon a supposition, that men of that
eminency might do more good in the reputation of a continent life; disengaged
from the lusts and cares of the world; and less subject to slanders and
reproaches, which Wife and Children do often occasion; then yoked and charged
with Wife and Children.

Now after all this, whether we may not conclude, that since the Pope and
Church of Rome would not; it was lawful for others to reform themselves in this
one point (had there been but this one:) concerning the marriage of Clergymen;
let the Reader judge: for that is it, which we did propose to our selves.

Having now gone over three particulars; that, of Infallibility, as the
chiefest, and which alone might have done the business, and therefore, chiefly
intended, and prosecuted; but besides that, two others, which casually did
offer themselves; (that of the mutilation of the Sacrament, and forbidding of
marriage) to prove the necessity of reformation, in and before Luthers time;
our chiefest part: I might immediately pass to what remains: rather, as an
accessory, then a part; to wit, what has most visibly hindered the progress.
But though I might; I shall yet nevertheless, before I come to it, (wherein we
shall not belong:) for the Reader (not acquainted) his further satisfaction,
and the better to stop the mouths of shameless impudent men, who tell their
ignorant Disciples and Proselytes, and dare tell it to us, and before us too
(brazen foreheads!) that all was well, in perfect peace and unity, when Luther
began to stir: I shall, I say, before I leave this subject, propose somewhat to
consideration, which if my judgment fail me not very much, may be sufficient to
convince the most obstinate, and make all men sensible, that have any freedom
of judgment left: that such men there be in the world, that will adventure upon
any thing, though never so false; rather than yield to the evidence of truth:
and if sensible, then I hope, more wary how they trust them hereafter.

I might tell the Reader, of Catalogus testium veritatis: or, Fasciculus rerum
expetundarum: but especially, of Goldastus, his three Tomes in folio,
containing for the most part the grievances, and complaints of Kingdoms, and
Commonwealths: the remonstrances, of Kings and Princes; of Courts and
Assemblies, Secular and Ecclesiastical: of men, for worth and reputation,
(Bishops and Cardinals, among the rest;) the most eminent of their times: some
with threats; others, with tears, calling for Reformation, against damnable
oppression; and abuses long continued, and daily increasing in all places: out
of which tomes, it were no difficult business (notwithstanding some slips, or
mistakes, if any such be, incidental to so great a work) to collect so much, as
would swell this small Treatise, into a large volumn: I might, I say, but I
rather choose to go another way; which as it will be, I am sure, more
compendious; so may prove perchance, not less effectual. I know it has been
thought upon, and some use made of it, by diverse: I have no ambition at all, to
be thought the first: but whether it has been pressed, or proposed so
effectually, as it might have been, to that end and purpose, that we aim at,
let the Reader judge, when we have done.

Ferdinand Emperor of Germany, whose piety, prudence, magnanimity (to which
some add zeal and constancy for the Catholic religion: meaning that, which he
was born, and brought up in:) is acknowledged by Historians of both sides:
after the Council of Trent was ended, and he saw that little, or nothing was
done by it to satisfy the expectation of so many in all Countries in point of
reformation, and to reconcile differences; but rather to the contrary; sensible
also, how he had been from time to time dallyed with, by vain promises; being
much troubled at it; and at the sad consequences of it: he begun, not without
the advice of his most faithful, and wisest counselors; to cast about, and
finally did resolve, upon another way, how he might come to the knowledge of the
truth, in all those controversed points. The way was to find out a man, (if the
Christian world afforded such a one) one of their own communion, a professed
and acknowledged Roman Catholic, but of approved integrity and piety, and for
his parts and abilities, in this kind of learning, especially (the knowledge of
antiquity, and all controversies of Religion:) not inferior, if possible unto
any, in any part of the world. Upon inquiry, a man was found. What shall I say?
Let any man in his private thoughts, form to himself the idea of a man, such a
one as he could have wished, or his fancy can represent unto him; I dare almost
say, that this man went beyond it* So many particulars did concur, to complete
him for such a work; that if I say less then a miracle, I think I say too
little (all things well considered:) and he that does not acknowledge a
providence in it, I know not how to say less, but that he is, or has much of
an Infidel in him. For his integrity, and the exemplariness of his
conversation, all the country, where he lived, would have born him witness; it
was so publicly, and notoriously known unto all; but most admired of them,
that knew him best. His learning and knowledge of antiquity, insight in
controversies, had made him famous: but affection and reverence, to ancient
rites and ceremonies that did savor of true Primitive Piety, he had given such
proofs, and testimonies of, both by his practice, and by his writings, his
Liturgica, his Hymni Ecclesiastici, preces Ecclesiasticae; (all extant) as
greater could not be expected from any man. Yet in those things, I will suppose
that some (not many, truly:) might equal him: which is as much as I can say.
But then, let us consider the rest, and let any man tell me, whether he thinks,
I have exceeded in my expressions. First, he was at that time, when the Emperor
did address himself to him by his Letters, and to some Princes of Germany about
it, (the Emperors Letters, and the Answers, are extant, and to be seen:) a
bedridden man, brought so low with the Gout, and what other infirmities; that
affidavit was made unto the Emperor, should he attempt to go to him, as was
desired, he would in all probability die by the way, and not hold out. Indeed,
he did not live many years after, though he did outlive Ferdinand; and gave
his account to Maximilian, who succeeded, and prosecuted the business with as
much eagerness, as Ferdinand had done. Here first we may (who can do less?)
observe the Providence of God; that whereas Cassander (for that was his name:)
was first appointed to come, and give an account unto the Emperor, by word of
mouth: he was afterward appointed to do it in writing, that so all posterity
might reap the benefit of it. Then secondly; whereas it might be said, (there
was no great probability, if he were such a pious honest man; but what will not
men say, when they are put to it?) that he might have some worldly ends, to
gratify others, or to advance himself; as we know, that such and such were
made Cardinals, for asserting the Popes cause, with all their might, and power:
How can that be suspected of one in Cassanders condition, which daily put him
in mind of another world and made him utterly incapable of enjoying any thing,
that this world could afford, as a temptation? But that which, as I take it,
considering how much he had to say for the Protestants, and their cause, and
against his own party; is most observable; is; that this very man, had been
very unkindly used, by some chiefest Protestants, who suspecting him, by some
writings of his, (they knew nothing of his person:) to have been a certain
scandalous Protestant, inclining to Popery, and ready to leave them; fell upon
him foully, with all bitterness and virulency; to their own shame, and the no
less grief and scandal of many others. Was not this somewhat to try a man,
whether he would be provoked, or no; and suffer his judgment (as most men) to
be corrupted by his Interest? But Cassander showed himself passion proof. He
did answer them, who so bitterly had provoked him, with all meekness and
moderation: and as for the Protestants, and their cause in general, it did
appear to all the world in general, that what he had written before of them, he
had written, not to gratify any, great, or small; but to satisfy his own
Conscience.

But yet for all this: some will be ready to say (I know:) they value not what
Cassander says, because they account him not a sound Catholic. Labyr. p.
144.296.
So indeed the Author of the Labyrinth does except against him, as many others
have done before him. But why not a sound Catholic? Could they charge him with
any particular opinion which anciently has been accounted Heretical; they
would say somewhat. Or could they say, though never so pious, or learned; yet
he was a Protestant, he did favor his own party, (as most men are too apt:)
that were somewhat too. But a man, against whose learning and integrity there
can be no exception: who lived, and died in the Communion of Roman Catholics;
round about in the Country where he lived, in high credit, and esteem: buried
honorably by Roman Catholics, in one of their Churches; with an Inscription,
or monument, now extant, and to be seen by all that go to those parts; which
monument does contain an ample testimony of his integrity, piety, learning; his
fame and reputation, whilst he lived, with all men, far, and near; and yet he
not a sound Catholic, because he has freely reproved or charged the Roman
Church, with many gross errors, and abuses, in matters of Faith, and otherwise:
is not this wise arguing? For apparently, either it signifies nothing: or it
does ground upon this, that the Roman Church cannot err: he is therefore an
Heretic, who does charge it with errors, or maintain opinions, contrary to
what it teaches. But is not this a mere petitio principii: a most senseless
and ridiculous kind of arguing? If therefore it does not follow, that he must
be an Heretic, because he excepted against the errors of the Church of Rome:
how much more probable, because he was a judicious able man, as any those times
afforded; a pious, conscientious man, so acknowledged by all men: a man bred
and born in the Roman Church: (and certainly, accustomance and education has
some influence upon the wisest of men:) who lived and died in the communion of
it: in all likelihood, therefore, well-affected, and more likely to extenuate,
then to aggravate: upon these grounds, I say, how much more likely, that he had
good reason for what he does except against; and that his judgment and
authority, should be of great weight with all sober judicious Roman Catholics?
For as for the Protestants, though truly his great learning, approved piety,
and integrity must make his judgment in all things very considerable, even to
them; yet the same obligation does not lie upon them: they may say, as was
intimated before; long accustomance, education, affection, might make him, as a
man, unsensibly partial; or at least, less sensible, (in some things) then
otherwise he might have been. For the further satisfaction of the Reader, but
of all Roman Catholics, especially; I shall add, that his Works were not only
printed by Roman Catholics, when he first set them out singly; but long after
his death, all reprinted in Paris, in one Volume, by Roman Catholics: in a
fair Character (more then is usual, for the largeness of it:) Parisiis, apud
Hieronymum Dro^art: A. D. 1616.

Well: it is time we should hear, what this man will tell us. Two Books there
be of his, of this argument chiefly: De officio pii, publicae tranquillitatis
vere amantis viri, in hoc religionis dissidio. In that Book (to begin with
that, because first written:) after some reasons given, why the Church of Rome,
is still a true Church: ( Ecclesiae Catholicae non contemnendum membram: in his
own expression: that is: a member of the Catholic Church, not to be contemned:
or if you will positively, because the words will bear it: a considerable
member of the Catholic Church:) and that there is no necessity of separating,
though corruption be acknowledged; he does add: Interim tamen, eos damnare non
possum, etc. that is: But nevertheless I cannot condemn them, who persisting in
the fundamentals of the Apostolic Doctrine, out of love of a pure (or sincere)
Religion, upon good information from them that are both pious and learned, that
some-things ought to be corrected; Supreme Authority leading, and the common
consent of the Church concurring, in some part of the Church (Catholic) have
purged some things in the Doctrine, and abolished some Ceremonies, though
ancient, great utility, and even necessity compelling them for the good of the
people: and in lieu of them, have established others, better agreeing with
piety and discipline: provided that this be done, with as little scandal, and
disturbance, as is possible: and that communion of spirit, and the bonds of
peace, be still preserved with the rest of the Body. For who can blame that
member, which when the rest of the body is sick, and will not be cured; does
take care of it self, that it may be cured? Not to insult upon the rest, but to
give it an example, and to invite it to do the like. (All this, how appliable
to the English Reformation; let the Reader judge.) These -- though by some, who
through an immoderate zeal, or particular disease of their mind, abhor all
restoration, or reformation of the Church; they are traduced and condemned as
heretics, and schismatics, and enemies of the Church: yet I know not how to
separate, or remove them either from Christ the Head (of the Church:) or from
the body, (of Christ:) which is the Church.

1. p 789
This, he repeats again, not long after: Quare ut ante quoque dixi, qui recta
sententia de Christo, etc. where indeed, he does acknowledge that he knows not
how to acquit them of schism who rejoice in this separation; will not
acknowledge them from whom they have separated a true Church; have no love, no
charity, for them: but abhor all manner of Communion with them, as very limbs
of Satan, or Antichrist. Of which kind of men, we shall have occasion to
consider afterward; and how right his judgment may be in this. What will our
Zelots of the Roman party say to this? The furious abettors of those mad
Tenets, That he that does not in all things, believe as the Roman Church does
believe; is an Infidel and (ordinarily) damned? What will they say? Why then
this good man, whose memory is so precious with many Roman Catholics, he must
be damned too. For though he lived and died in the Roman Communion; yet you
see, what he maintained; so contrary to that, which is maintained by the Church
of Rome: at least, if it must be so, that Jesuits and Jesuited Zealots, must
be accounted the best, and truest members of that Church; which I doubt many
will not grant. But what show soever, such men make before others; yet I
believe there be but few of the number, who (if really they believe a heaven
and hell:) in their private thoughts, will not rather, (when dead) wish their
souls, where this man's is; then where they can hope, that such furious courses,
and Tenets, will bring them.

L^byr. 297.
Well: but it may be some will be so charitable, (it is the charity of the
Author of the Labyrinth:) as to hope, (and that will be the answer:) that he
did effectively repent before his death. A pretty piece of charity, rather to
make men smile then much to persuade: but still they hold to their principle,
that somewhat must be said, when they have nothing to say. In the mean time
glad am I, that as yet, they can alledg nothing but hopes for it: it may be, at
some other time, when they have better considered of it, how much it does
concern them; we shall be told of somewhat else: some reasons perchance, why
one should believe it: or some pretended evidences, to prove it. For we know,
they are good at it; we have had some experience; when they think the cause
does need it. But this I hope we shall sufficiently prevent; there will be
occasion by and by: till then, the Reader may think of it, as he pleases. In
the mean time, God be thanked, that he has provided scrupulous Protestants,
(as some may be) that comfort, that they may be out of all fear of schism in
the judgment of this pious learned Roman Catholic, so that they want no
charity for them, who do not yet think themselves bound to follow their
example. And I hope that they that wished so well to his works, as to cause
them to be so fairly reprinted in Paris; may probably be thought to have been
of the same opinion.

Now after this general judgment of Cassander, concerning Protestants: we shall
in the next place, produce his opinion concerning some particular points, which
his Consultatio must afford us. Yet himself does acknowledge, that he did but in
part, acquit himself of that charge; his infirmities giving him but little
respit for such thoughts; as he does excuse himself to the Emperor, in the
conclusion. But that he did pass by many things, does appear by these words, in
the 26 th Article, De potestate Ecclesiastica: Ad haec concedimus, etc. that
is, We do grant moreover, that they that have the government of the Church,
must earnestly be entreated, that by their care, those known and manifest
abuses (some of which have been spoken of before) which have been the occasion
of these troubles, and commotions, wherewith the Church at this day is very
dangerously tossed, and afflicted, (those that concern the Mass, and other
parts of Divine Service, especially:) may be taken away and abolished. Now this
being written since the Council of Trent, it does plainly appear what he
thought of that Council, and their performances. And to this purpose, though
where he treats De Pontifice Romano, he does yield unto him some kind of
Supremacy, by the grant, or consent of the ancient Church: yet does he
immediately before, roundly charge him; to have been the chiefest cause of
those sad calamities, and distractions in the Church; which did so grievously
affect him; for that puffed up with a vain conceit of his Ecclesiastical power,
he did proudly and fastidiously despise, and reject them, who rightfully and
modestly, made their addresses, or remonstrances: His words are: Non negarim
tamen -- praecipuam caussam hujus calamitatis and distractionis Ecclesiae,
illis assignandam, qui inani quodam fastu Ecclesiasticae potestatis inflati,
recte and modeste admonentes superbe and fastidiose contempserunt, and
repulerunt.

Ed. 8o. p. 180.
In his Chapter of the merits and intercession of Saints: he does insist upon
several gross errors, and abuses; quos imprimis (says he) and quidem summa
diligentia correctos oportuit: that is: for the correction whereof, there was
great need, that all possible diligence should have been used. These errors he
says did beget contrary errors. It is true he would not have had invocation of
Saints, as it was used in the ancient Church; quite taken away: but the abuses
only, reformed; indeed very gross and intolerable, as he does set them out:
but the Council of Trent, it seems, had somewhat else to do; then to reform
such abuses.

Ed. Ed. p. 978 Ed. 8o p. 206
In his Chapter de imaginibus, and simulachris: having argued at large, what a
late thing this worshipping of images is, etc. he has these words: Manifestius
enim est, etc. that is: it is so manifest a thing, that we need not many words
to prove it; that the worshipping of Images and Statues has too much
prevailed; and that too much has been indulged to the affection, (humor:) or
rather superstition of people: so that either in point of highest adoration,
which was ever yielded by Heathens, (or Pagans) to their Statues: or in point
of utmost vanity, which the same heathen, in making and adorning their Statues,
and Images, were guilty of; our people may be thought not inferior to them.

Ed. Ed p. 974. Ed. 8o. 191.2.
Of relics, he concludes thus: Since then it is so, that true and certain
relics, in these parts, especially; are very few; and many of them that are
shown, may very well be suspected; and that the often visiting and worshipping
of such, does very little conduce to true piety; but to superstition, and base
lucre, very much: it seems much more expedient, that henceforth no showing of
relics be allowed; and that the people may be provoked, to a right estimation
of the true relics of Saints, by imitation of their examples of piety and
virtue, left unto us in their writings; or, in writings concerning them.

Of the Sacrament under one kind, he says: Quare non temere est, quod optimi
quique etc. that is: That all good men, even Catholics (so he calls them) as
well as others, that have been conversant in the reading of the Scriptures, and
Ecclesiastical writers: moved also by the consideration of those reasons (by
him there:) alleged; did even burn with a longing desire to enjoy the Cup; and
used all means to them possible, to effect it, that this saving (salutare: or,
so much conducing to salvation) Sacrament of the blood of Christ, with that of
the body: according to the old and continued, for so many ages, custom, of the
Universal Church, be restored again. Yet for all that, in that very chapter, he
does not seem to hold it so necessary (administration in both kinds:) as that
the contrary can be called mutilation, or sacriledg: or, that the peace and
unity of the Church (if it cannot be obtained otherwise) should be broken, or
forsaken for it. And as for the words of Pope Gelasius, we have spoken of
before, and vindicated from false foolish evasions, and interpretations: he
also seems to make the same construction of them, as Baronius did; as though
the objected sacriledg, concerned the Manichees only: So Cassander, there. But
in a treatise of that very subject, De Sacra communione sub utraque specie: set
out by it self, since this Consultation; where he does with much accuratness,
handle that business, historically, and scholastically; he is of another mind:
where his conclusion is, hanc integram in utraque panis and vini specie,
communicationem, etsi simpliciter non necessaria habeatur; that this communion
under both kinds, though perchance not absolutely necessary: (or by many, not
so deemed: that is, in some cases only, as that of necessity; and the like: for
the whole discourse tends to prove the greater safety, and manifold advantages
of a perfect Communion, under both kinds:) yet, multis nominibus anteponendam,
etc. for many reasons ought to be preferred. And for that Decree of Pope
Gelasius, he does expound it in this treatise, as we have done before, and
gives his reasons, why it cannot be otherwise understood; and that those
consequences of Bellarmine (though he does not name him, that in those days the
Eucharist, was administered in one kind, are manifestly false, and quite
contrary to the intention of the words: whereby we may gather, that Cassander,
(as one of that communion) did in his Consultation, comply, as much as ever he
could, and his conscience would suffer: and was more likely to have recalled
some of his concessions; if occasion had offered it self: then to have repented
(as the Author of the Labyrinth does charitably hope:) before he died, that he
had spoken so freely of the Church of Rome, and of the errors, and corruptions
of that Church.

Of Priests being forbidden to marry, he says among other things; Videmus hoc
decreto, etc. We see, that by that decree, (or, ordinance) Christian chastity
and continence, is so far from being confirmed; that by it, a door to all
manner of lust and flagitiousness, is rather opened: and again, to the same
purpose; afterward he quotes Panormitanus (that oracle of the Canon law, as
once accounted:) whose words we had before out of Campegius: and such an
apprehension he had of the horror of it, and how much Christianity did suffer
by it; that it made him venture upon a strange speech, as it may seem to some;
That though this caelibatus, or ordinance of Priests forbearance, were granted
to be of Apostolic institution (which he knew it is not:) there was reason
enough why it should be dispensed with. Neither would he have only married
Priests allowed, as anciently: but that it might be lawful for Priests, to
marry after ordination also; which was not wont to be: and yet, good man, when
he wrote those things, such was his condition, as to the world; that austerity
might have been feared, rather then too much indulgence, had not he seen a
great necessity,

In his Chapter, De missis solitarijs, he does avouch Hofmeisterus's saying,
that it was manifest, that the fashion both of the Greek, and Roman Church was,
that not only the Priest, who did officiat (he says sacrifice:) but other
Priests and Deacons also then present, and the rest of the people, or part of
it, at least, did communicate: and that it is a wonder how it came to be left
off; and that men should endeavor to recall that good custom into practice.

But it is time to make an end: though I hope the Reader that does apprehend
the case rightly, will not think this labor ill bestowed. Sure it is, that the
Emperor who set him on work, upon good assurance of his abilities, in every
respect, for such a performance; had such an expectation of it, that he
intended it for a rule to all Parishes within his Dominion: as does appear by
his letter to Cassander himself, in the end of the Second Letter: Ita ut tale
summarium, sit quasi methodus quaedam, etc. They are very remarkable words: let
the Reader well peruse them, and he will say, had so much been written to the
Pope, he would have had a very pregnant testimony for his Infallibility: but
what reckoning in the mean time the Emperor made of the Popes Infallibility, or
absolute Supremacy over the Church, the Reader may guess, by those words.

I hope by this, those Roman Catholics, that shall happen to read this, if not
sworn to the cause in despite of all truth; will have a better opinion of
Reformation, then they had before, and somewhat a worse opinion of those men,
who bear them in hand, that all was well, when Luther began to stir. And though
I cannot expect, that they, who (adhering to that blind Maxim, that whosoever
speaks against the Church of Rome, though never so good a Catholic otherwise,
and generally so accounted; cannot be Orthodox, eo nomine, because he speaks
against the Church of Rome; which is a ridiculous Petitio principii, as before
showed:) are not convicted by the judgment of such a one as Cassander; will be
much moved by any other Authority, of the same nature: Yet because we have
better hopes of the ingenuity of many of that side; and that he may not be
thought the only man that has so thought, or written: I will join another
with him; who for the opinion men had generally of his worth and piety; in
Spain, especially, where his works have been among all Preachers, in mavelous
esteem, beyond any other man's; comes very near to Cassander; even Joh. Ferus,
by name. Yet for all that, there wanted not a Zealot of that side, that durst
charge him publicly, with no less then seventy seven Lutheran errors, and
opinions; whereof, one is, as I take it, that we are justified by faith only.
But Ferus wanted not stout and able champions; more, it may be; but one, I am
sure; Michael Medina, Bellarensis, Franciscanus: who with great applause of the
learned of that side, vindicated him, and laid it home to his adversary, as a
malicious and ignorant Sycophant, or slanderer. The Book was first published at
Complutum, in Spain; (that part of Spain which is called Hispania
Tarraconensis:) famous for an University. There, first; and soon after,
Moguntiae, in Germany, A. D. 1572. Let any man read that Apology (so it is
styled:) and he most of necessity, either acquit Ferus, nay, acknowledge him
Virum Catholicissimum, as there styled; or charge all Spain as Lutherans; or
favorers of Lutherans, at least. Now all I intend by this naming of him, is
but to tell my Reader, that this Johannes Ferus, vir catholicissimus; this
eminent Roman Catholic; has written of the depravation of Religion, amongst
Papists; and of the necessity of a Reformation (our Subject:) as roundly, and
freely, as almost any Protestant. For which I appeal to his Preface, to his
Comments upon the Acts. And Ferus also, wrote since the Council of Trent, which
is to be observed.

I think the ingenuous Reader, is sufficiently convicted by the testimony of
two such witnesses, and that he will acknowledge it. Yet to stop the mouth of
impudency it self (if it be a thing possible:) or at least, that all men that
are not past all sense, and have been made to believe, that there was no such
need, as we pretend; may by the light of so many evidences, be forced to
acknowledge they have been grossly abused; and if in this particular,
apparently; then probably, in diverse others; I will yet produce the testimony
of one more, a man of very different temper from Cassander, or Ferus; yet
truly, a learned man; but a rigid Romanist, as does appear by a speech he made
in the name of Philip the II. King of Spain, uttered at the Council of Trent;
whereby he does bitterly inveigh against the Protestants, as unworthy of all
compliance or condescension: from which he does earnestly dissuade the Council.
That speech of his, is extant, with three Orations, uttered before Pius V. and
some Sermons of his before the said Council of Trent: printed by Christopher
Plantin, A. D. 1574. with an attestation of Arias Montanus, at the end,
concerning the worth of the Author, and high esteem he was in, in all places of
the same Profession. These, with an Apology of his for the Council of Trent,
were dedicated by him to Stanislaus Hosius, one of the Pope's Legates; and
President, in the Council, at times. In that Dedication, he does inveigh
against Luther's proceedings, sufficiently: yet so, that he does acknowledge
bona ex malis orta; and ex ipsis morbis, medicamenta; as he speaks. He does
make a great miracle of it; and does highly magnify the goodness and
providence of God, toward his Church in it. For before those times; those
stirs and commotions, first occasioned by Luther; Liquidi illi purique fontes
coelestis doctrinae, says he, negligebantur omnino, and turbidam e luculentis
quibusdam rivulis haustant aquam homines bibebant. Jacebant in tenebris, (he
goes on) illa Ecclesiae antiqua lumina; and auctores quidam obscuri, horridi,
spinosi, and inculti dominabantur in Scholis; quos omnes, sordida quaedam
barbaries occupaverat; and ipsa literarum gymnasia -- otiosis quibusdam, and
inanissimis concertationibus occupata tenebantur. Luther, I think, would not
have said much more. The sum is; That the pure fountains of heavenly Doctrine,
being forsaken, men drunk puddle-water: that is, as he does explain himself,
That the Word of God (before those stirs by Luther) was quite laid aside, as
also the writings of ancient Fathers: and instead of them, crabbed, obscure,
fruitless Authors ( Schoolmen, I think, he does mean: but Legends of Saints
also, probably: the only Books then in request:) were entertained in the
Schools; and Colleges: that is, Universities. If this be not plain enough;
hear him again, the same Author, in his Apology. Sed dices (says he) nullo
unquam tempore, tot ac tantiabusus. Nunquam depravata vetus sic disciplina:
nunquam sic omnes Ecclesiae ordines corrupti, and dehonestati fuerunt. Nolo
tecum hac de re pugnare, Fabrici: (that is the man, he wrote against, or rather
did endeavor to answer, in the behalf of the Council of Trent:) nolo
praeterita tempora cum nostris confer: Pet. ^^ntid. Apol. p. 104.5.
nolo nunc recensere veteres Ecclesiae plagas; nolo saecula illa commemorare,
in quibus vix ullus reperiebatur totius Christiani Orbis angulus, in quo, non
modo morum integritas, sed neque doctrinae puritas conspiceretur. Lateant haec,
etc. I think here is plain acknowledgment, that there was not any corner of the
world left, where both manners, and doctrine (among Christians) had not
suffered great corruption, and detriment: and I think, the restoring of Gods
Word to its credit, and authority, with the Writings of the ancient Fathers;
(the acknowledged effects or consequences of the then Reformation of Religion:)
deserve to be looked upon as a singular blessing, and happiness of the times.
True it is, he says afterward, that the evils which came along, were greater.
But what he, as an Adversary, does lay to our charge; we are not bound to
acknowledge true, because he says it: but what he does grant to us, not out of
any good will, but being forced by the evidence of things; I think we may
safely build upon, as unquestionable truth: and they that will not yield to
such evidence; what reason have they to expect, that they should ever be
believed in any thing? We do not deny, but many evils ensued upon those
alterations, (all alterations are dangerous:) to which Luther gave occasion.
But we know that the same thing was objected by heathens to the Gospel of
Christ: and what was answered by the godly Fathers of those times, we know. We
deny not also, but that division, and separation, is in it self the greatest of
evils, that can happen in the Church: but whether Luther or the Pope, was the
occasion of the separation that happened in Luthers time, is a great question:
Or rather, no question at all, with us Protestants, but that it happened
through the Pope and Church of Rome, their wicked obstinacy, who would not
hearken to good counsel, nor yield to any real reformation which from all parts
was so much desired.

We have heard Cassander say as much, that the Pope was the cause. Though
Cassander, with all truly judicious and wise, may be instead of a thousand, for
a witness, in this particular: Letters d' E^^. Pasq. 40 11. p. 596.
yet since we are upon it now, it may be worthy the Readers notice, that does
not know it; what another Roman Catholic, no obscure man, Stephen Pasquier the
author of les Recherches, does write to his friend Mr. de Raimond (he, I think,
that has written of Heresies:) about it. He does maintain it, and dispute it
at large, that, not Luther; or not Luther so much as Leo, the then Pope, was
the cause of the first breach. But the grounds he goes upon, are not the same
Cassander does: I make no great reckoning of his arguments; neither do I aim at
any great advantage to the cause by this accidental indication.

The same Fontindonius (a man more considerable to us, by far) in that very
Oration to the Council of Trent, wherein, Orat. p. 215.
as we said before, he does inveigh against the Protestants with so much
bitterness; has these words among others: Sauciam Ecclesiam in vestris manibus
habetis, etc. that is, Ye have the wounded Church in your hands: the wounds
whereof, there is no need that they should be opened unto you, which your
selves do know, and the Legates from all Provinces have not only insisted upon,
but have set the whole body of it before your eyes, full of wounds and bruises.
Thus he. And for that he faith of the Legati of several Countries; they that
have read a Book entitled Instructions and Missives des Roys Tres-Christiens
de Fr. etc. printed 1608. containing the several speeches, and Orations made by
the King of France, his several Ambassadors, and others authorized by him; in
the Council of Trent: their account given to their King, and his Letters and
replies and other things of that nature; will say, that he had good reason for
what he said,

For besides many such places, where they mention the wounds and sores of the
Church; they say in one place, after the perusal of some papers of that
subject; that their reformation was not like to prove like to Esays healing
plasters (Es. 38.) made of figgs; such as the Church wanted, and desired: but
to Ezekiels (chapter 10.) his untempered mortar, etc. And in the end of the
Oration, they protest openly against Pius the IVth. Pij autem Vti imperium,
etc. As for the power or authority of Pius the fourth, all his Statutes and
Sentences (or Decrees) we reject, we disdain, and despise. Him for Christ's
Vicar, and Peter's lawful Successor, we renounce and reject.

In another place they tell the Council, that they came to the Pope, craving of
him that Spiritual bread, which should be the food of their souls: whereof all
the Christian world over, there was such scarcity, as was scarce known in any
age since Christ: but that instead of that bread they desired; he had given
them a Scorpion, at one time, to sting both King and Church of France: that it
was not then with the world as some years before (that is before Luther
appeared:) for that now men believed in Christ, not for the women's Testimony, (
Joh. iv.42.) but because they believed the Scriptures, which now they were, but
before had not been acquainted with. And that is in effect, what Fontindonius
had told us before. If therefore such, even such, as Fontindonius, so zealous a
Romanist, such an enemy to Protestants; (not to speak here of that famous
Consilium Delectorum Cardinalium, etc. de emendanda Ecclesia: A. D. 1538.
Printed in diverse places; even in some editions of Councels to be sound; though
prohibited afterward, and concealed with all possible care) have acknowledged
the miserable condition of the Church before Luther began to stir: was there
not great need of Reformation? What may we think of them, that will not
acknowledge it themselves* and do what they can, to keep others from the
knowledge of it?

I Have now done with the first part of this my present undertaking, That,
before, and at that time, when Luther first appeared, the Church stood in great
need of Reformation; not in matter of Discipline and manners only, which is not
denied, though little has been done to redress it: but of Doctrine, and
matters of faith, as much as in any thing. This brought us to the business of
infallibility, the prime controversy of these times; upon which we have been
the longer, the variety of matter offering it self, partly because of the
consequence; and partly, because of the obstinate opposition of adversaries who
are very sensible of the consequence. What remains, a consideration of the
hindrances, will be no hard or long work; nor subject, as I conceive, to much
opposition; but of great use, if my judgment fail me not, and at this time, not
unseasonable.

How it comes to pass, that after so many endeavors, in so many years, the
heretics of these times, (they mean Protestants:) are not yet converted, or
persuaded, to return to the unity of the Church; that (to use some of their own
words) nihil adhuc profectum est, and de inanibus Catholicorum conatibus
haereses triumphant: that is, they that have labored hitherto, have reaped no
benefit of their labors, but heresies triumph of the vain attempts of the
Catholics; Some Romanists have been curious to inquire into the reasons. One
of them I am sure, an eminent writer among them; whose those words are, I have
quoted. Whether it be so or no; and whether they have any reason to make a
wonder of it; I will not now stand to dispute. Certain I am that we who
certainly believe this Reformation, which after so many wishes and attempts in
former ages, begun to take effect not full 150 years ago; was the work of God,
and for which all truly sensible of piety, and well acquainted with primitive
times, are bound to praise God heartily; have much more reason to wonder, that
in few years, having had so miraculous a success, it has made no greater
progress since: and since that, of late years, has rather lost, then gained,
though there have not wanted at no time, from the first beginning, multitudes
of able champions to justify the cause (though not to justify the
proceedings, in all places) by their writings. A thing it is, I confess, which
may cause some wonder: especially where the motives, or engagements, are
apprehenhended as clear and visible; as they are, certainly, in themselves
ponderous, and of highest consequence.

But if any be scandalized at it, let him consider the several ebbings and
flowings of Christianity in general, in several places of the world since the
first beginning of it; in those especially, where it was once most flourishing,
and is now either quite extinct (as in one fourth part of the world:) or
brought very low, and under cruel bondage; as in many places of great extent:
and if he be forced, (as I think he will) to say, that these be secrets of Gods
providence, or just judgments, which the reason of man cannot penetrate into; I
think there is in this particular also of reformation, as much reason, why he
should submit, if not without some wondering, or just indignation which can
hardly be avoided; yet without such scandal, as should make him think worse of
the cause.

Laying therefore that aside, the consideration of hidden causes, which does
not belong unto us; nor of such Politic causes, as may be given perchance, by
men well acquainted with the State, and interest of the several Kingdoms, and
Commonwealths of Europe: we shall only take notice of such, which no question
can be made of, but that then concurred more or less; the knowledge and
consideration of which, may be useful, and of some consequence, toward the
peace of this Church, which it is our happiness to be members of. To this
purpose, that which I shall chiefly insist upon, is, to show, that rash, rigid
speeches, opinions, and judgments, pretending to zeal and purity, but for the
most part, the effects of gross ignorance, or damnable hypocrisy, or natural
fierceness (such is the temper of some) and precipitancy; have been the most
visible hindrances. By this, some may think, that I intend Puritanisme; which
certainly does always proceed, from some one, if not more of those causes. If
therefore we distinguish, between the accidentals of Puritanism, particular
objects, and opinions, which may differ according to difference of times, and
places; (for even in England, the particulars of Puritanisme, have not been
always the same:) and the essentials, or formalis ratio of it from which those
accidentals usually flow and proceed; so we may call it Puritanism, that was
the greatest, or one of the apparent obstacles, in this blessed work.

But it will not be amiss, I think, first of all to take some notice of him,
who was the most visible instrument of this great alteration; even Martin
Luther; who did much please himself, that he was particularly prophesied of by
John Hus, who had begun the work, and made a good progress in it, in Bohemia,
about a hundred years, before Luther appeared in Saxony. Some words indeed of
John Hus, are mentioned by many, very express to that purpose: who also aver,
that a coin, or medal was stamped by the Bohemians about that time, containing
part of those prophetical words; which medal, I suppose, has been seen by
many. Ulembergius, a learned Romanist, who has written Luthers life very
particularly; and for the most part out of Luthers own works; where he does set
down Luthers words, he does not contradict it, nay does seem rather to
acknowledge it, by his marginal note: Vaticinium Hus, de Luthero. Certainly,
such a prophecy well attested, and strongly apprehended, as it seems it was by
Luther; must needs add much to his confidence, which indeed was extraordinary,
and little less, without the help of that prophecy, then miraculous. But of
this prophecy, and how far Luther might rely upon it, as belonging to him, let
every man judge, as he thinks fit.

However, the mention of it, has given me the opportunity to tell the Reader,
if he knew it not, of a very clear prophecy of St. Jerome's, concerning the
Reformation of religion, then begun in Germany, and the principal (though mute)
instrument of it, the Scriptures. St. Jerome, (whom also I find in part, cited
by learned Jewel, in his Apologia Eccl. Anglic.) in his Comments upon the 3d.
chap. of the Prophet Nahum, does tell us first, how perversa dogmata, and
perversae doctrinae, through the baits and allurements of the Devil, shall
prevail in the world; so that both Teachers and people shall be cast into a
deep sleep: non habente sermon Dei, ubi caput reclinet, cum perversa dogmata
cuncta possideant:) and the word of God shall be turned out of doors, nor find
any resting place. But, that at the end of the world, before Christ's coming,
the people of God, ( qui sub magistris antea fuerat consopitus) who before was
kept asleep by its masters, or teachers; shall then fly to the Scriptures, (for
safety:) and apply themselves to the reading of them.

St. Jerome wrote this above a thousand years, before Luther; he might very well
think the world would be toward an end, by that time; and besides, we may hope
yet for a further accomplishment. But whether we have not seen the fulfilling
of it, in part, ever since the Reformation began, if any be so ignorant or
wilfully blind, as not to acknowledge it, I desire them to consider once again
of Fontindonius, the Trent Orator, his words before set down; and with them, of
those of the French Orators, the then King of France his Agent; uttered before
the said Council. I will say no more of it; this is more then I intended, but
that John Hus his prophecy, concerning Luther, gave us the occasion.

What Luthers good parts were, natural and acquired, by which the Reformation
by him begun, was happily promoted; is not our business here to inquire: It is
certain, he had some that did not a little hinder it. He had a great courage:
that did well: but he was very passionate, and in his passion, and anger, what
he said, he had no regard at all. He could not endure to be contradicted by any
who pretended to reformation: or that any (in Germany, at least) should share
with him, in the credit of that great work. He was naturally very free to speak
any thing that was in his thoughts, without any disguise, or dissimulation: and
such an opinion he had of his calling (being much animated by the success:)
that instead of striving against, he used this liberty with all security, as a
privilege of his authority. As reason, or passion led him, so he spoke, and
wrote, with all manner of indifferency; which made such notable contradictions,
in his writings, (which have been observed by more then one) not to be
reconciled, but by the knowledge, and acknowledgment of his infirmities as well
as excellencies.

In his first Augustan Confession, which only the rigid Lutherans to this day,
acknowledge, and embrace, as genuine; how indifferently, and moderately, (and
yet not with less truth, for the most part, then moderation: being in substance
the same with the second, which Calvin did approve and subscribe) did he state
all manner of differences? But how differently, since that, he wrote when he
did indulge to his passion, or was set upon aggravation; there be that have
made it their business, to take notice, and to make known: among the rest,
Bellarmine; who both in some Orations; and elsewhere in his Controversies, does
make great use of it, to advantage his cause thereby, (which I believe he did;
as much, as by any thing:) and to make Reformation odious, and detestable unto
all men, that did not wisely consider of it.

For I ask, Would it not confirm a Protestant in his Religion, who is not a
stranger to the Articles, and Confessions of Faith, set out by Protestants,
concerning the necessity of good works: hears the same preached, and pressed
every day, in Sermons: the same, in ordinary books of Devotion in best credit;
besides the known practice, of all accounted pious and religious, among them:
to hear a Papist, pretending to the knowledge of Differences, and Controversies,
object unto Protestants generally; that they maintain the sufficiency of faith
unto salvation; (to justification indeed, we do: and so diverse Roman
Catholics:) without works? Or that, to follow Calvin, we deny the reality of
the body and blood of Christ in the Eucharist, which so many Protestant
Confessions profess to believe; and Calvin, of all Protestants, does in so many
places, so vigorously assert? Witness among others, those words of his:
Substantiam very corporis and sanguinis Jesu Christi, uti ex utero virginis
illam semel accepit, praesentem esse in Coena, tam fidelibus, quam infidelibus;
who also does acknowledge a great miracle (though no transubstantiation:) in the
business, and effect of Gods omnipotency, not comprehensible to man. His whole
book against Westphalus, is of that subject, to vindicate himself and his
Doctrine, of that slander. Yet these be objections made by a late Romanist, a
great pretender to peace and charity. But when the same author, speaking of the
English Reformation, does tell us, seriously, that instead of the Crucifix upon
the rood, a naked Unicorn, to content Luther and Catherine Bore, was placed;
and that marriage was allowed to Priests to satisfy Calvin, who without
scruple of irregularity, married a Tailors widow: what can a sober Protestant
think of such men, who pretending to sobriety and moderation, Fiat lux. p.
250.251.
are not ashamed, to our faces, so basely, so unworthily, to traduce, and
calumniate: how can he believe them in any thing?

When therefore Papists have been told by some Protestants (to instance in one
particular:) that before the Reformation, begun by Luther, they had no knowledge
of Christ nor of the benefit of his Cross; the free remission of sins, and
justification, through faith: so contrary to their ordinary Rituals (as by
diverse Papists and Protestants, has been asserted and objected:) and so
contrary to so many books of Devotion, in use and credit among them: must they
not in all probability, suspect every thing to be of the same nature, and have
a worse opininion of Reformation, and all Protestants, in general?

But of all things in this kind, wherein the inconsiderate zeal, or ignorant,
uncharitable rashness of some Protestants, has been to blame, my opinion is,
that nothing has done more hurt to the cause, to hinder the progress of
Reformation, and to advantage the adversaries of it, then the denying of the
Church of Rome, to be a true Church. Quin and eo ventum est, etc. that is, Nay
it is come to that, (says learned judicious Cassander) that some (which is the
propriety of schism) have made bold to bereave this Church (the Roman) of the
title and possession of a true Catholic Church; and to arrogate it unto
themselves, as their own peculiar.

This indeed, is a matter of highest moment, on which as I conceive, the
standing or falling of Christianity, in general, does not a little depend. For
since it is well known, that most errors of Popery, began to prevail over all
Christianity, or the greatest part; (in Europe, at least:) a thousand years
before Luther; (though every age did afford some, that did vigorously oppose
them:) and that Christianity, in other parts of the world, has suffered,
though not so much perchance, nor in the same kind; yet suffered not a little:
if all this while, Christ has had no visible Church in the world, but here,
and there in some corners; I know not what to make of all the prophesies of the
Old Testament: and if so many prophesies, so plain, so full, so direct (as by
St. Augustine in his books, De veritate Ecclesiae, is disputed, and proved, at
large:) come to nothing; truly I know not, what we may trust to. To me, it does
appear no less, then, if not a direct, yet an implicit (if the consequence be
rightly weighed;) abjuration of Christianity. And were it so indeed, that
Protestants generally, did require any such profession, or subscription; I
think that were ground enough for any conscientious man, to avoid their
communion: as on the other side, were there nothing else to be objected to
Papists, but this one thing; their uncharitable proscribing, and
excommunicating of all Christians, in all parts of the world, who are not of
their communion; and obliging all that adhere unto them, to profess the same; I
should think that one thing, a just ground of Separation, or forsaking of their
communion. And I must acknowledge when I consider with grief of the calamities,
and diminution, Christianity in general, has received, by the increase of
Mahometisme: though I am sorry, that so much superstition is gone along; yet it
is no small comfort, to think of the conversion of the Americans. And though my
comfort would be greater, if, as I said, less superstition had gone along; yet
even in that, I receive no small satisfaction, when I read the speeches made to
some Indians, concerning Christianity, wherein I find nothing, that can give
just offense; but true and pure Christianity delivered: as particularly in a
book entitled, The History of the Mission of three Capuchins to the Isle of
Maragnan, etc. by the R. F. Claude d'Abbeville Praedic. Capuchin: at Paris,
1614. not to mention others.

This therefore I conceive, was a great hinderance, to the progress of
Reformation; when many (through misinformation) apprehended, that instead of
Reformation, a new Religion was intended, not known, or heard of, (but here and
there in some corners:) for the space of a thousand years: whereupon must
follow (which many were ready to infer, and to exaggerate:) that as many
(Fathers, and Forefathers) as were dead in the mean time, though otherwise
never so pious in sight; were dead in their sins, as Heathens, and Infidels.
Now, though this never was the Doctrine of Protestants, in general; as will
appear by and by: yet it cannot be denied, but some Protestants in very deed
(if I may call them Protestants, whom I know not how to account Christians;
except ignorance, and not want of charity be their plea:) have been of that
opinion; and even before our late confusions, by which true Christianity did
suffer such an Eclipse in this Land; a learned and pious Bishop was much put
to it, by the Puritanical party, for this very thing, because he had said, The
Roman Church was, or is, a true Church. Though his credit, and deservingly, was
great; yet, no less then an express Apology; and after that another, (which are
extant:) would serve the turn, to acquit him from suspicion of Popery; and glad
was he, to get compurgators, men of eminency in those days* and of some credit,
with the faction; and all, little enough. And even since that, in this late
dismal interruption of government, one of that worshipful company, that were
appointed Examiners of them that were to be ordained, or beneficed; whereof
Hugh Peter's, (a very fit man for such a purpose: for by the questions they were
wont to ask, a man cannot tell what they aimed at, except it was to advance
Quakisme, or make way for Mahometism:) was the head: but one of that worshipful
company, did publicly, p^rstringe, though absent, that Reverend worthy Prelat
for it, as guilty of a foul business. It became one of that company well
enough, both for their learning and their Principles. Some may wonder, that
Reverend Bishop could find in his heart (but that it was his humility, and
charity:) as though the judgment of such, had been a thing considerable; to
apologize a third time. The more we may wonder, because at that very time, or a
little before, Jus Divinum Ministerii Evangelici. Published by the Pro^^n.
Assem. of Land. 1654 Part 11. p. 39.
a book was set out by the Provincial Assembly of London, (so they call
themselves) wherein I find it thus: The Religion of the Church of Rome; etc.
They hold many truths; but then they poison them by their heretical Additions.
They hold most that we hold, etc. Thus their Religion, is bread and poison,
mingled together; and whosoever living among them, can separate the bread from
the poison, shall find bread enough to nourish him unto eternal life. Again:
When the Protestant Churches did separate, they did not erect a new Church; but
reformed a corrupt Church. And therefore ours is called, The Protestant
Reformed religion: not, Ibid. p. 45.
A new Religion. Again: There are indeed some learned Orthodox Divines, that
say, That the Church of Rome is vere Ecclesia: is Truly a Church: though far
from being, a true Orthodox Church. There are others that say, etc.

But whatever may be the Faith, or apprehensions of particular men, in this
business; God be thanked, the Church of England has sufficiently declared her
self, to take away all scruple from them, that adhere unto it, in outward
communion, as to a particular Church; (of all particular Churches, that we
know, both for Doctrine and Discipline, as we verily believe, and heartily joy
in the happiness of being members of it* most right, and Orthodox:) but think
themselves, as Christians in general, bound to believe a holy Catholic Church,
dispersed throughout the whole world: the Church of England, I say, has
sufficiently declared it self; as to satisfy her Sons and adherents, and to
take away all scruples, in this point: so to stop the mouths of the enemies.
Witness those gold^n words, in her Canons and Constitutions, set out A. D.
1604.. 30. So far was it (so they profess) from the purpose of the Church of
England, to forsake and reject the Churches of Italy, France, Spain, Germany,
or any such like Church, in all things, which they held and practiced; that (as
the Apology of the Church of England professes) it does with reverence,
retain those Ceremonies, which do neither endamage the Church of God, nor
offend the minds of sober men: and only departed from them, in those
particular points, wherein they were fallen, both from themselves, in their
ancient integrity; and from the Apostolic Churches, which were their first
founders.

(...) against Featly, p 52 53.
Now whereas some Papists would make some advantage of this against us, as
though the first Reformers of Religion, had denied a constant visible Church
upon Earth, for many Ages, before the Reformation; which they say later
Protestants have been forced to acknowledge: it is, either a great mistake, or
a gross calumny. For I do not know any one of the first Reformers, or
Protestant Divines, that were then, or are now, of any reputation, that ever
denied, that Christ had a Church in the Papacy, not only invisible, consisting
of the Elect properly: but also visible, C^lv. Epist. 104. p 222.
as Calvin does explain himself. Their testimonies have been produced by
others; to which more (if need were) might be added. Luther indeed, expressed
himself very variously, in this point, as in many others; as was before
acknowledged. Sometimes, he grants more to the Church of Rome then most
moderate Protestants can well allow unto it; sometimes, he leaves them nothing
at all; which no sober man can justify* Some other Protestants may speak
ambiguously, sometimes; but if well understood, they will be found to agree
well enough, in this point.

That which has made many wary and scrupulous how they speak, in this
particular; is, the advantage the Papists make of our concessions, with
ordinary simple people; when they infer upon it, that therefore their
communion must be the safest way, because we acknowledge them a Church; and by
consequent, a possibility of salvation in it: they, (that is, the hotheaded or
ignorant Zealots, of their side:) not ours so: whereas in very truth, (and they
will acknowledge it, who are well acquainted with the Doctrine of Antiquity:)
it is one main advantage of our cause, that though we differ from them in many
things; nay, charge rhem with many gross, pestilent errors, and abuses: yet
because they still keep to the main fundamentals, we do not exclude them from
the Catholic Church; though by their hard and rigid censures, and
excommunications of us, and all others that do not hold with them; they do very
much hazard their right and title, to the said Catholic Church; as much, as by
any thing.

But this has been considered of before, and their Arguments for this
pretended advantage fully discussed: whether, (if he have not been there
already) I referr the Reader, who does desire further satisfaction in this
point. Our occasion here, is only to observe, that this one thing; the denying
the Church of Rome, the being of a Church, in the communion of which, they that
have lived and erred; or do yet; wanting the means, ignorantly; by the
advantage of the main fundamentals, and a godly life, may possibly be saved:
which some Protestants rashly, and ignorantly; or rigidly, and uncharitably,
too much yielding to their own tempers, and humors, have done: has been a
great hinderance of Reformation. And I verily believe, the opinion most Papists
are kept in, that the Religion of Protestants, is a new Religion; is not of
little force, to make them averse from it* to this day.

It is well known, how bitterly rigid Lutherans judge generally, of the
Protestants, that are not of their opinion. Papists (ordinary Papists) may be
thought charitable, in comparison. Yet no provocation could make other
Protestants, far more in number, and every way much more considerable, to
requite them, or to imitate their uncharitableness, and virulency: though they
make great boast of it, and make no small advantage of it among themselves, to
maintain their own party; by their insultation. Yet for all that, they are
accounted Brethren, whether they will, or no: the French Churches, even lately,
in a Synod of theirs at Charanton; have declared them so. I wish we had no
greater differences with the Papists: however, if moderation and charity
toward the one, be commendable; (as who would not commend it?) notwithstanding
their uncharitable provocations: why should not we be as charitable (so far as
the cause will bear:) toward the Papists, in our judgments, and deserve
commendation for it; though they judge of us no better (for worse they can
not:) then the Lutherans?

Another great hinderance, noted and acknowledged by all men, and concerning
which diverse Books have been written, which give an Historical account of all
actions and proceedings, private, and public, in that business; is the
difference that did arise among Protestants concerning the Sacrament of the
Body and Blood of Christ. So much has been written of it, and of the sad
effects and consequences, that I shall only name it here, and no more.

Other particulars there be, of the same nature; which I could insist upon; if
I intended a perfect search, and disquisition. But because my chiefest intent,
is, to insist upon those things, the knowledge and consideration whereof, may
be of some concernment to us, of the Church of England; I shall confine my self
to the consideration of one particular, of Ceremonies: which as it was at
first, a great hinderance to the progress of Reformation, in Germany, and
elsewhere: So has it been the occasion of great troubles and disturbances, to
the Church of England; and sometimes hazarded the beauty and glory of its
Reformation, (by all Protestants, that have any knowledge of former times, and
do not unchristianly contract the Catholic Church, to present and particular
Congregations, acknowledged:) by base, unworthy compliances with the defects,
(that I say not, deformity:) of some other Churches.

Whilst the chief Reformers were busy about material points, wherein true
Christian-Faith had suffered great detriment; which every day appeared more and
more, and begun so far to be acknowledged every where, that all States and
places, did even thirst for a sound and substantial Reformation: the Devil, who
had tried many ways, to hinder and oppose what he could, and yet saw himself in
great danger: (God for other secret causes, but apparent infirmities of some
chief actors, and unworthiness of others, who should have reaped the benefit;
permitting, or not hindering:) this great Enemy of incorrupted Truth and
Religion, stirred up a Sect of men, whereof Flaccius Illyricus, and one Joach.
Westphalus, were chief leaders, and abettors; who under color of Zeal and
Purity, despised, affronted all Authority; preached rebellion, and sedition, as
lawful, for that which they called Religion; charged the most eminent
Reformers, with Idolatry, Apostasy, Infidelity, and the like, for allowing some
ancient Rites and Ceremonies: some, for themselves, as ancient, and useful:
others, for peace and unities sake, as things indifferent. Like so many Furies
of Hell, or Bedlams, that had broken their bonds, by Press and Pulpit, and all
manner of ways, they filled the world, with their outcries, and reproaches; by
which many were not a little terrified; but many more, who before had showed
great inclination to it, scandalized, even to a hatred and abhorrence of all
Reformation. In the mean time, the Zelots for the Popes power, and great
Patrons of all inveterated Superstitions; made great advantage of it, to
countenance their rigor and obstinacy, on the other side; and wholly bent
themselves (which was vigorously prosecuted by the Council of Trent) to make
the breach as irreconcilable, as they could possibly make it, even unto all
extremity: placing henceforth the greatest strength of their own safety and
security, in the proscribing, and anathematizing of all dissenters, as damned
Apostates, and Infidels. This is the grand mystery of Jesuitisme, and politic
Popery, at this day: to look upon all moderate counsels, as pernicious and
destructive; to fear nothing more, and to hinder as much as they can, lest any
man with calmness and indifferency (that is, not preoccupied and prepossessed
with opinion and prejudice) should enquire into the occasion of this unhappy
breach, and the true state of Reformation. It is their advantage, and that
which they earnestly labor for, that every difference may be made a Heresy;
yea, flat Idolatry, or Apostasy: whether they impeach us, or we impeach them,
in that kind, it matters not; the advantage they make of it is the same. So
that in very truth, Jesuits and Puritans, by two contrary extremities, are the
great props, and interest of Popery: and though particular Papists, may suffer
in some places, by the fierceness of Puritans; and Puritans, in other, by the
fierceness of such Papists: yet that is not considerable, in comparison of what
the cause does get in general, by those extremities, on both sides.

What were the particular Rites, or Ceremonies, that were so fiercely impugned,
and the occasion of such division; I shall not now make any inquiry: of rites
and ceremonies in general, the question was, that is certain, whether in their
own nature indifferent, (whence the name, or crimination of adiaphoristae, so
frequent in that History, sprung:) and whether any might be retained, that had
been abused, the abuse being taken away: the one (the sober and moderate)
maintaining the affirmative: the pretended zealots, as peremptorily charging
them with Popery, Idolatry, Apostasy, and I know not what, for the opinion. The
Surplice, I remember, was one great particular, concerning which strange things
were delivered by that Fanatic crew; as though whole Christianity had been
hazarded, nay lost, by the using of it. But I will refer my Reader, if he
desire a further account, to the Ecclesiastical History of those times:
especially to them that have written the life of Luther and Melanchthon: which
incomparable man, as he excelled in piety and learning; so he was the principal
object of their revilings, and threatenings.

This is all I intended of the visible hindrances of Reformation; the
observation whereof, I thought, would be of some use, to those that have any
interest in this particular (of all reformed, the most eminent) Church of
England. I shall yet before I end, commend some things to the Readers
consideration; which upon the same subject of ceremonies, as I was writing what
has been written before; did offer themselves; and I have done.

First, to the Papists: Great braggs they make of their Ceremonies, and their
antiquity. We cannot deny, but many of them are ancient: now laid aside for
good reasons, by the Church of England. But first; Can they make it appear that
the substance of Faith which does Constitute a Catholic Church, was ever
thought by the ancients, to consist in part, or in whole, in ceremonies? Who
does not know, what ancient fathers have said and determined, concerning this
matter of Ceremonies? What notable variety, and in some things, contrariety
has been observed by ancient Ecclesiastical writers, in diverse parts of the
world; where one faith was acknowledged and professed.

But secondly: they have retained many; ancient, we acknowledge; which we have
not: but withal, they have many articles of faith; never heard of in the
primitive times; which we have not, we praise God for it. They will not
acknowledge it, I confess; except some here, or there, that are more ingenuous
then the rest: but it has been proved, and will be proved yet, if need be, and
made as manifest and visible, as the light of the Sun at noon day may be to
them that have eyes, and will not shut them of purpose, lest they should see.

But again, (a third answer, or observation:) They have many that are ancient;
which we have not: we grant it. But have they all, or near all; of that nature?
I will undertake, let all their rites, and customs, that are truly ancient, be
put together: we will give an account, when it shall be required, of so many
more, at least, ancient also, which are now, and have been, these many years,
antiquated, and out of use. The reader may be better satisfied that the thing
is very feasible, who shall but peruse those that have written de antiquis
Baptismi, and Missae ritibus; Josephus Vicecomes, particularly; who has taken
greatest pains: in two tomes, in 4to; Printed at Milan, 1620.

Bellarmine, I remember, in a place, where he disputes for transubstantiation:
has these words: Bell. de Sacr. Ecc. l 4 c. 13.632.
Add ultimo morem esse Graecorum etc. that is: [Lastly, Cardinal Bessarion, in
his books of the words of the consecration; does relate that it is the custume
of the Greek Church, that those words of the Lord, This is my body: and, This
is my blood: are uttered with a loud voice, and that the people answer to
either, Amen.] A man would not have thought, that such a one as Bellarmine
should be beholding to Bessarion for this observation, which he might have
found in diverse ancients, who spoke of it, as a thing generally practiced: St.
Ambrose, in two several places, and Justin Martyr, long before him; not to
mention others. But then it seems, it was so anciently; is it so now? Bell. De
Missa. ii.12. p. 831.
But Bellarmine, again, does in another book, out of St. Augustine, tell us of
another ancient custom; that the people not only after consecration; but then
also after the Priest had dispensed to them the blood; or uttered the words of
distribution; The blood of our Lord Jesus Christ etc. did answer, Amen. Truly I
have no ambition to find fault with Bellarmine: but the ingenuous Reader will
not be offended, if I desire to do the truth right, upon any occasion that
offers it self. Bellarmine excepts, the book out of which this is cited, is not
Augustines. Be it so: Yet Ballarmine might have observed, that those words are
taken out of a book of St. August. to. vi p. 323.
Augustine, that was never questioned; cont. Faustum Manich. lib. xii. c. 10.
Secondly, Bellarmine does referr us to St. Ambrose De Sacr. iv. c. 5. for the
same. But the diligent Reader will find, that St. Ambrose in that place speaks
of the Amen of the people, after the consecration; not, after the words of
distribution, or dispensation. But for that custom, that the people were wont
(and that it ought to be so) anciently to answer, Eusebius. Ecclesi. Hist. l. 6.
c. 35. p. 180.
Amen, after the words uttered by the Priest, The body (or, The blood) of our
Lord Jesus Christ, etc. We have (not to mention others) the clear testimony of
Pope Cornelius, in Eusebius; and as clear testimony of St. Augustine, many
years after, that it was so practiced, or observed ab omnibus gentibus, in his
time. So anciently, then, and universally so; is it so now at Rome; or where
Rome is followed, as a rule? I find it not in the Missals, or Rituals, that I
have. Well, if it be not; all I shall say of it, they were to blame; were it
but for antiquity sake, that first left it out. But what shall we say, to the
very words, or form of consecration: (of greater moment I believe, then any
bare ceremony; yet, that too, in some respects a ceremony:) do not we know,
that the practice of this day, generally, is contrary to the order, and
resolution of some ancient Popes about it: and that the learned among the
Papists, are divided among themselves, in their opinions, what is, or ought to
be the true form?

Here be some instances of some variety: but the Ordo Romanus, or ancient
Western Liturgy, set out by learned Cassander, with his observations; will
furnish, who is desirous, with more of the same nature; and of higher
consequence, some; as the administration under both kinds, and the like.

Thirdly, and lastly, we say: The Church of England, though for the abuse and
other good considerations, it has laid aside diverse Ceremonies, that are
acknowledged ancient: yet it does not condemn any, that have been anciently and
universally used, (as then used:) as impious, or idolatrous: nor does think
that, a just cause of Separation, from any other Church, that uses them, as
then used: whereby it does fully acquit it self of all imputation of schism,
or breach of Communion with the ancient Church; upon that score: which they
that do, that rashly and furiously censure all they do not like (the right
Puritanical humor:) for Popish, impious, idolatrous and the like; are guilty
of: and by that means, though they do not all proceed perchance to that degree
of madness, as to deny the ancient Church, to have been a true Church,
therefore: yet truly, they do it great wrong; and give the Papists great
advantage (which they make great use of) by making Popery to be so ancient:
more ancient, by some hundred of years, then sound Protestants can, or will
acknowledge it. For it is not the using, or not using of such, or such a
Ceremony; (where the duty of obedience to superiors, does not oblige the
conscience) that is so considerable in it self: but rash, uncharitable
censuring, and condemning of others, or separating from them for such things,
which of their own nature are indifferent: which must needs proceed from great
ignorance, (as we would charitably hope, of most:) or a worse cause. The Papist
the refore have no reason at all to be offended; nor can take any advantage at
all, of the doctrine or practice of the Church of England, in this point; which
has used such moderation, such wonderful caution, to prevent all just
offense: but what they can say for themselves, for retaining so many idle,
superstitious (to say no more as now used:) ceremonies, by which the
consciences of men are intolerably burdened; and Religion it self the substance
of it, clouded, oppressed, and very much endangered: as by many moderate
Papists (by Kings and Princes among others; witness the Letters of Charles the
II. Exemplar. liter etc. Paris 1557 and p. 204. and 212.
King of France, to the Princes of Germany:) has been in part, if not
altogether acknowledged, and complained; I know not, nor they neither, I
believe, if they would deal truly, and ingenuously.

As for those among us, who have been, or are yet guilty of such rash, and
uncharitable censures, in this matter of Ceremonies; whereby they have caused,
(besides the advantage given to Papists) great troubles in this Church, and are
yet ready, many of them, to set all on fire again, upon this very score of
Popish, Idolatrous Ceremonies: which they have ever found their readiest
Incentivum to work upon ignorant or disaffected people; and therefore, as a
necessary reserve to themselves, against any good occasion, are so loath to part
with: I have but little to add, to what has been said by others, and whether
possible to light upon any thing, that has not been forestalled, I make a
question. But I shall adventure upon somewhat, I do not remember to have met
with elsewhere: which I will commend to their consideration, whose senses,
proper ends and Interest, or resolved and obstinate partiality, has not
obstructed.

In civil worldly things, that outward visible Signs and Ceremonies have great
power and influence upon men, ordinarily, to beget affection, or reverence; is
acknowledged by wisest men and Politicians. Plutarch does observe (and some
have made use, I know, of the observation, but upon another occasion) that
Cato, though he was a man of great integrity, in his ordinary conversation, and
very incorrupt in his judgments, as a Magistrate: yet did more hurt to the
Commonweal of Rome, by the contempt he brought upon the Senate, and highest
Courts, by his contempt of outward apparel, and carriage, in his place: then he
did good by his exemplary innocence of life, and approved uprightness, in
administration of justice. I will not deny, but true Religion may suffer by too
much, and affected formality: but the contempt of all Ceremonies, must be
acknowledged, to be the highway to Atheism; or no Religion at all: which is
the worse of the two.

I remember I have read in Calvin, of a certain Staff, which was the Insigne or
proper badge of Supreme Authority, in that Town where he lived. He calls it
sacrum baculum; a sacred staff; and says plainly, that the people generally
gave so much respect to it, that the very sight of it (when the authority of
the persons did not, or could not: so I understand him:) did appease tumults,
and prevent slaughters: so that the breaking of that staff, in a tumult, which
at other times did use to appease tumults, was looked upon, as highest
contempt, and rebellion. How should that Staff, I wonder, become so sacred, and
of such authority in the eyes of the people; but as it was an outward sign
(confirmed by long use and time) of power and authority? The persons, to whom
the reverence was properly due, often changed; but the Staff still continuing
the same, long time, and accustomance, was of that force, that it added
reverence to the persons, and contributed not a little to the maintenance of
that Authority, which was due unto them. If this be the nature of men, in point
of Signs, and Ceremonies, civil: why should not Religious Signs and Ceremonies
(used with moderation, and discretion) be a help to devotion, and a
preservation to reverence, as well? We have had sad experience in our late
confusions, when the very Prayers of men, first brought into contempt, by their
unmannerly sitting, and other misbehaviour in the Church; were heard by many,
as ordinary Ballads, in the streets; and indeed, were not better (many times;)
by their affected nonsense, (though I believe, many could not help it:) and
familiarity with Almighty God. Was this Reformation according to the best, or
worst Reformed Churches? But we may easily guess, what was intended by the
contrivers of that horrid Oath; and the contempt of God, and all holy Rites,
and Ceremonies, was a visible effect of it.

It is true, when a Rite or Ceremony, though never so good and warrantable,
has been disused in a place, or never used; it may seem strange at first; as
apparel, that a man has not been used unto, though never so comely of it self;
by children, and fools, especially: (such I mean, that know little of the
world, besides the place of their birth, and usual abode) is looked upon with
admiration, if not derision. But wiser men, who judge of what they see, by the
nature of things, and not by vulgar apprehensions; they will soon be satisfied,
if their reason be satisfied. Yet some men, though wise and prudent enough,
otherwise, (too much austerity, perchance, may be some cause:) have naturally
such an antipathy to Ceremonies, that Nature (if they look not to it carefully)
will sooner overcome their Reason; then Reason, their Nature. But there is
danger in it: not only because rash censures, in this kind, may give just
offense, and cause divisions amongst Brethren: but because, by yielding too
much to nature, we may condemn them sometimes unwarily, to whom we acknowledge
all submission and reverence to be due; and so condemn our selves, at the same
time, though against our wills, that we condemn them. But I shall be better
understood, by giving an example.

St. Paul, 1 Cor. xv. among other arguments, by which he does prove the
Resurrection of the Dead; or rather does reprove their inconstancy in the
Faith, that denied it: one is, in these words, v. 29. What shall they do, that
are baptized for the dead, if the dead rise not, why are they then baptized for
the dead?

How many ways, these words by several Expositors, and other learned men, are
interpreted, and what I my self think most probable, I will not take upon me to
give the Reader an account, not for the difficulty, but because it would not be
much to our purpose. The most obvious, and literal Interpretation, certainly;
much confirmed by the observation of a very learned Philologist, of the
difference between (...) and (...), is, that St. Paul by these words, does
allude to the custom of some of that time, and Church; which was, if any
converted to the Christian Faith, died unbaptized, to substitute another to be
baptized for him, though dead. That this was done really, by diverse in the
Primitive times, we have the clear testimony of some ancient Fathers, and
others: as Tertullian, Chrysostom, Epiphanius; whom learned Justellus, in his
Notes upon the Codicem Can. Eccles. Univers. does cite. But those they speak
of, the Cerinthians and Marcionists, besides that they were Heretics, were not
then in being, when S. Paul wrote. And whether they were the first institutors
of it, (which is possible; grounding upon those very words of St. Paul, as they
understood them; as Theophylact does intimate:) or whether they received it
from some that lived when St. Paul wrote; does not appear by those testimonies.
However, as I said before; the most obvious and literal sense, that can be made
of the words, is, to understand them as spoken of such a custom or practice,
by some of that Church, to whom St. Paul did write. And it does appear* both by
the 18th. Canon of Codex Ecclesiae Afric. and by the 83. Canon of the Council
in Trullo, that it continued a custom a long time, in diverse Churches, among
them that were no Heretics. Those first Christians, certainly, did by it,
innocently testify their Faith, and certain* belief* concerning the
Resurrection of the Dead; their charity also prompting them, to use all means
imaginable, though not commanded, or at all necessary, to secure them that were
dead* St. Paul (it must be gtanted, if it were his meaning, as there is great
probability:) saw no hurt in it; and therefore does mention it, without
reproof. But Calvin, a rigid man naturally, against Ceremonies, and ever
suspicious of the worst, he calls it, a profanation of Baptism: a wicked
heathenish superstition; a sacrilegious, and Magical abuse of Baptism: and will
by no means allow, though he grant it the most rceceived interpretation, that
S. Paul should be so understood. It is well, he would not have St. Paul to be a
Patron of Magic. But what if Calvin's interpretation of St. Paul's words, be
thought by others, forced, violent, not at all probable: and that other, which
he does so reject, as countenancing those abominations, (as he would have it:)
be thought the only true, or that has any probability and this, by
Protestants of good credit, who lived in Geneva, since Calvin? Was not Diodat a
man of some credit, in Geneva; and his Annotations upon the Scripture, in great
esteem? Well; what says he upon these words of St. Paul, in his third and last
Editions of his Annotations; as he is expressed, (for I have not the Original
Italian, at this time:) by the English Translator? Which are baptized for the
dead: so St. Paul: From this manner of speech (says he,) it appears, that the
Apostle means not an ordinary Rite of the Church, but a particular custom of
some Christians; of whom Antiquity makes mention: and it should seem, that the
beginning thereof, was, if not altogether good, and laudable; yet, at least,
tolerable. Which was, that when any one died in the confession of Christ's
Faith, before he could receive Baptism; some of his kindred or friends, etc.
And again: The end of this particular Ceremony was, the profession of the
expectation of the blessed Resurrection of Believers. In following Ages, this
thing came to be an abuse, and superstition.

The same Interpretation is followed by learned Hugo Grotius. And the Jews have
a custom to this day, (when it began, I know not:) if a child die before he be
circumcised; that is, before the eighth day; he is circumcised nevertheless,
and a name given him over his grave: as Buxtorfius, and others testify.
Certainly, besides profession of their Faith; there was somewhat in this
custom very considerable, to keep people in the opinion of the use, and
necessity (ordinarily) of Baptism: which was much better, then that horrible
contempt of it (and of Christ himself, in it:) which among Precisians and
Puritans; as in our late confusions, to the great damage (as to the ordinary
means:) of innocent souls, and as great scandal of true Orthodox Christians,
did appear unto all men; is usual and ordinary: and not of Baptism only, but
of the Eucharist also: which Calvin (this contempt of it, I mean) did so much
detest. Now if this were St. Paul's meaning, for which there is so much
probability; and is so positively and peremptorily maintained, where Calvin's
name is yet in greatest credit: what shall we say, that St. Paul was much to
blame, for his apparent countenancing of so heathenish, magical, an abuse and
superstition; as Calvin does censure this custom? or that Calvin was much to
blame, to judge so rashly and rigidly of a custom, which if not altogether
good and laudable; (to use Diodate's words) yet was tolerable: and, as a bare
profession of Faith, (as then used:) and due respect unto the Sacrament of
Baptism, we might say, very commendable; but it will serve, (if St. Paul were
in the right:) to say, not to be excepted against.

But for Calvin, though he was a rigid man, naturally; and especially in point
of Ceremonies; and might over-shoot himself sometimes, in his censures and
opinions; yet he was a godly pious man, otherwise; a man of great worth, and
parts; and by what he writes of some particular Ceremonies; in some places,
very moderately; but especially, of the necessity, or expediency, at least, of
a standing Liturgy; we may probably guess, had he lived in England, and been
better acquainted with the true state of businesses, he would have been of
another mind, in many things. But what shall we say of them, who (to pass by
what they have done, when the confusions of the times gave them the
opportunity; which, I wish heartily, their present carriage would suffer us
altogether to forget:) are yet ready to cry out against whatsoever they allow
not, (a Surplice, perchance, or the sign of the Cross in Baptism; and the
like:) as Popish, Antichristian, Idolatrous; and would have the world believe,
that Conscience is the cause of these outcries: what shall we say of them?
That these be the Saints; the beloved of the Lord, The Life of Faith; a Sermon
preached by R. B. Jul 22 1660.
(as one does style them) the apple of his eye: the people that are sure to
prevail, and reign with him for ever? Does he not mean, the only true
Christians of the world? I know not what other sense to make of the words. O
horror! O infatuation! O deluded people!

Deluded? They that are so against their wills, they may be pitied. But with
the Readers leave, I will for conclusion, give the world an account ( I know
not any now living, that can do it better) of a business which once in the days
of King James of blessed memory occasioned much talk; whereby it will appear
clearly, that these men, these precise anticeremonial, antiprelatical men,
generally; (or many of them, at least:) are willing to be deluded, and wilfully
delude others: being persuaded, it seems (which we noted of Popish zealots,
before) that no means are unlawful, whereby the cause may be advanced.

In the year of the Lord 1624* a book was set out, entitled: The original of
idolatries; or, The birth of Heresies. First faithfully gathered out of sundry
Greek and Latin Authors; as also out of diverse learned Fathers: By that famous
and learned Isaac Casaubon, and by him published in French, for the good of
Gods Church: And was translated in English for the benefit of this Monarchy: By
ABRAHAM DARCIE. I was then a young Student in Oxford. I heard of the book, and
great commendations of it, before I saw it. When I had seen it, and read some
part; I know not whether more sensible of the ignorance, that possesses
ordinary men; or of the wrong that was done to my Father particularly; but
troubled I was, I am sure, very much: and that which most troubled me, was the
report of the acceptance the book had found at the hands, as of many others;
generally; so of that blessed and learned King, particularly, whom I knew very
able, as most men in the Realm, to judge of such ware. The chief end, and
subject of the book, I found, was to prove, that the Mass, (a word of great
extent and antiquity; which made the Authors of the Augustane Confession,
subscribed by Calvin, say, Falso accusantur Ecclesiae nostrae, quod missam
aboleant: retinetur enim missa apud nos, and summa reverentia celebratur.) or
rather indeed the whole Liturgy; ancient and late; and every part of it; was
derived from ancient Heathens, Numa Pompilius, and I know not whom: some part
also taken out of the Alcoran: which to prove, his Authors, for the most part,
are some late collectors of Roman Antiquities, as Blondus, Alexander ab
Alexandro, and the like; who say no such thing: but from what they say of the
Romans, he makes his inferences and applications, as he list himself; more like
the dreams of a distempered man, then the words of a man endowed with ordinary
sense and reason. Truly, I could as soon have been persuaded, that all the
ballads that were sung in London, those four years my Father lived there, were
of his making, as to believe he had any hand in that book: and I further
believe, that himself, had he been alive, had as easily digested, to have been
thought the Author of the one, as of the other. But a fierce book it is,
against Ceremonies: against Superstition, and Popery: that is enough to
satisfy those, who are such friends to zeal, that they stand not at all, upon
truth, or knowledge; the proper character of a Puritan or a Jesuit.

Well: though Nathaniel Butter, the Bookseller, that vented them; had told me
beforehand, when he saw I did not like the business, he was sure, I should
have no thanks, if I did question the book; and bid me earnestly, to consider
of it: yet I was resolved, whatever came of it to do my utmost, to do the
truth, and my Father right. I first addressed my self to some, to whom by their
place, as I conceived, the cognizance of such things, did most properly belong,
but there indeed, though otherwise, and upon other occasions, looked upon with
favor enough, I had little thanks, it was far from it. After that, I had no
hopes, but in the King; to whom I was well known; as my Father had been before,
much more. The King was then at Theobalds, as I remember: I addressed my self
to one of those Reverend Bishops, who usually waited upon the King. By whose
means a letter of mine being showed unto the King; (who indeed had received the
book, because it bare my Fathers name, with much gracious acceptance; but had
not yet had the leisure to look into it:) after he had pawsed a while, and as I
was told, examined some places; grew into a great passion, that such a cheat
was put upon him, and others. Certain it is, that some were put to it, to make
their peace, whom the King apprehended accessories by their neglect, or the
neglect of those, whom they trusted: and suddenly after, Nathaniel Butter, the
Bookseller; and Abraham Darcy, the Translater, were committed. This Darcy was a
man of a very bad life, generally; and lived, or made use, at least (as I was
told by one of the Ministers of the French Congregation, in London, who said he
had been charged by their Consistory about it:) toward his living, of an
employment so base, and scandalous, that the very name is base, and offensive
to modest ears. Upon this, the noise was all London over, (and I suppose it
went further:) that the Popish Bishops, at the Court, by their calumnies and
misinformation, had set on the King against a godly book, and some godly men,
by whose means it had been published. I am very sure, that liberal supplies of
money were sent from some, that were very near the King, to the Translator;
whilst he was in prison: who (some others having, at last, with much
importunity, mitigated the King to his enlargment:) thereby instead of
punishment, made a benefit of his imprisonment. Yet before this, (which is the
thing I would have the Reader take good notice of) a French book, the original
of the English translation; being produced; it had been found out, that an old
title page, had been, by art, and cunning, transformed; the years altered, and
the name of Isaac Casaubon inserted; and thus the world for mere gain and
lucre, (for I do not believe, that there was any further mystery in it, at the
first:) shamefully abused. Other editions, or copies of the same book, were
found, and showed to the King; yea translations of it, that had been made, when
my father was yet scarce born. Besides somewhat had been written and published
by me, in the Latin tongue, in Vindication of my Father; which by the Kings
command, had been translated into French, and English: all this, whilst the
business was yet fresh, and in frequent debate; or soon after.

A man would think, there had been enough done (besides the quality of the book
it self, before spoken of:) to satisfy the world; if apparent truth and
visible evidences, would have done it. Yet for all this, some years after, the
same book, or English translation, was again (we may guess by whose
procurement) reprinted; where, I cannot tell certainly; but at Amsterdam, I
guess: with this title: The Original of Popish Idolatry: or, The birth of
heresies. Published under the name of Casaubon; and called in the same year,
upon misinformation. But now upon better consideration, reprinted with
allowance, Being a true and exact description etc. Printed -- 1630. A preface
also was added, in justification of the book, and first editors of it: where
among others of the same stuff, these words are: that they that did suppress
it, were either Papists in their hearts; or such as hold with Papists, that
ignorance is the mother of devotion: that the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Chrst,
was departing from the land, etc. and the like. And since that, a base Pamphlet
came out, I know not where Printed, much to the same purpose; in the very front
whereof, these goodly words are; by way of approbation: D. Causabonus, ille
eruditissimus, Caeremoniarum Ethnicarum and Diabolicarum in Pontificias and
Episcopales mutationem, terris demonstrare promittebat. Quod ego Casauboni
promissum judico dignissimum, quod typographiae beneficio, ad manus plurium
perveniat. It is but short, but all of the same strain, and spirit, as the
former book, to which it does referr.

Evidences I know are obvious enough; and we needed not have looked back so
far; (later times have afforded store;) how much those men ( I speak it of the
generality:) regard truth, or sincerity, when lying and juggling will advantage
the cause. But because I was particularly interested, in this account, I hope
the Reader will accept of it, and make good use, (my chiefest aim:) as occasion
shall offer it self.

FINIS.

