THE QUESTION, TO Whom it belonged Anciently TO PREACH: AND Whether all PRIESTS
might, or did: Discussed out of ANTIQUITY: As also, what Preaching is, properly.

By MERIC CASAUBON, D. D. and one of the Prebends of Chapter Chapter CANTERBURY.

LONDON, Printed for Timothy Garthwait, at the Kings Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1663

OF PREACHING, AS Anciently used.
SInce the late Directions to Ministers, sent by his Grace of Canterbury to all
Parishes; a Question was put to me by a Friend, a Pious Orthodox Minister, and
well affected to the Government, what ground there was for those words in the
said Directions; That Preaching was not anciently the work of every Priest, but
was restrained to the choicest persons for gravity, prudence, and learning: Not
that he so much doubted, as I suppose, the truth of what was alleged, or
scrupled at the obedience and submission, but that his obedience and submission
(for to that purpose he expressed himself) upon fuller information and
evidence, might be more rational; or rationally justifiable before God and men,
if there should be occasion. I cannot say I use his very words, but to this
effect I am sure, as I apprehended him. His Question came to me by a Letter,
and by a Letter Answer was made. In my Answer, I was forced to contract my self
as much as I could, being then wholly taken up by some other more pressing
duties of my place. But afterward when I was more at leisure, consulting with
my Adversaria, and finding, that as many (known to me) as had treated of that
Argument, had not only done it very slightly, as I thought, but also committed
diverse mistakes in setting down the practice of Antiquity; and that it might be
the case of more then this one, who had addressed himself to me for further
satisfaction: I thought it would not be unseasonable service, if I published
what by diligent reading was come to my observation upon this Argument. I shall
not keep my self so precisely to the words of the Question, but take the
liberty of any thing that offers it self by the way, having some reference to
it, and may be useful and fit to be known of its self.

And first of all, that there may be no mistake about the word, wherein some
men of no small account, for want of a right understanding, have been misled in
their judgments and opinions; it will be very requisite, that we consider and
agree, what Preaching is in general; and what is that Preaching particularly,
and by what names known unto the Ancients, which is the subject of this
discourse.

I will not insist upon the Latitude of the words, (...), or (...), in Greek;
or of concio, or sermo, and such others, whether in Greek or Latin. Though
Optatus Bishop of Milevis in Africa, was once put to it, when he wrote,
Episcopalis tractatus, probatur ab omnibus sanctitate vestitus: salutatione
scilicet geminata: yet I think there is no man so ignorant in these days, but
can distinguish between a set Speech or Oration in general, of any common
subject, ordinary or extraordinary, public or private, but publicly
delivered, or fitted, at least, for public audience, (besides the difference,
either of places, or persons;) and that which we usually call a Sermon, though
both go often under one title in ancient Books. But whether any set Speech
publicly delivered (setting aside the consideration of the Speaker at present)
tending to reformation of life; as, a serious exhortation to virtue, and
contempt of the world, disswasion from vice, and all sensuality, and the like,
may be called Preaching, may be some question, and the resolution of it of some
consequence. It is very certain, that long before and since Christ, both among
the Romans and Graecians (not to speak of other Nations less known in those
days) such a practice was, answerable in many respects, to what we now call
Preaching. Certainly, if the visible fruits of what we call mortification and
renouncing of the world, if outward abstinence and sobriety in life and
conversation, if liberal distributing to the necessities of others, if
strictest bonds of mutual love and amity be the proper effects and evidences of
powerful Preaching, it cannot be denied, but such have been the effects often
of that kind of Preaching which has been in use among Heathens; for which we
have not the authority of the Heathens only, but of Christians also, Fathers
and others, who bear witness and tell us of particular examples. And though it
is not improbable, that many such things might be done for ostentation only, or
some other worldly end, as among Christians but too often: yet there is more
ground to believe, that more frequently Speakers dealt with all simplicity,
aiming at the edification (as we now speak) of their hearers, as may appear by
that excellent passage of Musonius the Philosopher (who lived under Nero the
Roman Emperor) recorded by Aulus Gellius l. V^. c. 1. and by sundry Epistles
of Seneca, as particularly the 52. and 108. well worth the reading. Whence it
is, that the Greek Fathers use the word (...) (especially St. Chrysostom) so
frequently, for piety and godliness And this may be some reason too, which made
some of the Greek Fathers (as understood by many, at least) to extend the power
(...), in general, so far as to maintain, that even before the true and
essential (...) (or Word) the second Person of the Trinity was fully revealed
unto the world; the natural (...) (reason, or speech, though natural, yet the
gift of God, that too) well managed and improved with care and industry, was
able to save; of which assertion, for it, and against it, much has been
written by some late writers.

But though for the matter of their moral discourses and exhortations, they
might have much affinity, those that were made by Heathens, with those that
were made by Christians, called Sermons; yea, and excel too for the most part
in pregnancy of wit, and ornaments of speech; yet one main difference is this,
that their grounds and motives related unto this life only, as having no
knowledge, much less assurance of another life after this: which will much
aggravate the case of Christians at the day of Judgment, who having so much
more to ground upon, as promises of Eternity, and being partakers of the Divine
Nature, have therefore the more to answer for; if exhortations do not work more
potently upon them, then they did upon Heathens, among whom nevertheless they
did produce such wonderful effects.

Now if we look into the property of the Greek word (...), usually translated
into Latin, praedicare; from whence our English, to preach, is derived; it does
import a solemn proclaiming, or announcing of somewhat of public concernment
which was not known before; so does (...) too: both which words have particular
relation unto Christ his blessed Incarnation for the Redemption of the world.
His coming into the world, who was the subject of so many Prophesies before,
and the expectation (as both the Greek and Latin translation render it, Genesis
49. 10.) and the desire of all Nations, Hag. 2. 7. as it was solemnly
proclaimed or Preached by Angels at the first, so it is still the proper
subject of all Preaching; and though moral discourses and exhortations be also
necessary, as a consequent of Christ his coming into the world; yet are they
not properly Preaching, such as the Church may challenge as peculiar unto it
self, except they be grounded upon Christ, whether as a Priest, or a Prophet,
or a King, in the authority of his commands, the obligation of his example and
sufferings, and the excellency of his rewards. For the truth is, the
consideration of Christ laid aside, though good language and excellency of wit
may go far with some men to persuade, and with all, or most, to please, and
delight; yet bare virtue of it self, all things soberly considered, will prove
generally but a weak Plea; and as Brutus at his death is said to have bemoaned
himself; rather words, then reality. We conclude therefore, First, That moral
discourses and exhortations by set speeches and elaborate elocution are not
properly Preaching, but as grounded, not implicitly only, (which may be said of
the speeches of Philosophers in some sense) but explicitly and expressly upon
Christ, and the ends of his coming unto the world.

Secondly, That all public performances (by speech, or word of mouth) tending
to the manifestation of Christ, and his coming unto the world, and the ends of
his coming, (to which end, holy days were instituted and are of special use,)
may truly and properly be called Preaching.

I say public, because indeed the original word (...), does import some kind
of publickness. But then we must know that a man may be said to Preach
publicly, as well he that goes from house to house, so far as he can, or is
permitted, as he that does it in a public auditory before a multitude: for
which we have ground in the Scripture it self, Acts XX. 20, 21. (...):
publicly and from house to house: in Socrates his expression upon the like
occasion, (...). Plat. (...). p. 121. Greg. Mag. Epist. lib. 4. 44. ad Romans


Gregory, Pope of Rome the first of that name (not unworthily surnamed the
Great) in one of his Epistles, has these words concerning Deacons: Iniquum
esse, ut in Diaconatus ordine constituti, modulationi vocis inserviant, quos ad
praedicationis of ficium, eleemosynarumque studium, vacare congruebat.
Bellarmin. De Cler. l. 1. c. 13. does quote this passage, to prove that Deacons
were sometimes allowed to Preach. But this does not prove, that they were
allowed sometimes, but that it was part of their duty at all times. Again, in
the Council of Ancyra, can. 2. lapsed Deacons, though permitted upon their
repentance to continue in the place; that is, to retain the title and honor of
it, yet not permitted to discharge the duties, not to minister at the holy
Table, by distributing the consecrated Bread and Wine, nor (...) to Preach.
Filesacus, a learned Antiquary, does quote this Canon (as Bellarmin, St.
Gregory) to prove Fill. varia de episcoporum authorit. c. 15. p. 349.
that Deacons were allowed to Preach sometimes. But by this Canon (as by
Gregory's passage) it would appear, that it does belong unto them as part of
their office: And which is worse, because (...), and (...), are promiscuously
used often, to signify Preaching; in stead of (...), in the Canon; Filesacus
either by a mistake of memory, or purposely, thinking to interpret the one by
the other, does substitute (...), which does much alter the case, and would
oblige us to believe, that the Canon did intend it of Preaching indeed (as
Preaching is ordinarily understood) as part of the Deacons duty. But otherwise,
it is sure enough, that neither the Canon by (...), nor Pope Gregory by
praedicare did intend any such thing, as is now understood by Preaching. In two
respects Deacons were then said (...), or praedicare, according to the
propriety of the words, the Greek especially. First, in that it was part of
their office to read the Gospel at the administration of the Sacraments: For
though there were the Lectores besides, whose peculiar office it was to read
the Scripture to the people generally; yet at certain times, as peculiarly at
the time of the administration of the Sacrament of Christ's body, the Deacons
read the Gospels: so that as the Lectores were properly said praedicare, when
they read in the Church, audibly and distinctly, both the mysteries of our
Faith, those especially that concern Christ revealed, and the instructions and
exhortations contained in the Word of God; Decret. 1. did. 21. c. 1. so for
the same reason and respect were the Deacons too when they read the Gospels.
And so is the word used in the very Scriptures, Acts xv. 21. where Moses is
said to be Preached, that is, read (as St. James does interpret himself) in the
Synagogues every Sabbath day: (...) is the word there. But Gregory does explain
himself, when what he called before praedicationis officium, he does afterward
as it were expound by Evangelicae lectionis officium. Again, Deacons were said
(...), or praedicare, when by loud voice or proclamation, they did warn the
people in several parts of the Service what was done, or to be done, that
accordingly they might prepare and order themselves, both in their hearts and
with their bodies, agreeably to that which was done or performed by the
Ministers of God, that all things might be performed with good order and due
reverence. So they were said (...) (praedicare) (...): and (...), or (...), and
the like. Among other cries belonging to every part of the Liturgy (in the
Greek Church) one was, (...), in giving warning to the people (which was the
innocence of those holy times, which had some ground also upon the custom of
the times:) when they should salute one another with a holy kiss: which
continued till Cyrill of Jerusalem, as does appear by his Catecheses, which
Catecheses I have, compared with an ancient Manuscript with many additions and
alterations. But this is according to the Printed Copy; which must be corrected
(according to the translation) (...). which Cyr. Hieros. Catach. mist. 5. p.
534.
does very well fit the coherence. The Heathens also in their Sacra, had their
(...), to the same purpose, to regulate the carriage of the people, and to
prevent confusion; mentioned by Athenaeus, in his fourth Book, and by others.
But this, by the way only.

After so much of Preaching in general, and different notions of the word
(...), and praedicare: which are the most ordinary words, by which Preaching in
ancient Books is expressed; to make some application of what has been said to
the Question proposed, and so to a positive decision, or determination of it:

I say, first: That Preaching at large; by way of Catechism, or by way of
familiar, but solid and sober reasoning; tending, not only to the publishing or
spreading of the Gospel of Christ, and conversion of Infidels; but also to the
confirmation, and further edification of them that were already converted; did
always belong, as unto all devout Christians in general, as opportunity did
offer, and ability did afford; so particularly unto all Priests, as part of
their charge and Ministry.

I say secondly, that at the very beginning of Christianity, it is the opinion
of some, that all things or most things at least, were common to all men. So
the Author of the Comment upon the Epistles, ascribed unto St. Ambrose, who
upon the fourth Chapter of the Epistle to the Ephesians, has these words:
Tamen postquam omnibus locis Ecclesiae sunt constitutae, and officia ordinata;
aliter composita res est, quam coeperat. Primum enim, omnes docebant, and omnes
baptizabant, quibuscunque diebus vel temporibus fuisset occasio. Nec enim
Philippus, etc. Vt ergo cresceret Ecclesia, and multiplicaretur, omnibus inter
initia concessum est, and evangelizare, and baptizare, and Scripturas in
Ecclesia explanare. At ubi omnta loca circumplexa est Ecclesia, conventicula
(in a good sense, as frequently in ancient Books) constituta sunt, and
rectores; and caetera officia in Ecclesiis sunt ordinata, ut nullus de clero
auderet, qui ordinatus (appointed, licensed) non esset, praesumere officium,
quod sciret non sibi creditum, vel concessum, etc. Hinc ergo est, quod neque
diaconi in populo praedicant; ((...), here) neque Clerici vel Laici baptizant
(so all editions I have seen; and so quoted by learned men: but I know not what
sense can be made of the words, except we read: neque ubi Clerici, Laici
baptizant: or to that effect; which is agreeable to what Tertullian, and others
witness of those times: that where a Clergyman was not to be had; that is, in
case of necessity; it was lawful for any to baptize. Except Clerici be here
intended properly the inferioris gradus Clerici: that is, all under the order
of a Deacon. For Episcopi, Presbyteri, and Diaconi, were often joined under the
title of Sacerdotes, in general) neque quocunque die credentes tinguntur, nisi
aegri. But it was not so long; nor then neither, generally, so: but at
extraordinary times, and occasions only.

Thirdly, I say: That as soon as matters of the Church came to some regulation;
and a certain Government by Bishops, Priests, and Deacons established: Bishops
within their own Diocese, had the sole power of holy functions: Priests and
Deacons were added to them, to help them, and to be employed by them, according
to their degree and abilities, as they should see occasion. So that a Priest
might not baptize, nor administer the Communion, nor teach, or interpret the
Scriptures de loco superiore sedis Ecclesiae, as St. Augustine calls it, or de
cathedra, as St. Ambrose: as a (...) or a Doctor: (for so they were then
called, that did it, either by their own authority as Bishops; or were allowed
it, as Priests: which is the preaching now in use) without peculiar allowance
of the Bishop of the Diocese. In many places Priests generally were not allowed
it: it was not then thought to belong unto them, but unto Bishops only.

For baptizing, and the administration of the Lords Supper, we have Ignatius
his testimony, in those words which are found in the ancient Copies, and are
warranted by the old Interpreter, to be genuine; the words are these, (...).
Ignat. Epist ad Smyrn. ed. 4. p. 117
And a little after, (...), etc. The Latin there is, Nemo praeter Episcopum
aliquid agat eorum, quae ad Ecclesiam pertinent. Firma Eucharistia reputetur,
quae ab Episcopo concessa fuerit, etc. Propterea non licet sine Episcopo neque
baptizare, etc. So Tertullian of baptism: Dandi quidem (baptismum) habet jus
summus sacerdos, qui est Episcopus. Dehinc Presbyter, and Diaconus, non tamen
sine Episcopi authoritate, propter Ecclesiae honorem, quo salvo, salva pax est.
And so St. Jerome, Ecclesiae salus in summi Sacerdotis dignitate Hieron. cont.
Lucif. 10. 1. p. 199.
pendet: cui si non exors quaedam, and ab hominibus (s. omnibus) eminens detur
potestas, tot in Ecclesiis efficientur schismata, quot sacerdotes. Inde venit,
ut sine chrismate (which Chrisma therefore was provided, and for that purpose
distributed to the Priests, at certain times of the year, by the Bishop of
every See, as by ancient Canons does appear) and Episcopi jussione, neque
Presbyter, neque Diaconus, jus habeat baptizandi. As for the Communion, or
Eucharist; besides Ignatius, whom we have heard but now; the author of the
Epistle, ad Rusticum Narbonensem, de septem gradibus Ecclesiae, by diverse (and
indeed it has much of Jerome in it, and is ancient enough, whosoever is the
Author) ascribed unto St. Jerome; and in the Canon Law, Decret. distin. 95. c.
6. registered under that name; Nec ego dico praesentibus Episcopis atque
astantibus altari, Presbyteros posse Sacramenta conficere. Sed si forte usus
exegerit, etc. We might add to those, the supposed Dionysius Areopagita; whom
though we do not acknowledge under that name; and could give some reasons, if
need were, that have not yet been given, to prove him counterfeit: yet we
acknowledge him, and all men must, ancient enough to bear testimony in this
cause. He speaks as peremptorily, as any does; and ascribes all power, both of
baptizing, and of consecrating, and teaching, to the Bishop: but he is not
easily to be understood, but by them that are acquainted with his style; and
worse in a translation, except a man take the liberty of a Paraphrase, then in
his own original language. But it may suffice to have named him; there is no
need of his words, which have so much of affected obscurity.

Now, though it might easily be granted perchance, that those who were not
allowed to baptize, or to consecrate, without permission; were much less
allowed to Preach: yet there is much to be said in that behalf, of Preaching
particularly, which is our particular undertaking here; and therefore, not to
be omitted. But I will first inquire into the reasons, or grounds, why it was
so ordered; and produce my testimonies, in their orders.

The first ground, or reason was, because the Bishop, representing more
immediately Christ himself, in his office; he was looked upon, as the
wellspring, from whom all holy duties were derived: which made him so absolute
in his Diocese, that it was accounted great usurpation for any man, to
challenge any power in the Church (in spiritualibus) but under him; and by his
deputation. This is well expressed, by the forenamed Author, who goes under the
name of Dionysius Areop. where he does tell us: that the supreme order in the
Ecclesiastical hierarchy, is both supreme, and lowest too: as comprehending
all others within its self. (...), says he, (...) Dion. Areop. (...).
(...). Which is yet more fully set out by Maximus, the Greek Scholiast. St.
Ambrose also, speaks much to the same effect, where he says, Ambros. ubis. p.
355.
Nam in Episcopo omnes ordines sunt, quia primus est sacerdos, and princeps and
propheta, and Evangelista, and caetera, ad implenda officia Ecclesiae in
ministerio fidelium. And so strict were they in those times, to preserve this
absoluteness of a Bishop in his Diocese, that by some Canons of the Church, no
less then deposition was the mulct, if one Bishop had presumed to preach in
another Diocese, without his leave first obtained: and this too, in those
times; when Bishops, wherever they were, at home (within their own Diocese) or
abroad, if no lawful impediment, as age, or other accidental indisposition of
body; or some other more advantageous employment to public concernments did
hinder; thought themselves bound, and by some Canons of Councils in some
places, were bound to preach every Sunday. I have heard, when young my self,
from some ancient Divines, that it was so in Queen Elizabeth's time; which among
the common people could not but add much to that veneration, which is due from
all men unto their place.

A second ground, or reason, was, the insufficiency of many Priests, in those
days (and when was it not so?) for so great an employment. What Seneca
somewhere says of his Philosophy, is very applyable here: Damnum quidem
fecisse Philosophiam, non erit dubium, postquam prostituta est: sed potest in
penetralibus suis ostendi, si modo non institorem, sed antistitem nacta est.
And this he speaks upon occasion of the many Philosophers of his Sen. ep. 53.
p. 240.
time, who thought themselves brave fellows, because people did run after them
to hear them, and with loud cries and acclamations testified their great
esteem, and approbation of their performances. This made them to applaud
themselves, because applause was the thing they sought after, and chiefly
proposed to themselves: but whether their admirers were really the better in
their lives, and conversation, for what they heard, was no part, or the least
part, at least, of their care: it being generally observed, that they profited
(or edified) least, who were most ready to applaud, and by outward expressions,
showed greatest pleasure. These he calls institores, and says, that Philosophy
was prostituted by them. And St. Austin has much to that purpose too: and so
diverse other Fathers. But this is not my business. When that is done, we may
think of it again in the end.

That insufficiency was a great reason, and that Preaching (such Pulpit
Preaching, or teaching by way of authority, which gave them the title of (...),
or Doctores) was thought too great a work, then, for every Priest (who might
find work enough otherwise, if they acquitted themselves, as they were bound)
to undertake, or to be trusted with; one passage of St. Chrysostom, will so
clearly evidence, that we shall not need to seek further. Upon those words of
S. Paul, in his first Epistle to the Corinthians and first Chapter (ver. 17.)
For Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach the Gospel: treating of the
labor and toylesomness of it (besides the danger, which he does not here
mention, but elsewhere he does; vain glory and popularity) (...). that is, to
preach the Gospel of Christ (out of the Pulpit as a Doctor, must be supplied in
the words) it is well, if one or two may be found that are fit: but to baptize,
any man that is but a Priest. And a little after, (...). Therefore, says he,
to this day we commit that (baptizing: he does only mention baptizing, though
much more did belong unto Priests, because baptizing only is mentioned by S.
Paul) to the weaker: but the business of preaching (or teaching) to them that
are more learned (or wise:) nothing can be clearer, or more express, then this.
To St. Chrysostom, we shall add Balsamon, who was well acquainted with
Ecclesiastical businesses, both of his time, and of former times, (and though
no friend to the Pope, yet is commended for his diligence by diverse Papists)
whose assertion upon the Councils, inmore then one place, is, (...), that
Priests are not Preachers, or Teachers; and that (...). That to teach the
people (that is, de loco superiore, or out Bals. ad Cens. 2. Syn. Constable. and
Can. 19. Syn. Trull.
of the Pulpit) is granted unto the Bishops only; (or unto them, who have
authority from the Bishops, must be supplied out of others, though not here
expressed.) The same more fully, upon the sixty fourth Canon of the Council in
Trullo: (...), Page 439.
etc. To teach the people of God, and to interpret the divine decrees ((...)
the Scriptures) is granted by the grace of the holy Spirit unto Bishops only,
and unto them that are permitted (or authorized) by them. It is true, that the
same Balsamon elsewhere, does seem to contradict himself, when upon the fifty
eighth Canon of those called the Apostles, having first laid down that (...).
he does add, (...), etc. That such also (teachers) Priests, ought to be, as
they that have the privilege of higher seats, (in the Quire, or Church) next
unto the Bishop. But in effect, there is no repugnancy; neither in the words of
Balsamon, nor in the words of the Canon. For (...) (which is the expression of
the Canon) to instruct to godliness, in general: there is no question, but
Priests also are bound by their office, as Priests: and in case they be allowed
by the Bishop, as Doctors, to teach, or to preach out of the Pulpit, and
neglect it, (which is all that can be made of Balsamons interpretation of the
Canon, compared with other places) they are liable to censure. Indeed upon the
twentieth Canon of the Synodus Trull. we find somewhat, that has much more
appearance of repugnancy: in those words: Sacerdotis autem munus; accipe etiam
de docendi munere; and non de sola sacrificii celebratione. Sacerdotes enim
antiquitus, necesse habebant etiam docere. But whose words these are, I know
not: for I find no Greek in the Text, to answer to this Latin.

Now for the Latin Church: Of the Churches of Africa, so numerous in those
days; we have good records, attested by the most eminent of the Latin Fathers,
as St. Jerome, and St. Augustine: that till Valerius his time (by whom St.
Augustine was consecrated) Priests were not allowed to preach; or to speak more
properly, that the Pulpit was one of the Bishops peculiar privileges.
Valerius, they all say, was the first, that did alter the custom in his Church:
whose example, was soon followed by others: as peculiarly by Aurelius Bishop of
Carthage; for which he was much commended by St Augustine: as may appear by
those congratulatorie Letters of his unto the said Aurelius, upon that
occasion. Baronius has it at large out of Possidonius, Ierom, and St.
Augustine. Tentavit S. Valerius (says Baronius) quod ante nullus Episcoporum
Africanorum attigerat; nempe ut Presbyter Evangelium praedicaret, cum non nisi
Episcopi id obirent muneris. Which also is attested by Optatus Milevitanus, a
Bishop of those days, in his books against the Donatists, who does not argue
Opt. l. 3. contra Don.
it, but delivers it upon occasion, as a thing notoriously known, that
tractare, est Episcoporum. However, those testimonies in Baronius, deliver it
not so generally; that it was not lawful, absolutely: but not lawful, or
allowed, that they should do it, praesente Episcopo. But to our purpose, it
comes all to one, whether they might not absolutely, before, till Valerius had
broken the ice, and others followed his example: or, whether it was praesente
Episcopo only, that it was not lawful; certain it is, that all did not; and
none did, but those that were licensed by the Bishops. And certainly, that was
the practice over all Churches in those days: neither do I believe, that one
Priest of a hundred, was allowed it, or ever did it.

But we must distinguish of times too. For there was a time, when all Priests
had their maintenance from the Bishop immediately; and were called sportulantes
Presbyteri; and were employed by him, as he saw occasion. Then, after the
increase of Christianism, Parishes came to be divided; and upon that division,
particular Parishes assigned to particular Priests. Since which time, it is
apparent by some Canons of later Councils, that Priests (now Persons) were not
only allowed; but also, called upon, and enjoined to preach in their Parishes;
to which end Pulpits were erected in most Parishes.

But of all things I have read upon this Argument, I have always most wondered
at the relation of Sozomens, the Greek Historian; who, where he treats of
different customs, in different places, does attest, that as in Alexandria
(which is also attested by Socrates) the Bishop only did preach, or teach: so
in Rome, neither Bishop, nor any body else: his words are, (...), etc. and
then, (...). It is translated by Cassiodorus, in his, Historia, Tripartita,
Apud Romanos in unoquoque anno, semel psallunt alleluja; primo die Paschae, it
a ut Romani velut pro juramento habeant (a ridiculous mistake: he found it in
his Copy, as we have it to this day, (...), for (...); the true reading,
certainly; that is, pro re difficili and multi laboris habeant) ut hunc hymnum
audire mereantur (that is; audiant.) In qua Ecclesia, neque Episcopus, neque
alter quisquam coram populo docet. There is so much to be said against this, as
that I must needs mistrust a mistake. And yet it were as hard to believe, that
Sozomen, either (wittingly or willingly) would misinform, where he could be so
easily convinced: or could be misinformed himself, in a thing of so public
observation. I conceive the mistake may lie in those words, (...), which may
import (being translated, in Ecclesia) that it was not the fashion in Rome, for
any body to preach in the middle of the Church: but in the Quire only; or from
the stairs, or ascent, tending to the Quire, as in diverse other places.
History Records tell us, that Chrysostom, by reason of the multitude of
people, that flocked from all places to hear him, was forced to change his
place. Baronius says, he did, suggestum in medio Ecclesiae collocare; but I
think he is mistaken. For his Authors, though he name them not, were no other,
certainly, then Sozomen, and Nicephorus: both which say, that he did it, (...):
ex lectorum ambone, seu pulpito: from the readers Pulpit, seated in those
days, in the middle of the body of the Church. Now it is probable, that
others, both before, and since Chrysostom did the same. Socrates also, speaking
of Origens preaching, has the same words, (...). It seems therefore, that it
was usual enough, in those places: but not so at Rome. If so, then Cassiodore
was much mistaken, in rendering those words, in this place (for otherwise the
words will bear it very well; and of the two, it is the most warrantable
translation, as to the words) coram populo: where it was intended, in Ecclesia;
of the place, precisely. Or it may be, because Sermons were in the Quire, not
in the body of the Church, as elsewhere: though the people might come and hear;
yet not so many as when, or where, in the body of the Church: therefore not
thought so properly to preach (...), that is, populo. If any man can devise any
thing more probable, I shall be glad; for I have no great confidence in this.
But I have not yet met with it, I am sure.

However, this occasion being given me, I cannot but profess my great dislike,
that Service, and Sermon, should be parted any where; the one, in one place;
the other, in another; if it may possibly be avoided. Especially at such a
distance, as it is here with us, in the Cathedral and Metrapolitical Church of
Christ in Canterbury. I conceive it to be one main reason, that so few are
acquainted, and by consequent, not more in love, with the Service: which if
better known unto them, and the many benefits they might reap, by observing
diligently every part of it (which the ancient Fathers of the Church, do often
refer their auditors unto) would certainly be in far greater request; that I
say not, admiration: which yet I profess to believe, that it does highly
deserve, at the hands of all both religious and wise. That the place is not so
convenient for many to hear (though I believe there be but few Quires in
England, either more spacious, or more stately) is but a weak plea, against
such apparent mischief, by contempt of the Service, and therein of God himself;
of his holy Word especially, which makes a great part of the Service. But this
by the way only; out of a deep sense of the abuse, and earnest desire of
redress.

We will now consider, what can out of antiquity (for that is all we have to
do) be objected to the contrary; in opposition, I mean, to that assertion, (the
subject of our discourse) that Preaching was not anciently the work of every
Priest. Franciscus Bernardinus Ferrariensis, (to begin with him first) one of
the Doctors of the College of Milan, in his book, De ritu Concionum, Printed
at Milan, a. d. 1600. takes upon him to prove, jam inde a primis Ecclesiae
temporibus, concionandi munus etiam Fran. Bern. Fer. l. 11. c. 1
presbyterorum fuisse: That it belonged unto Bishops principally; (Episcoporum
maxim proprium fuisse) he does not deny. But he adds, Sed and presbyteros,
ijsdem primis Ecclesiae temporibus, public concionari solitos, quoniam quidem
non satis notum ijs videtur, qui multa in hanc rem collegerunt, Nos ex
Apostolicarum Constitutionum autore, etc. It should seem by him, some that had
undertaken the same before him, had performed it but very slenderly, as he
thought; and therefore did expect he should do them no small pleasure. His
chief, and as I may say, only Author (for the rest prove nothing of ancient
times; much less, de primis Ecclesiae temporibus) is the compiler of the
Apostolical Constitutions; so entitled. What some Protestants, great
pretenders to the knowledge of Antiquity, have made bold to affirm, concerning
these Constitutions, I know well enough. But great undertakers, are not always
the surest men, either to perform, or to be trusted too. The most learned
Papists, have given them over long ago, as Bellarmin, Baronius and others, as
not justifiable: and he that desires further satisfaction, let him read the
Prolegomena of that truly pious and learned Prelate, James Usher, Archbishop of
Armach, to his edition of Ignatius his Epistles: who is of opinion, that the
book, as now interpolated, was not known to the world, till the sixth age after
Christ. And in case it had been known before, some part of it; yet being a
counterfeit book, at the first; what credit his testimony, or, a testimony
rather (if it be the work of many hands) taken out of him, may deserve; let the
reader judge. The other testimonies, which he does produce, they concern later
times, and import no more then this, that power is given unto Priests: or, that
for the time to come, they are appointed and commanded to preach in their
Parishes; or lastly, that Bishops were to take care, that those whom they knew
able, should be employed: which rather shows, that anciently it was not so
ordinary for Priests to be employed; but not at all, that till licensed, or
appointed by the Bishop of the Diocese, they did ever presume (or might
legally) to do it. It is not doubted, but that all Priests, by virtue of their
ordination, have a legal capacity to preach, as now understood: but their
ordination does neither confer ability of performance, in point of parts: nor
gives power of actual execution at pleasure, for time, or place: the trial of
the one, and the allowance of the other, altogether depending of the Bishop, in
those times. So that in effect, all that Ferrarius does bring to prove his
assertion, for which he did expect thanks, it seems, from some, who had
attempted it before, but with little success; is no more then what we grant,
and may grant, without prejudice to our assertion, and present undertaking. The
reader may take notice, that the words of the Constitutions, quoted by
Ferrarius out of Turrianus his translation; are by Bovius (Episcopo Ostunensi)
very differently translated, quite to another sense, which has nothing of
Turr. p. 40. Bovi. ed. p. 44.
preaching in it. I had not at this time (I once had, I am sure) the Original
Greek to consult. But I guess, that Turrianus was in the right; and Bovius
mistaken.

But again: Possidonius in the life of St. Augustine, where he speaks of the
custom of the African Churches, that no Priest, absolutely, says Baronius; no
Priest before his Bishop, says Possidonius; might preach; and how that custom
was altered by Valerius; Et eidem presbytero (Augustino scil.) potestatem dedit
coram se in Ecclesia Evangelium praedicandi; ac frequentissime tractandi,
contra usum quidem, and consuetudinem Africanarum Ecclesiarum. Vnde etiam ei
nonnulli Episcopi detrahebant. Then follows, Sed ille vir venerabilis ac
providus, in Orientalibus id ex more fieri, sciens, utiliter Ecclesiae
consulens, etc. What can we infer upon this? This, as I conceive: Not that a
Priest, by the custom of the Place might preach in the Eastern Church, without
a license from the Bishop: but that, once licensed and allowed, he might
without offense preach before his Bishop, as well as in his absence.

Again, some ground of objection against what we here maintain, may be taken
from the words of the Epistle, adscribed unto S. Jerome (which, as I intimated
before, has much of St. Jerome his sense and spirit in it, though for some
other reasons it is very likely that it is not his) ad Rusticum Narbonensem
Episcopum, de septem gradibus Ecclesiae. Nemo hinc Episcoporum (says he)
invidia Hieron. to IV. (vellX.) ed. Plant. p. 55. etc.
Diabolicae tentationis inflatus, irascatur in templo, si presbyteri interdum
exhortentur plebem; si in Ecclesia praedicent; si plebibus, ut scriptum est,
benedicant, etc. and then tells us, that Romae, and in Orient, in Italia, in
Creta, in Cypro, in Africa, in Illyrico, in Hispania, in Britannia, and, ex
part, per Gallias: it was so. If this be true, then France was the only place
at that time, where Priests were not allowed, or licensed to preach at all. Or
at least, not to preach, praesente Episcopo: which those words, irascatur in
templo, may seem to import. But because in this whole Chapter, he does always
speak, absolutely, without any such limitation, or intimation, as praesente
Episcopo: I rather suspect a transposition; (not by any fault of the Copy; but
from the Author himself; which is ordinary enough to best writers) and that
those words, in templo, belong not to nemo Episcoporum; but to, si presbyteri
exhortentur, etc. What then shall we, or can we make of this testimony? This,
certainly, and no more: That Priests who for learning and other parts, were
found fit, which formerly in many places, whether fit, or not fit, would not be
granted; were then in most places, allowed, or licensed to preach: or, being
allowed, and licensed; might do it praesente Episcopo; as well as when he was
out of the way.

But when all is done, or said, that can be said upon this subject; we must
acknowledge, that according to difference of times, and places; great variety
may be observed; as in other things, observed by Ecclesiastical writers; so in
this particular. We do not therefore undertake to prove, that always, and in
all places of Christianity, it has been so: but that in ancient times, and
most generally, Priests did not preach (in that sense as preaching is now
generally understood) except they were called, and licensed to it, by the
Bishop. I know well enough, that upon some extraordinary occasions, some
Deacons: and some, who were neither Priests, nor Deacons, have been allowed,
and employed: but this proves nothing against what we maintain: and I hope
there has been enough said, to satisfy, that it is so indeed.

Now from the consideration of all that has been said: if without offense I
may, I would by way of Corollarie, propose it to the consideration of all,
truly sober, and impartially judicious; whether those men that have reduced, or
endeavored to reduce, all holy duties, or functions, belonging to a Priest, or
Presbyter, to Pulpit preaching; leaving men to the liberty, not of moral
discourses, at large, only, (in which kind I dare undertake, that some
discourses of ancient Heathens, judiciously selected, may pass for good
Sermons) but also of Politic speculations, and passages of the time (witness
many, if not most Sermons under the late Rebellion and Tyranny:) and those
Churches, (we will call them so) where Pulpit preaching is, or has been the
only public exercise of Religion: without any standing Liturgy; any
administration of the Sacraments, (as many were in those days) any observation
of holy days, properly relating to Christ; (for the observation of the Sunday,
or Lords day, as pressed by many; is rather Jewish, then Christian; if not
Antichristian: contrary to the judgment and practice of purest antiquity:)
Whether I say, those men, in the judgment of antiquity, so far as may be
gathered by the premises; would have been: or should any of those ancient
Fathers of the Church, whom for their labors and their sufferings, for Christ
and his Church, all true Christians so much honor, and reverence; now revive;
would be accounted right Priests, worthy of that name and title: or those
Churches, true Christian Churches. I leave all men to the liberty of their
judgments: let them consider of it soberly. But this must be understood as
proposed of Priests and Churches, in times of peace and liberty, not of
persecution: which in many particulars may alter the case. And since we have
said so much of preaching in general; I think it will not be amiss, before we
end, to enquire a little further into the nature of that we call Pulpit
preaching; and wherein the true advantage, and excellency of it, lies.

The end, as I conceive, of all preaching, tending to edification; (which all
preaching does pretend unto) is, either to inform, or to reform: that is, to
teach, or to persuade. Where both those may effectually be attained, whether
out of the Pulpit, or without: it will be granted I hope, that that may be
called preaching. Of teaching, there will be less question, or difficulty:
Persuasion is the thing that public preaching does especially aim at. Some men
are of opinion, that no preaching is effectual to persuade; that is not set out
with some ardor, and vehemence of speech, and action: which they call, the life
of preaching: and upon that account speak scornfully of Homilies, or reading of
Homilies, as destitute of that life, which they require. Indeed flectere, or
persuadere, is by Rhetoricians ordinarily made the proper effect of that which
they call, grandis oration. And St. Augustine in those elaborate books De
Doctrina Christiana, (for the most elaborate part whereof, he was much
beholding to Tully) he seems to be of that opinion too; he is very copious in
the commendation of it. However, upon better consideration, both of the nature
of things, and of the nature of men, it will easily appear, that there be more
ways to persuade; and some perchance not less powerful, then that so much
extolled faculty. It is a noble question in the Schools, and in the speculation
of nature, Vtrum voluntas necessario determinetur ab intellectu? For my part,
notwithstanding that ordinary objection from the Poet,

-- Video meliora, proboque Deteriora sequor; I profess, I am very inclinable
(if the matter be rightly stated) to believe that it is. My meaning is, that
all or most sins proceed from ignorance. Let a man be rightly informed, wherein
true happiness does lie; what is truly expedient, and profitable, and what is
not: that this, or that particularly is against his interest, and main end: so
informed, that he believe it; and be fully satisfied, or convicted, in his
mind, or understanding, by clear light and evidence of reason, that it is so
indeed: I think he will need no other persuasion. Seneca has two Epistles of
this argument, whether the dogmata of Philosophy, by which the understanding is
rightly informed, be sufficient to produce good living; without particular
precepts, or, Rhetorical exhortations: it is argued on both sides very
learnedly, and copiously; according to the exuberancy of his wit. Et fortasse,
rebus ipsis cognitis, it^ movebuntur, ut eos non opus sit majoribus eloquentiae
viribus jam moveri: St. Augustine says, even where he does so amply set out his
grandis oration.

Besides, as all kind of Music does not fit all ears, either to please, or to
stir affections: so neither does one kind of Oration, equally prevail with all
men. Cic. in Ora.
Flumen alijs verborum, volubilitasque cordi est; qui ponunt in Orationis
celeritate eloquentiam: Distincta alios, and interpuncta; intervalla, moraeque,
respirationesque delectant. Nay, not particular men only, differ in their
judgments, in point of oratory, but whole nations: some affect one Cic. ibid.
way, some another: so that what among some is applauded Aberat tertia illa
laus: -- neque erat ulla vis atque contentio: sive consilio, quod eos quorum
altior oration, actioque esset ardentior, furere and bacchari arbitraretur:
sive, etc.
and admired; is by others exploded, and vilified, as foolish and ridiculous;
as by the same grand Master of Rhetoric is well observed. I do not deny, but
ardent and vehement speech, is generally most plausible and powerful: yet I
find that some accounted learned and judicious, have avoided it, as having too
much affinity, with madness and distraction. Wise men are apt to suspect any
thing that is accompanied with passion; as knowing that passion and reason
seldom go together; and that a calm temper of the mind, is the best temper, for
the discovery of the truth. Neither is that, which is most popular, and
plausible, always most profitable. Vehement language, with voice and action
suitable, is most apt to stir up the affections, we grant it: but as the wind
upon the water, whilst it blows; so that, whilst it is heard, or read: when
the sound is out of the ear, and the impressions out of the fancy, which will
soon be: the stir of the affections is abated, and men for the most part, are
the same as before.

But when by strength of reason and ratiocination, the judgment is convicted;
and a man's reason fully satisfied, that it is so, and so; and in point of
practice ought to be so; the fruits and effects of such conviction, are usually
more durable, and of greater operation upon the soul and affections. If to
persuade, be the chiefest and noblest work of Rhetoric, or eloquence; and
which gives the grandis oration, the pre-eminence above the two other kinds; as
we are taught by the Masters of that Art: I do not doubt, but we may find the
power of persuasion in some other faculties and ways, as eminent, as in
vehement language. How admirably did Socrates work upon the affections of men,
even to astonishment, if we consider the effects; merely by familiar
interrogations? Or, if not only so; yet chiefly so, I am sure, as by best
records of those times may appear. The ancients had a way; it was much used in
ancient times; and it has much affinity with Christ his way, by parables; to
persuade men by moral apologues, and fables; which made Aesop so famous in his
days. And do not we read of wonderful things achieved this way, when no other
oratory would prevail? Did not Menenius Agrippa, when the common people of
Rome, provoked by the cruelty of usurers, were gathered together in a seditious
manner, and had taken arms, to the great terror of the Senate, and whole City;
pacify them, and to the admiration of all men, by that famous apologue, of the
members of the body (St. Paul, Romans the twelfth, has much of it) reduce them
to obedience? So Arsinoe the Queen, as we read in Plutarch, when nothing could
allay her immoderate weeping and lamentation for the death of her son; one of
the Philosophers of those times, found a way by such an apologue of his own
devising, to persuade her to patience. And what use did Nathan, the Prophet,
make of such a device or made story, to make David his King, who perchance
would not have endured it another way; sensible of his great unthankfulness
toward his God, who had done so much for him; in that in despite of Gods
Commandment, Thou shall not commit adultery, he had seized upon another man's
wife; and because his plot would not take, which he had plotted, to save his
credit, (as one sin does often beget another) was provoked to plot the death of
her husband? If therefore, the chief end of preaching, be to teach, or to
persuade: conversion, or reformation; how it can be said, that eloquence, or
studied oratory, is the only way, I leave it to the judgment of men, who are
more led (which few are) by reason, then prejudice, or prejudicate opinions.
For my part, I think, catechizing, if rightly used, has much the advantage of
it. There is another way too, which with men who are more for reason, then
words, is of great force; and that is, by short aphorisms. My opinion is, that
the frequent reading of Epictetus (especially, as fitted anciently for the use
of Christians) may go much further to persuade a man, that is rational; then
many Sermons, such as he may hear in many Churches. And so may Ludovicus Vives
his Introduction to wisdom; digested and compiled by certain short rational
aphorisms. It is true, that much good may be done by Rhetoric: but, as much
good; so, much evil also; for which reason it has been forbidden formerly in
some judicatories.

But since speech and oratory (as once among the Athenians, when it ruled all
there; and since that, among the Romans) is now become in so much request,
among both great and small; that nothing almost is accounted Religion, or
learning, but what comes out of the Pulpit: and that this is the very way,
which the enemies of the Churches peace, and government, since the Reformation
of Religon, have ever gone in England, to gain credit with the people: this
way, this popular way of preaching, though perchance, less of it otherwise,
might serve in some places, if all other things were duly performed; ought to
be in great request unto all, unto whom, the peace and prosperity of the Church
is dear and precious: so that still care be taken, so far forth, as by good
means it may be prevented; that none be allowed, or licensed to preach, but
such as are true sons of the Church.

However, though for diverse respects, we maintain the necessity of this way;
yet it were very requisite, I think, that people should be made to understand
everywhere, how much, and how dangerously they are deluded, when they are made
to believe, that there is no other preaching effectual to the conversion of
souls; and that this is the Word of God, that which is uttered out of Pulpits;
so much commended, and so necessary to salvation. Which conceit, when men are
once prepossessed with; it makes them to despise the true Word of God (the
infallible true Word of God, I mean; for Sermons also, if Orthodox, may be
called the Word of God at large) when it is read in the Church, out of the Old,
and New Testament: and this contempt of it, bereaves them of the benefit, which
they might reap by it. I am persuaded, that all the blasphemies, which some
Papists have belched out against the Scriptures, being put together; will
scarce make one half, of what the Puritans and Precisians of England have done,
to advance the honor of Pulpit Preaching, wherein they did conceive (and they
were right in that) their advantage to lie. Let them be beaten off from that
advantage, which may easily be done, if care be taken (and God be praised, care
has been taken in London of late, the chiefest City: might it be so too in all
other places) it is to be hoped, that the quarrel will soon be at an end.

But see (I pray the Reader to give me leave) the impudency of some of those
men; far be it from me, to censure all. The Author of that infamous Pamphlet,
called Puritanismus Anglicanus (a man, both for this, and Purit. Angl. sive
praecipua, etc. Francof. 1610. Auctore Gulielmo Amesio.
his other writings; some of which have been Printed, I am loath to say where:
of no small account, among them that are bred that way) the very first mark, by
which he does describe, and set out an English Puritan, is, that, verbum Dei,
Prophetarum and Apostolorum scriptis comprehensum, numeris omnibus perfectum
esse, arcte tenent, (so he speaks) accurateque defendunt. Whereas in very deed,
of all things (not a few) that can be laid to the Puritans charge, I know not
any thing, either more notorious, or more detestable, then this very thing,
that they so vilify the pure Word of God, comprehended in the writings of the
Prophets and Apostles, daily read in Churches, at the time of Divine Service;
as to make it of no use at all to the Conversion of Souls: appropriating as
much, as in them lies, that sacred title of Gods Word, to their own Pulpit
Preaching. Which also they will often call the Gospel, (...), and without any
limitation, whereby people (deluded silly people) are brought to believe, that
there is no other Gospel, but what is Preached out of Pulpits: and in case any
of that Party (though the occasion be never so just) be prohibited to Preach,
that the Gospel does suffer thereby, and is in danger.

Another great and dangerous error, in this business of Preaching, which would
be looked into, is, that many, because they hear Sermons with joy; and are
eager after them; through ignorance of the nature of speech, in general; and of
former times, withal: without any further examination, what operation it has
upon their lives; they are ready to flatter themselves, that this love they
bear unto the Word, must needs be an argument of grace; and an effect of the
spirit of regeneration; and in this confidence, they live secure, and
regardless of any thing else, by which they might edify: and not only so, but
become proud, insolent, and censorious; many of them. Whereas there is nothing
more certain, then that it is the nature of speech, whatever the argument be,
if it be fitted to the ears of the auditors, to be winning, and be witching:
not only to delight, but even to ravish: to cause admiration, and astonishment:
in brief; to have the same effects as music, even the best music and melody
can have upon the minds of men. It is a secret of nature, which every body does
not understand: but I have argued it elsewhere at large; and clearly by
evidence of reason, evinced it, that there is music in words, in the
composition of words; in the ordering; in the pronounciation: in the tone, and
action of the speaker: briefly, in all that belongs unto Oratory. And such has
been the power of speech and Oratory, in former ages among Heathens, that whole
towns and villages have been forsaken (for a time) of inhabitants; whilst men
both rich and poor, did run after some Sophist, or Philosopher, who would
entertain them, it may be, with some moral discourse; it may be with somewhat
else, that had no reference at all to life, and manners; much less, to
godliness and piety: (...), indeed; amazement and astonishment, was the very
thing, that Sophists did affect, and propose to themselves; and he that could
not attain unto it (great indeed was the labor they did undergo to bring this
to pass) was accounted to have miscarried in his profession. What operation the
moral discourses of ancient Philosophers, have had upon some men, as not only
to produce plentiful tears at present, but also a sudden change of life; yea
sometimes an absolute forsaking of the world, and the pleasures of this life:
has been touched before. But it is as certain, and examples of it have been
produced elsewhere, that many, notoriously wicked and impious, yet were very
studious to hear such discourses, as pleasant and delightful for the excellency
of speech. To which may be added, that anciently many professed Heathens, enemies
to the Christian Religion; did studiously repair to the Sermons, and Homilies
of some learned, and eloquent Bishops; not to edify by their doctrine: but to
partake to the pleasure of good language.

Some perchance, for what I have said (for I cannot expect it should please all
men) will be ready to suspect, or to traduce me, for one that is no friend to
Sermons. Truly, I should be sorry to give just cause: I wish, where there is
one, there might be two; so the Ministers be Orthodox, and that it be not to
the prejudice of Gods holy Word. I think the better of them, because I doubt
much, when they come to be disused, or less used, learning in general (for the
extempory pratlings of illiterate Phanaticks, and Enthusiasts, I do not call
Sermons) will suffer; as at this day, in Moscovia, and diverse other places. But
I must suspect his sincerity to Religion, that is not sensible of the wrong
done unto Gods holy Word, by those, who seem (but for their own ends, I doubt)
to be most zealous for Sermons.

St. Chrysostom, what he was for a Preacher, his very name or surname rather,
((...)) is some argument: but his works yet extant, a stronger evidence.
Somewhat was said of him before. It grieved his pious soul, when he observed,
that there was no such crowding, when the Word of God was read in time of
Divine Service, as when he preached. In one place, he does expostulate the
matter with his auditors: and among other things, sticks not to tell them, that
Preaching (Pulpit Preaching) was not absolutely necessary, but only for the
daintiness of men: the bare Word of God, that was read in the Church, being
sufficient to salvation: (...) (says he) (...) (so printed; I think it must be
(...)) (...) that is: It is our daintiness (or sloathfulness: (...), is a great
word in S. Chrysostom, very comprehensive, and not easy to be expressed:
propter fastidia plurimorum, etiam ipsa, sine quibus vivi non potest, alimenta
condienda sunt: says St. Augustine, upon the like occasion) that has made this
need (to wit, of Pulpit August. de Doct. Chri. c. XII.
Preaching) All things are plain and obvious to the eyes; all things manifest,
that are necessary, in the Divine Scriptures. But because you must hear with
pleasure, that is it, that makes you to require this way of Preaching also. And
then he meets with another objection; that it is tedious and unpleasing, to
hear the same thing (though it be the Scripture) over and over, often: which
they must needs do, if they did constantly, as was required, attend the
Service. It is excellently well answered by him. O, that all popular Preachers
(I intend it not as a reproach; for I look upon it, as a great blessing, if it
be well used) would imitate this pious man's zeal, for God and his holy Word!
who are so far from it, many of them, that it is their endeavor and main
design (it is for their honor and reputation: but for their profit too; and to
the advantage of their cause, most of all) to maintain the people in that
conceit, that Sermons are the only Word of God; that there is no Preaching of
the Word, but that: that to love Sermons, and to run after Sermons, is a
certain sign of grace and regeneration; that God loves them, and they love God:
and in that conceit, though their lives and their actions show nothing of the
power of godliness; how many live and dye!

This was the zeal of this holy Father, for Gods holy Word, read in the Church
publicly, in time of Divine Service. Who nevertheless himself, was a zealous
constant Preacher of the Word, as any age (though most Bishops, great
Preachers, then) has known: and as much followed, and admired, by all sorts of
people. Some part of the year, he preached every day; and yet could not preach
often enough, to satisfy the longings of the people: a man indeed endowed with
extraordinary parts, for that holy function. And least any man for want of
piety and industry (though piety indeed, if true and real, will make a man
industrious) should be ready to take the advantage of these words of St.
Chrysostom, that Sermons are not needful: let them know, that though just
indignation, and a holy zeal, for Gods holy Word, and the Church Service, made
him say so here: yet that it was not his opinion, absolutely and positively; as
may appear, not only by his practice (the best evidence) but also by what he
writes elsewhere; as particularly upon 1 Timothy 5. 17. (...) (says he) (...) And
shortly after; (...) Where be they now, who say, there is no need of Sermons
(o^ teaching) -- whereas in very truth, it is a great thing: I say a great
thing; and of great concernment for the edification of the Church, that the
Governors of it (Bishops, properly: but it may now extend to all that are
called Rectores Ecclesiarum, and their substitutes; Curates, and Vicars) be
Teachers, or Preachers: and the want of it, is the occasion of much evil in the
Church. Certainly, the Church will be happy in it, if both in the one, and in
the other: in his zeal for the true Word of God, as it is read daily in the
Church: and in his diligence to Preach the same (which in regard of the
intention, or institution of Preaching, may be called the Word of God also) he
may have many followers. God grant it. And here I end.

FINIS.

