NOT POPERY, BUT THE Protestant Religion The Support of the CROWN. Confirmed
out of the Mouth of that Blessed Martyr King CHARLES I. of Pious Memory.
With other of his Saying and Instructions concerning both Religion and
Government, worthy to be seriously considered by all PROTESTANTS.
IF the Soul of the Blessed Martyr, from his Mansion of Bliss and Glory, could
look down and behold a part of himself embracing a Religion so much averse to
his Royal Judgment, and Pious Mind, and so contradictory to what he professed
and laid his Life down for; and which truly entitles him to Martyrdom, it could
not but wonder at least, if not grieve (might such Passion be admitted to
Celestial Spirits) to behold the danger of introducing a Religion into these
Protestant Kingdoms, that will infallibly overthrow that Church and Government
he so highly prized; and in effect, make him an Heretic, in dying for a false
Religion: But we doubt not, as that Holy Royal Martyr is employed in more
beatifick Visions, and sees not what in his Life time he would scarce ever have
believed from any Prophet or Oracle: He is not concerned with our Troubles; yet
we think it not unnecessary, that this Holy Martyr's Words should never be
forgotten, or sleep in oblivion, who was so great and zealous an Assertor of
the Protestant Cause; and that they may even stare those in the Face that are
most concerned, and appear before them in most indelible Characters, never to
be blotted out of the Memories of all Protestants; and whose Judgment therein
ought to be most sacred, especially to his own Issue, since his Sacred Life was
laid down, and his Royal Blood shed for that Cause which is almost now
abandoned and forsaken; and which depends only on the Life of our now Sacred
Sovereign, whom the God of Heaven preserve for the Peace of these Nations. Amen.

In his late Majesty's Speech to both Houses, on Feb. the 3d. 1640. about the
Papists, he says, I take in good part your Care of the true Religion
established in this Kingdom, from which I will never depart -- It is against my
mind, that Popery or Superstition should any way increase within this Kingdom,
and I will restrain the same by causing the Laws to be put in Execution. I am
resolved to provide against Jesuits and Papists, by setting forth a
Proclamation with all speed to command them to depart the Kingdom within one
month, of which if they fail, or shall return, then they shall be proceeded
against according to the Laws.

Likewise in his Speech to the Knights, Gentry and Freeholders of the County of
Lincoln at Lincoln, July 15. 1642. He thus expresses himself, I assure you upon
the Faith and Honor of a Christian King, I will be always tender of any thing
that may advance the true Protestant Religion, etc. this Blessed Martyr mocked
not at the word True Protestant, it is his, though now ridiculed, Here mark his
Solemn Protestation made at the Head of his Army, Sept. 19. 1642. I do promise
in the presence of Almighty God, and as I hope for his blessing and protection,
that I will to the utmost of my power, defend and maintain the True Reformed
Protestant Religion, established in the Church of England, and by the Grace of
God in the same will live and die. I desire to govern by the known Laws of the
Land, and that the Liberty and Property of the Subject, may be by them
preserved with the same care as my own just Rights, etc. And I do solemnly and
faithfully promise in the sight of God, to maintain the just Privileges and
freedom of Parliament, and to govern by the known Laws of the Land, etc. And
again, in his Speech to the Lords and Commons at Oxford, Apr. 26. 1644. He has
these words toward the close of his Speech -- And be assured that there is no
profession which I have made for the defense and maintenance of out Religion,
Laws and Liberties, which I will not inviolably observe.

But his Protestation made at Christ Church in Oxford 1643 just before his
receiving the holy Eucharist, for being then about to receive the Sacrament at
the hands of the Lord Archbishop of Armagh, rising up from his Knees, and
beckning to the Archbishop to forbear a little, he made this Solemn
Protestation which ought never to be forgot,

My Lord, I espy here many resolved Protestants, who may declare to the World
the resolution I now make. I have to the utmost of my power prepared my Soul to
become a worthy receiver, and may I so receive comfort by the Blessed
Sacrament, as I do intend the Establshment of the truly Reformed Protestant
Religion, as it stood in its Beauty in the happy days of Queen Elizabeth,
without any connivance at Popery, and may this Sacrament be my Damnation, if my
Heart, does not join with my Lips in this Protestation.

And yet there were those who would have this King a Papist, but hey were only
such of themselves, as endeavored to make him odious to his People, and as a
Priest lately in Ireland, who bragged that our now Sovereign was of the Romish
Religion, for which he was fined 200 l. at the Assizes, and lies in Gaol to
this day. But by this Protestation the World may judge how far this good King
was from enduring the Romish Religion in his Kingdom.

And again in his Letter to the Judges to be Published in their Circuits, July
4. 1642. He gives them a Charge, That they take care by all the best means to
suppress Popery in all the Counties, by putting the Laws against them in
Execution, etc. And further bids them assure his good Subjects on the Word of a
King, who called God to Witness, That He was resolved with Gods assistance
constantly to maintain the True Protestant Religion, etc.

In his private Letters to the Queen, with whom he would not dissemble, he
tells her in several places, that he will never quit his Religion, but remain
constant to the maintaining Episcopacy.

In his Instructions to his Commissions for the Treaty at Vxbridge, He declares
to them, That be cannot yield to change the Government of the Church, being
bound thereto by His Coronation Oath, and that they must do nothing to change
or lessen the dependency of the Clergy on the Crown entirely, without which it
will scarce sit fast upon the Kings Head: So that Popery absolutely overthrows
this, when the Clergy depends on the Pope altogether, and nothing on the Crown.

How well also His Late Majesty argued for Episcopacy as the only true
Religion, and most agreeable to the Word of God, may be seen by His Learned
Papers which we shall not mention, and as he lived so he dyed, in the same
Constancy of asserting ad maintaining of the same Protestant Religion; for
being on the Scaffold, and about to seal to his last words with his blood, He
says, My Conscience in Religion is very well known to all the World, and
therefore I declare before you all, That I die a Christian according to the
Profession of the Church of England, as I found it left to me by my Father, etc.

In his first Paper to Mr. Hindrrson He declares how he was by his Father King
James, whom none could call in question in the particular of Religion, brought
up in the right Religion (not Popery, mark that) and that he had laid in him
the grounds of Christianity, in which he had continued to that day, and that
nothing made him reverence the Church of England more than that its Reformation
was effected neither with Multitude or with Tumult, but legally and orderly,
and by such who had only the Reforming Power.

And as he had been well instructed and settled in the True Protestant Religion
himself, so he endeavored to instruct and fix his Children, as the Relation
under the Lady Elizabeth's own hand testifies, being some of his last words to
her, to ground her against Popery, recommending to her reading for that end,
Bishop Andrews's Sermons, Hooker's Ecclesiastical Policy, and Bishop Laud's
Book against Fisher. And thus he instructed his Son our now Dread Sovereign, in
his Icon Basilicon: Above all, says he, I would have you well grounded and
settled in your Religion, that of the Church of England, in which you have been
educated, etc. And again, I charge you to persevere in it as coming nearest to
Gods Word for Doctrine, and to the Primitive Examples for Government, etc. And
a little after, Your Fixation in matters of Religion will not be more necessary
for your Souls than your Kingdoms Peace, when God shall bring you to them. And
in the same Advice laid down to his Son, he proceeds after this manner -- If
you never see my Face again, I require and entreat you, as your Father and your
King, that you never suffer your heart to receive the least check against, or
dissatisfaction from the true Religion, established in the Church of England, I
tell you I have tried it, and after much search, and many disputes, have
concluded it to be the best in the World, etc.

And not only as to Religion did this Blessed King and Martyr give instructions
to the Prince his Son, now our Sovereign; but also in other matters of
Government, worthy to be Recorded in Letter of Gold, and which no doubt are
fixed deeply in His Majesty's Memory, and will not be forgotten by him; among
the many others he advises him and says, Never repose so much upon any Man's
single Council, Fidelity and Discretion, in managing Affairs of the first
Magnitude (that is matters of Religion and Justice) as to create in your self,
or others a diffidence of the Judgment, which is likely to be always more
Constant and Impartial to the Interests of your Crown and Kingdom than any
man's. Next, beware of exasperating any Factions, by the crosness and asperity
of some men's Passions, Humors, or private Opinions, employed by you, grounded
only upon the differences in lesser matters, which are but the Skirts and
Suburbs of Religion. Wherein a charitable connivance, and Christian Toleration,
often dissipates their strength, whom rougher opposition fortifies, and puts
the despised and oppressed Party into such Combinations as may most enable them
to get a full Revenge on those they count their Persecutors, who are commonly
assisted by that vulgar Commiseration which attends all that are said to suffer
under the Notion of Religion. Always keep up solid Piety, and those Fundamental
Truths, which mend both hearts and Lives of Men with impartial favor and
Justice. Take heed that the outward Circumstances and Formalities of Religion
devour not all, or the best encouragements of Learning, Industry and Piety, but
with an equal eye and impartial hand, distribute favors and rewards to all
men, as you find them for their real goodness, both in abilities and fidelity,
worthy and capable of them. This will be sure to gain you the hearts of the
best, and the most too, who though they be not good themselves, yet are glad to
see the severer ways of Virtue, at any time, sweetened by Temporal Rewards. I
would not have you to entertain any aversation or dislike of Parliaments: which
in their right Constitution with Freedom and Honor, will never injure or
diminish your Greatness, but will rather be as interchangings of Love, Loyalty
and Confidence between a Prince and his People.

Thus we see on what Pious Foundations of both Religion and Justice, this King
built his Policies; the Protestant Religion he esteemed his Glory, and the Prop
of the English Crown; Parliaments, the Peoples Love, Liberties and Properties,
he esteemed his Chief Support; and a wrong to them an injury to his own Right.
Popery he held absolutely inconsistent with the Constitution of this Realm, and
no doubt did never nxpect, that one out of his Loins, who was Martyred for the
Protestant Cause, and the Church of England, should ever declare for the Church
of Rome, be a Professor of it, and give hopes to the Papists of setting up
their Authority and Dominions in these Kingdoms.

FINIS.
London, Printed for L. C.


