ALEXANDER ye GREAT King of Macedon.
portrait of Alexander the Great F. H. van Houe. fec*


THE LIFE and DEATH OF Alexander The GREAT, KING of MACEDON.

IN TEN BOOKS, BY Quintus Curtius Rufus.

Exactly Conferred with the Original, And purged from Many gross Errors and
Absurdities, With which it before abounded.

Done into English by the same Hand that Translated the last Volume of the HOLY
COURT.

LONDON: Printed for S. S. and are to be sold by Nich. Cox, over against
Furnivals-Inne in Holborn. 1674.

To the true Lover of all good Learning, the Right Honorable Baptist, Viscount
Cambden, Lord Noel of Redlington, and Baron of Elmington, etc.
My Lord,
GReat Actions are the Subjects of great Wits; and no Age has been so unhappy,
but they have great Personages, if not to exceed, yet to second and protect
them. But the Achievements of Alexander the Great, are so great in themselves,
that they are rather the Subjects of our Wonder then Belief; nor can any man be
a just Judge of them, who is not endued with the same Spirit of Fortitude, and
withal, transported with the same desire of glory. Fame, indeed, is not so much
the bound, as the delight of Transcendent Spirits, who with the unwearied
Travels of their Swords, add Kingdoms unto Kingdoms, and abstract from the
number of the Nations, to add to the numbers of their Conquests. How many have
we read of, who almost since the Cradle of the World, have exercised thus the
Power of the Sword, and by a lamentable happiness, have made the Epitaphs of
other Nations to become the best Annals of their Immortality and Fury?

But Alexander was as merciful as he was just; and having overcome the Nations
by force, he always after, by a newer and Nobler Conquest, did both overcome
and oblige them by his Bounty. By a rare felicity he had Fortune entirely in
his own Power; and at last he would become the Master as much of Fame as of
Fortune: He was sad to understand that his Achievements had brought him to the
utmost parts of the World; and he would have no end of his Victories, because
he would have no end of his Glory: Having exceeded the Acts of Men, he would
exceed even Fame her self, unless she could find breath enough to raise him
unto Heaven, and leave him there enthroned amongst his gods.

And yet for all this vain attempt and confidence, he might have slept covered
with the Dust of Oblivion, were he not beholden to a better Divinity, and to
the Light of History, which have preserved his Name throughout all Generations:
The Prophets have done the one, and this our Author the other; the Prophets in
the Word of God, and our Author in this History: A History drawn from the
Records of Antiquity, and famous as Ptolomy himself, a man as admirable in the
Arts of Peace as of War, who being present with Alexander in all his Wars, was
both his Companion and his Kinsman: A History composed with such Art, such
State and Truth, that Lipsius, the most Lettered, and most received of the
Critics, has affirmed, If there were ever History pure and legitimate, it was
this of Curtius.

It was before imperfect in English, and labored at least under a thousand
Solecisms; I have only taken the pains to put it in a new Dress, and to prepare
it for your Honors hands, to which precisely it does devote it self, and with
it, the most Elaborate Observances of him who is,

My Lord, The most humble and most faithful of all that serve you, Robert
Codrington.

To the Reader in general, and especially to the Soldier.
IN these Martial Times, if any thing can excite you yet higher to Honorable
Achievements, it will be the perusal of this History, then which (if you
respect either the Excellence of Alexander, or the Abilities of Curtius) you
will find nothing more Magnificent or Delightful: You will find how Kingdoms
are disposed of by the Eternal Decrees of Providence; and that when God is
pleased to put a period to them, he selects men, and inspires them with Courage
and Understanding answerable to that great Work unto which he has appointed
them. None but Alexander could perform what Alexander has done; and though his
course of life was so short, that he did rather destroy then erect an Empire,
yet we may wonder as much at his Resolution what he undertook, as at his
success in what he performed. With an inconsiderable Power, with Wicker
Targets, and Swords covered with Rust, and a Stock of not above threescore
Talents, which he himself confesses was the strength of his Exchequer, he
advanced into Asia, and in the compass of a few years, he became Master of all
the East, and, at that time, of the most Flourishing and Potent Nations of the
World. He never encountered any Enemy whom he overcame not, nor besieged City
which he took not, nor invaded Land which he subdued not. Although the first
grounds of the War were in the days of Xerxes, and his Predecessors, yet the
calamity of it, and the utter ruin of the Empire, was in the days of Darius,
the last and best of the Emperors. The admirable Revolution of States, and
from what small beginnings great Powers do arise, is no where more apparently
to be seen; and by the understanding of the events so long ago abroad, you may
draw your Application to things more present, and at home. To add more, is to
anticipate your understanding; I shall only insert, that the Author of this
History, Quintus Curtius, (by his Complexion surnamed Rufus) was supposed to
live in the days of Caligula: His History is full of Variety, and attended with
us much Gravity as Delight, as in the perusal of it you will acknowledge with
him, who for your sakes only has taken these pains to review it; it being as
much my Business as Ambition, to relieve and advance your Understanding.

Codrington.

THere is nothing that is absolutely perfect; Alexander himself had a Mole in
his Face. The oversight of the Printer has caused some literal faults in the
Press, which are left to your Candor, either to correct, or excuse them.

An Advertisement to all Gentlemen, Booksellers, or others.
WHereas Samuel Speed, Bookseller, has lately disposed himself to a
Wholesale Trade for Books, not making any appearance of that Employment as
formerly he did; These are to certify, That those persons that please to apply
themselves to him for Books, shall be as well used as by any person whatsoever:
And whosoever has any Study or Library of Books, or Copies, either in
Manuscript, or such as have been already Printed, to dispose of, shall receive
from him the full value thereof, to the said Parties ample satisfaction.

THE FIRST BOOK OF QVINTVS CVRTIVS.
Concerning the Birth and Education of Alexander the Great: The Murder of his
Father Philip: The Dream of his Mother Olympias, in relation to the admirable
Victories which (throughout the whole course of his Wars) he afterward
achieved.

PHilip of Macedon, who by subduing of Greece, did first advance that Kingdom
unto that height of power, was the Son of Amyntas; a man endued with wisdom,
courage, and all other virtues of a Noble Captain. This Amyntas had by Euridice
his Wife three Sons, Alexander, Perdicas and Philip, who was the Father of
Great Alexander, and a Daughter called Eurione. The Queen Euridice being
enamoured with one that had married her Daughter, conspired the death of the
King her Husband, to the intent to have married with her Son-in-Law, and to
make him King; which thing she had brought to effect, had not the Treason and
Lasciviousness of the Mother been opportunely revealed by the Daughter. After
the death of Amyntas, Alexander the Eldest Son enjoyed his Fathers Kingdom, who
in the beginning of his Reign was so assailed on all sides, that he was driven
by force to purchase Peace of the Illyrians with Money, and by giving his
Brother Philip in Hostage: And afterward, by the same Pledge, he made a like
Peace with the Thebans, which was the occasion that Philip did attain to such
Excellency of Knowledge and Wisdom; for by reason that he was committed to the
custody of Epaminondas, who was a valiant Captain, and an excellent
Philosopher, he was brought up in the exercise of honest Disciplines, and
Princely matters, greatly profiting under a Scholar of Pythagoras School, whom
Epaminondas kept in his house for the instruction of his Son. In the mean
season, Alexander was slain by the means of Euridice his Mother; whose former
Treason King Amyntas her Husband had pardoned, in respect of the Children had
between them, little thinking that she would afterward have been their
destruction: For when Alexander was dead, she caused, in like manner, her other
Son Perdicas to be slain; which Perdicas left behind him one Son, being a
young Babe. About the same time, Philip the youngest Brother, having by good
hap slipped away from his Guardian Epaminondas, returned into Macedon; and not
taking upon him the Name of King, remained a great while, no otherwise, but as
a Protector to his young Nephew. Nevertheless afterward, by occasion of sundry
mischiefs growing in the State, the same being such as might not well attend
the Majority of the young King, Philip appearing to be a man of singular
activity, and of no less skill in feats of War, then in knowledge of
Philosophy, was compelled by the people to take upon him the Kingdom of
Macedon, which as then stood in great difficulties, and danger of ruin. This
was done 300 years after the building of Rome, and in the 105 Olympiad. In the
beginning of his Reign he was environed with infinite troubles; for all the
Neighboring Countries (as it were by a general Conspiracy) moved War against
him; and at one time sundry Nations combined together, out of sundry parts, to
assail his Kingdom: Wherefore, considering that it stood him upon to move
discreetly, (not being able to Match them all at once) he pacified some with
fair promises, others with money, and the weakest he withstood by force. By
this means he both made his Enemies afraid, and confirmed the hearts of his
people, whom he found discouraged, and sore amazed. These things he wrought
with great Artifice and ^ineness of wit, in such sort, that he diminished not
any part of his Honor, Estate or Reputation; determining nevertheless, as time
should serve, to deal with every one apart. His first War was with the
Albenians, whom he overcame by Wit and Policy: And whereas it lay in his power
to have put them all to the Sword, he set them all at liberty, without Ransom:
By which point of Clemency, though it was but counterfeit, being done for fear
of a greater War at hand, yet it procured him great Estimation and Authority.
After that, he subdued the Peons; and from them turned his Power against the
Illyrians, of whom he slew many thousands, and conquered the famous City of
Larissa. That done, he moved War against the Thessalians; not for any desire of
their goods, or spoil of their Country, but out of a policy, to add to his
strength the force of their Cavalry, which in those days were accounted the
chiefest in the world. This he happily effected: for being suddenly assailed,
they were soon brought to subjection; and Philip joining the force of their
Horsemen unto his Footmen, he made his power invincible.

After all these things being brought to pass, he took to Wi^e Olympias, one of
the Daughters of Neoptolemus, King of the Molossi. This Marriage was concluded
by the means of Arisba, who had the Government of Olympias, and not long before
had married her other Sister Troas. This Marriage, which he intended for his
security, turned afterward to his subversion; for thinking to have made
himself strong by the affinity of Philip, he was at last by him deprived of the
whole Kingdom, and ended his life miserably in Exile. Not long after this
Marriage, King Philip dreamed, that he saw an excellent Medal fastened to the
W^mb of his Wife; and to his seeming, the lively Image of a Lion thereupon: By
which Dream the Divines did interpret, that his Wife was conceived of a Child
that should be of a Lions heart and courage; which interpretation pleased him
highly. Afterward, at the assault of a City called Methron^, by shot of an
Arrow he lost his right eye; whereof though the displeasure was great, yet was
he content, upon their submission, to take them to mercy. He won also the City
of Pagus, and annexed the same unto his Kingdom: He invaded the Land of the
Tribals, and at one instant conquered it, with all the Countries thereabout.
Thus having made his Kingdom strong by subduing his Neighbors, at his return
home his Wife Olympias was delivered of his Son Alexander, on the eighth of the
Ides of April. Of these good fortunes the King rejoiced no less then reason
was, having established his Country at home, subdued his enemies abroad, and
gotten an Heir to succeed him in his Kingdom: he could have desired no more of
God, if the mind of man could ever be satisfied, which the more it has, the
more it coveteth.

As Dominion increases, so does also the desire to have more; which was well
seen in Philip, that still did compass how to grow great by taking from his
Neighbors; and lay always like a Spy, waiting an occasion how to catch from
every man; whereunto he had an opportunity offered by the Cities of Greece: for
whiles one did covet to subdue another, and through ambition were at strife who
should be chief, by one and one, be brought them all into subjection,
persuading the smaller States to move War against the greater; and to serve his
purpose, contrived the ways to set them altogether by the ears. But at length,
when his practices were perceived, diverse Cities fearing his increasing power,
confederated, against him as their Common Enemy, but chiefly the Thebans*
Nevertheless, necessity compelling, they chose him afterward to be their
Captain General against the Lacedaemonians, and the Phoceans, who had spoiled
the Temple of Apollo. This War he honorably achieved; so that by punishing of
their Sacrilege, he got himself great Renown in all those parts. But in the
end, observing both those Countries to be brought low with the War, he found
means to subdue the one and the other; compelling, as well the Overcomers, as
the Overcome, to be his Tributaries. Then he made a Voyage into Cappadocia;
where killing and taking prisoners all the Princes thereabout, he reduced the
Province to the subjection of Macedon. He conquered Olinthus, and after invaded
Thrace: For whereas the two Kings of that Country were at variance about the
limits of their Kingdoms, and chose him to be their Arbitrator, he gladly took
it upon him: But at the day appointed for the Judgment, he came not thither
like a Judge with a Council, but like a Warrior with an Army; and to part the
strife, expelled both Parties from their Kingdoms. By this time young Alexander
was twelve years of Age, and began to take great delight in the feats of War,
showing most manifest signs of a Noble Heart, and an excellent apprehension.
He was very swift of foot; and one day at a solemn game of Running, called The
Olympic Race, being demanded by some of his Companions if he would run with
them; Gladly, (said he) if there were Kings Sons to run with me. On another
time, when certain Ambassadors of the Persians came into Macedon, Alexander,
who in his Fathers absence took upon him to entertain them; and discoursing
with them of diverse things, in all his communication, there not passed not from
him one Childish or vain word; but he enquired of them the state of their
Country, the manners of the People, the distances of the Ways, the Power of the
King, and the order of his Wars, with such like: So that the Ambassadors
astonished thereat, esteemed the Greatness of the Father, to be much less then
the Expectation of his Son; and that his Courage was much greater then was to
be looked for in one of his years. As often as Tidings came that the King his
Father had conquered any strong or rich Town, or obtained any notable Victory,
he never seemed greatly joyful; but would say to his Play-Fellows, My Father
does so many great Acts, that he will leave no occasion of any remarkable thing
for us to do: Such were his words, such was his talk: whereby it was easy to
conjecture what a Man he would prove in his Age, who so began in his Youth. His
delight was not set on any kind of pleasure, or greediness of gain, but in the
only exercise of Virtue, and desire of Honor: The more Authority that he
received of his Father, the less he would seem to bear. And although by the
great increase of his Fathers Dominion, it seemed that he should have the less
occasion of Wars; yet he did not set his delight in vain pleasure, or heaping
up of treasure, but sought all the means he could to use the feats and
exercises of War, coveting such a Kingdom, wherein for his Virtue and Prowess
he might purchase Fame and Immortality. That hope never deceived Alexander, nor
any other, that had either will or occasion to put the same in practice.

The Charge and Government of this young Prince was committed to sundry
excellent Masters, but chiefly to the Philosopher Aristotle, whose Virtue,
Learning and Knowledge King Philip so much esteemed, that he would often say,
he took no greater comfort in the birth of his Son, then that he was provided
with such a Master as Aristotle, under whose Tuition he remained ten years.
Many things there happened besides, whereby it was conjectured, that Alexander
should prove a man of great valor: For when his Father sent to Delphos to
receive answer of the gods who should be his Successor, the Oracle delivered,
That such a one should not succeed him only, but also be Lord of the World,
whom Bucephalus would suffer to sit upon his Back. This Bucephalus was a
passing fair Horse, fiery, and full of courage, whom Philip had bought of a
Thessalian for thirteen Talents; and because of his fierceness he kept him in a
Stable impaled with iron Bars: yet for all this, he remained so full of spirit,
that none could approach to dress him; whereof the King was so wary, that he
sought the means to be rid of the Horse. It fortuned that Alexander came one
day with his Father into the Stable; What a Horse (said he) is spoiled here for
want of good Horsemanship? And so coming more near, and gently clapping him,
without any great difficulty he got upon his Back, and using both the Spur and
the Rod to the uttermost, he ran and managed him so up and down, that the Horse
seemed proud of his Rider: and having rode his fill, he brought the Horse back
again. As he alighted, the King for joy embraced and kissed him, and with tears
in his eyes said; O Son; seek out for some other Kingdom suitable to the
greatness of thy heart, for Macedonia cannot suffice thee: So that even then
the prudent Father did presage, that all his possessions were far insufficient
for his Sons heart. After this, King Philip determined to make War against all
Greece; for the maintenance whereof, he thought it great advantage if he might
first win Bizantium, a famous City on the Sea Coast. Wherefore committing the
Charge and Government of his Realm to his Son, being then fifteen years of Age,
he laid siege to the Town, which made him great resistance: When he had
disp^nded all his riches and treasure about the siege, he was driven to so
narrow a shift, that to furnish himself with money, he became a Pyrate, and
roved on the Sea, where he took 170 Ships, the spoil whereof he divided among
his Soldiers: And least his whole Army should be detained about the siege of
one City, he selected the choicest Bands of all his Soldiers, and marched into
Cherson^sius, where he took and put to sack many Towns; and because his Son
Alexander was then about eighteen years of age, and had showed an evident proof
of his Virtue and Manhood in all his Attempts, his Father sent for him thither,
to the intent, that under him he might learn and exercise all the feats
belonging to a Soldier; and with him made a Voyage into Scythia, upon no other
quarrel but to spoil the Country. Thus using the way of Merchants, with the
gain of one War he did bear out the charges of another. After he brought the
Country in subjection, because no riches of gold nor silver was to be gotten
there, he brought from thence 20000 men, women and children, besides a great
multitude of Cattle, with 20000 choice Mares to make a Race in Macedon. In his
return he was encountered by the Tribals, who denied him passage, except they
might have part of his Booty: Whereupon, debating of the matter, from words
they fell to fighting; in which King Philip was so wounded in his Thigh, that
through the violence of the Thrust, the Horse was run through the body; and all
men judging him to be slain, the Booty was lost.

As soon as he was recovered of his wound, his dissembled grudge against the
Athenians burst out so far, that he made open War against them; by reason
whereof, the Thebans seeing the danger so near at hand, gave succor to their
Neighbors; fearing, if the Athenians were overcome, the last fury of the Wars
would turn upon them. Wherefore the Cities that a little before were mortal
Enemies one to another, combined together in one League, and sent their
Ambassadors through all Greece; holding it most expedient, with a common Aid,
to withstand a common Enemy: Some considering the peril to be universal, stuck
to the Athenians; and some observing Philip's power increasing, and the other
decreasing, took part with Philip. In this War, Alexander had the charge of one
of the Wings committed to him, wherein his Noble Courage did well appear; for
he deported himself so valiantly, that he seemed nothing inferior to his
Father, nor any else, but by most just desert got the honor of the Victory;
yet he was defrauded thereof by the envy and sleight of his Father, as he
himself complained afterward. This Battle was fought at Cheronaea; wherein,
though the Athenians were the greater number, yet were they overcome by the
Macedonians, who were the fewer, but expert Soldiers, by reason of their long
and continual practice in Wars: Nevertheless, the Athenians (as men not
unmindful of their former honor) lost their lives valiantly. That day made an
end of all the Grecians glory, as well of their large Rule and Government, as
of their most Ancient Freedom and Liberty; which being hardly won, and long
time kept, was thus lost in a moment. For these things, and many other
experiments of Valor and Prowess in young Alexander, although the King his
Father did bear him singular affection and favor; yet nevertheless, by certain
occasions ensuing, that love was unhappily broken: For Philip being married to
Olympias, Mother of Alexander (as is said before) took to Wife, besides her, a
Lady called Cleopatra; whereupon fell great discord and unkindness between the
Father and the Son: The occasion was given by one Attalus, Uncle to Cleopatra;
who being at the new Marriage, exhorted the Macedons to make prayers to the
gods, to send the King and new Queen a lawful Heir to succeed in the Kingdom of
Macedon: Whereat Alexander being moved, Vile man as thou art (said he) do
thou count me a Bastard? And with that word flung the Cup at his head. The King
hearing this, rose up, and with his Sword drawn ran at his Son, who by the
nimbleness of his body avoided the stroke, so that it did him no harm.
Hereupon, Alexander inveighing against him with many sharp and despiteful words
departed, and went with his Mother into Epirus. Nevertheless, soon after, by
the means of one Demoratus a Corinthian, who persuaded the King that this
discord was nothing for his Honor, Alexander was sent for again, and much
solicitation was used before they could be well reconciled: Wherefore, to
confirm this Atonement, there was a Marriage made between Alexander the
Brother of Olympias (whom Philip by the expulsion of Acisba had made King of
Epirus) and Cleopatra the new Queens Daughter. The Triumph of the day was
remarkable, according to the State and Magnificence of such two Princes; the
one bestowing his Daughter, and the other marrying a Wife. There were set forth
sundry Interludes and Inventions, pleasant to behold: And as King Philip
(between the two Alexanders, the one his Natural Son, the other his Son-in-law)
was passing through the press without any Guard, one Pausanias, a young man of
the Nobility of Macedon, when no man suspected any such thing, suddenly slew
him; making the day dedicated to joy and triumph, to be heavy with lamentation.
This Pausanias, being a Boy, one Attalus enforced to the unlawful use of his
Body; and not content to do so himself, at another Feast he caused diverse of
his Familiars to abuse him likewise: which shame and villainy grieved the young
man so sore, that he complained to the King; whom although the foulness of the
fact moved much, yet for the love he bare to Attalus, and for the respect of
his service, he did forbear to animadvert against him. This Attalus was very
near unto the King, and in special favor, by reason he was Kinsman unto the
Queen Cleopatra, whom Philip had lately married: He was also Elected Captain
General of the Kings Army prepared to pass into Asia, being one that was both
valiant in his person, and no less politic in the discipline of War. Upon
these respects, the King endeavored by all the means he could to pacify
Pausanias, (incensed with indignation and revenge) as well by giving him great
gifts, as by placing him honorably among those Gentlemen that were for the
Guard of his Person. But all this could not appease the rage of his implacable
anger, which wrought so in him, that he determined to be revenged, not only
upon Attalus that did the villainy, but also upon the King that would not
administer Justice; which determination he put in effect, as is said before.
Many things might be said more of the doings and sayings of this Philip; but
one thing above all others is to be noted, that although, for the most part, he
was exercised in the travel of the Wars, and in Victorious Actions, yet had he
ever such affection to the Studies of Humanity and good Learning, that he both
did and spoke many things worthy of Memory, which were both witty and pleasant.
He lived 47 years, and Reigned 25, being the three and twentieth King of the
Macedons.

THE SECOND BOOK OF QVINTVS CVRTIVS.
Of the Acts of Alexander the Great, King of Macedon.
WHen Philip was dead, his Son, who for the greatness of his Acts, was
afterward called Alexander the Great, took upon him the Kingdom, the 426 year
after the building of Rome, being of the age of twenty years: His state stood
at that time subject to much envy, hatred and hazard from all parts; for the
Nations and Provinces, bordering upon him, could not well endure their present
bondage, and every one of them sought how to recover again their ancient
Dominions and Principalities. The first thing he undertook, after he was King,
was the severe punishment of as many as had conspired his Fathers death; which
performed, he celebrated his Funerals with great solemnity. As for his Estate,
he soon established it; and that much better then any man could have imagined
in one of so young and tender years: For being of some had in contempt, and by
some others suspected to be cruel; toward the one he deported himself so
gallantly, that he took from them all contempt; and to the other so gently,
that their imagined fear of his cruel disposition was clean taken away. He
granted unto the Macedons freedom and privilege from all Exactions and
Bondage, except from the service of War: By which act, he got so great favor
and love amongst his people, that all affirmed by one consent, how the Person
of their King was changed, and not his Virtue; his Name was altered, but not
his Government. In the beginning of his Reign, Rebellion was made against him
on all sides; but immediately, with an incredible courage and constancy of
mind, he appeased all the Tumults. That matter set in order, he went to
Corinth in Peloponnesus; where calling a General Council of all the States of
Greece, he was Elected Captain General against the Persians, who had afflicted
Greece with many overthrows, and at that present did posses the greatest Empire
in the world. His Father had designed this War before; but by the prevention of
death, he brought not his intention to effect. Whilst he was in preparation
for this Enterprise, he was informed how the Athenians, the Thebans and
Lacedaemonians, were revolted from him, and were Confederate with the Persians,
by the persuasions of the Orator Demosthenes, who was corrupted by them with a
great sum of money: For the Reformation whereof, Alexander so suddenly advanced
with his Army, that when he came upon them, they could scarcely believe he
should be present, having not received the least intelligence of his March. In
his way he treated with the Thessalians, and used to them such gentle words,
and apt persuasions, by putting them in remembrance of his Fathers benefit, and
of the Ancient Kindred between them by their descent from Hercules, that by an
Universal Decree of the whole Country, he was created their Governor, and they
delivered up unto him all his Treasures and Revenues: So great was the celerity
that this young man used, and his diligence so effectual, that he made all such
to fear him as before were revolted, or had him in contempt. As the Athenians
were the first that failed, so they first of all repented, extolling with
praises Alexanders young years (which before they had despised) above the
virtue of the Ancient Conquerours. They also sent Ambassadors to require of
him Peace, whom he sore rebuked when they came to his presence; but yet was
content at length to remit their offense: And although Demosthenes was chosen
one of the Ambassadors, yet he came not in his sight; but being on his way as
far as Cytheron, he returned again to Athens; which either was for fear that he
had so often inveighed against Philip, and stirred the Athenians against him;
or else to take away the suspicion of himself from the King of Persia, of whom
(it was said) he received a great sum of Gold to oppose the Macedons. The same
thing was objected against him by Aeschines in an Oration, where he says; For
the present the Kings Gold does bear his charges, but that cannot last him
long, seeing no riches can suffice his prodigal life. When Alexander had
pacified the Tumults that were begun in Greece, before he would pass his Army
into Asia, he made a journey against the Peons, the Tribals, and the Illyrians,
because he understood they were conspiring together, and bordered upon his
Country, and were accustomed to invade it upon every occasion; he thought them
to be no way neglected before he removed his Army from the City of Amphipolis:
He therefore marched against the Thracians, who at that time were not under the
Rule or Law of any.

In ten days he came to the Mount He^tis, in the top whereof he found them
encamped with a Power to ref^r his passage: Instead of Trencher, they had
imp^l^d themselves, with their Carriages, cross the Streights, purposing there
to withstand him; and it they should be invaded any other way then by the
Streights, they did determine to roll their Carriages down the Hill upon the
Macedons, to break their array. That Device was put in execution; but the
Soldiers had received before instructions by Alexander, as occasion should
serve, either to open their array to let the Chariots and Wheels pass through
them, or else to fall flat upon the ground, and by covering their bodies with
their Targets, to avoid the danger: They followed their instructions; and when
the Chariots were passed by, they with a great courage and shout mounted up
against their Enemies, and in a moment put them to slight. When Alexander was
passed the Mountain, he entered into the Country of the Tribals, as far as the
River of Ligeus: When Syrmus King of that Land understood of his approach, he
sent his Wife, and his Children, with such of his people as were not meet for
the wars, into in Island called Peuca, situate within the River of Danubius;
into which Island, the Thracians bordering with the Tribals, were fled also: It
was not long after that Syrmus himself fled thither in like manner. The rest of
the Tribals that were not with the King, withdrawing themselves into an other
Island, where they kept themselves against Alexander: But he by policy sought
the means to draw them out of their strength, whereby he slew of them to the
number of three thousand, and the rest fled away; so that of prisoners but few
were taken.

After this Battle he marched toward the River of Danubius, to the Island
whither the Thracians and the other Tribals were fled. They made notable
resistance against him; which they might the better do, by reason Alexander
wanted Boats to pass into the Island; the Banks whereof were so high and sleep,
that they would not be mounted on but with great difficulty, the River running
violently swift, by reason that the Stream was there driven into a straight.
When Alexander perceived the impossibility to assault them, he withdrew to
another place; where getting a few Boats, in the night he passed over one
thousand five hundred Horsemen, and four thousand Footmen. With that company he
set upon a people called Getes, who stood in order of Battle, on the further
side of the River, with four thousand Horsemen, and ten thousand Footmen, of
purpose to stop the Macedons passage: But by their sudden coming over, the
Getes were so afraid, that they did not abide the first assault.

It seemed to them a wonderful adventure, for Alexander in one night, without a
Bridge, to pass his Army over the broadest and deepest River in all Europe.

This struck such a fear and terror in their hearts, that they fled into the
Woods, Mountains and Desert places, leaving their City desolate; which was
taken by Alexander.

Syrmus King of the Tribals, with the Germans, and the other Inhabitants upon
the River of Danubius, sent their Ambassadors thither unto Alexander, to enter
with him into friendship: and he condescending unto their requests, inquired of
the Germans what thing it was which in the world they doubted most; thinking
indeed that the terror of his name had been the most fearful thing unto them.
But when they understood his meaning, they answered, That they doubted greatly
the falling of the Sky: with whose presumptuous answer Alexander was nothing
moved, nor further replied; only he said, the Germans were a proud people; and
thereupon dismissed them. As he was going from thence against the Agrians, and
the Peans, he was advertised, that Clitus Bardelius had rebelled, and had
confederated with Glaucius, the King of the Thaulaunts. He had also
intelligence, that the people of Anteri would give him battle in his passage:
wherefore he committed to Lagarus, King of the Agrians, (who was well beloved
of King Philip, and no less in the favor of Alexander) the charge to go
against the Anterians, and promised him, upon his return, to give him his
Sister Cyna in Marriage; and Alexander himself, with great celerity, marched
against Clitus and Glaucius, whom in sundry battles he overcame. Whiles
Alexander was about these things, he received intelligence, that diverse Cities
in Greece, and specially the Thebans, had rebelled; which thing moved him much,
and was the cause that he returned with speed to suppress these Commotions: The
Thebans, in the mean season, besieged the Castle of Thebes, wherein was a
Garrison of Macedons, and endeavored by all means to be Masters of it:
Alexander, by great journeys, advanced to their rescue, and encamped with his
Host near to the City. Such as (...) rule amongst the Thebans, when they saw
him come contrary to their expectation, and doubting whether such aid should
come to them from other Cities as was promised, began to consult how to
proceed: At length, by a general consent, they determined to abide the
adventure and extremity of the War.

The King in the mean season stood at a stay, giving them space to be better
advised, and alter their resolution: For he was of opinion, that no one City
would have made resistance against so great a Power as he had, being above
30000 Footmen, and 3000 Horsemen; all old Soldiers, and expert in the travels
of War: The trust of their experience and valor had caused him to undertake
the War against the Persians. Truly, if the Thebans had given place to Fortune
and time, and would have required Peace, they might easily have obtained, his
desire was so great to pass into Asia against the Persians. But the Thebans
being determined to try their force, and not to make any suit, fought against
the Macedons, far exceeding them in number, with great resolution: but whilst
the Battles were joining, the Garrison of the Castle issued out upon the
Thebans backs; whereby being enclosed, they were vanquished, their City taken,
spoiled, and utterly razed: Which extremity Alexander used of purpose, because
he thought the rest of the Grecians (being afraid by their example) would be
the more quiet while he should be in the Wars of Asia. To gratify the Ph^^eans
and Platae^ns, his Confederates, which brought many accusations against the
Thebans, he slew six thousand of them, and sold thirty thousand as slaves; the
money thereof amounted to the sum of four hundred and forty Talents: yet he
spared all the (...) of (...) the Poet; whereby he would witness unto the
world, the favor he did bear unto learned men.

In this City of Thebes was a notable Woman, called Tim^^lea, whom when a
Captain of Thrace did ravish, and would have enforced her to confess her money,
she brought him to a Well where (she said) all her precious Treasure was
hidden, and whilst he stooped down to look into the Well* she thrust him in,
and threw many great stones after him, whereby he was slain. For this Fact she
being committed to Prison, and afterward brought before Alexander, he asked
her what she was: She answered without fear, that she was Sister to Th^^genes,
who being Elected Captain General against King Philip his Father, manfully died
for the Liberty of Greece: whose stoutness and (...) the King marvelled so
much, that he caused her, wi^h her Children, to be set at liberty.

The Athenians had so great pity and comp^ssi^n of the Estate of the Theb^ns,
that contrary to the Commandment of Alexander, they received into their City
such of them as escaped; which King Alexander took in such displeasure, that
when they sent Ambassadors the second time to demand peace, he would not grant
atonement upon any other conditions, but that such Orators and Captains which
had stirred them to Rebellion, should be delivered unto his hands: But at
length it was so carried, that the Orators were reserved, and the Captains
banished; who straight fled to Darius King of Persia.

At such time as Alexander assembled the Grecians in Isthmos for the
determination of his journey into Persia, many Orators and Philosophers came to
visit him; Diogenes only, that remained about Corinth, kept himself away, as
one that esteemed Alexander nothing at all: whereat he marvelled much, and went
himself to visit him, as he was warming of himself in the Sun. He asked
Diogenes, if he had need of any thing that he might do for him: To whom
Diogenes gave neither reverence nor thanks, but willed him to stand out of his
Sunshine. In whose behavior and words Alexander took so great delight, that
turning to those that were with him, he said, If he were not Alexander, he
should wish to be Diogenes.

When he had put in order the affairs of Greece, committing the Rule thereof,
together with the Realm of Macedon, to the Government of Antipater, whom he
most trusted: In the beginning of the Spring, he marched to Hellespont with his
whole Army, which he transported into Asia with incredible speed and diligence.

When they were come to (...) further shore, Alexander with great force threw a
Dart into the Enemies Land; and as he was armed, leaped out of the Ships with
great joy, and there sacrificed; making petition unto the gods, that they would
vouchsafe to admit him* King of that Land. From thence he marched toward his
Enemies, and ^orbad his Soldiers to make any spoil of the Country; persuading
them to spare that which was their own, and not to destroy that Land which they
came to possess. He had not in this Army above the number of 32000 Footmen, and
5000 Horsemen, and but 180 Ships: wherefore it is hard to judge whether it be
more wonderful, that he conquered the World, or that he durst attempt the
conquest thereof with so small a power. To such a dangerous Enterprise, he
chose not out the young men in the first slower of their Age, but the old
Soldiers, of whom the most part, for their long continuance in Wars, should
according to the Custom ^e set at liberty, and excused from the service of the
wars, saving at their own pleasure: And there was no Captain, nor any other
that did bear O^fice in his Army, under the age of sixty years; so that the
Soldiers seemed to be Schoolmasters of the Wars, and the Captains, for their
gravity, appeared to be Senators in some Ancient Commonwealth: which was the
occasion, that in the Fight none of them minded flying; but every one,
confident of the Victory, did not trust to his feet, but to his hands.

Alexander, who every where made Sacrifice, did (...) most solemnity at Troy,
upon Achilles Tomb, of whom he was descended by the Mothers side: He judged him
most happy of all men before him, because in such glory he died young, and had
his Acts set forth by such a one as Homer was. From thence he passed forwards
into the Dominions of Darius King of Persia, who being the Son of Arsanus, and
the fourteenth King after Cyrus, had the possession of the Monarchy of the
whole Eastern part of the World. The chiefest cause that moved Alexander to
invade him, was to be revenged of the damages* and destructions wherewith the
Predecessors of Darius had afflicted the Country of Greece, and also for
demanding Tribute of Philip his Father; for the which he sent a proud and
presumptuous Embassage, calling himself, The King of Kings, and Kinsman of the
Gods. Lastly, he had written to Alexander, and called him his Vassal; and gave
Commission to his Lieutenants, that they should beat that Mad Boy (the Son of
Philip) with Rods, and afterward bring him to his Presence in Kings Apparel:
And furthermore, that they should sink both Ships and Mariners, and convey all
the Soldiers that should be left alive, beyond the Red Seas. They therefore
purposing to execute the Kings Commandment, assembled their Power at the River
of Granike, which does divide the Country of Troy from Propontides, having to
the number of 20000 Footmen, and as many Horsemen; with whom they had taken the
ground, on the other side of the River, where Alexander must needs pass over;
whereof when he was advertised, though he saw apparent danger in the
Enterprise, to fight in the water; and the Ouze against his Enemies, who had
the advantage of the higher Bank; yet upon a singular trust to his own good
Fortune, and the courage of his Soldiers, he charged upon the Enemy.

At the first he was sore encountered, and put in great danger of repulse; but
at length he vanquished and overthrew them: In doing whereof, there neither
wanted policy in himself, nor singular Manhood in his men. There was slain in
that Battle of the Persians, twenty thousand Foot, and two hundred and fifty
Horse; and of the Macedons but thirty four. This Victory was greatly
advantageous to Alexander's design; for thereby he won the City of Sardis,
being the chief strength the Persians had for the Mastering of the Seas: unto
which City, and to all the rest of the Country of Lydia, he gave liberty to
live under their own Laws.

He got also under his possession the City of Ephesus, which, the fourth day
after the Battle, was abandoned by the Garrison which Darius set there. In the
mean season, there came Ambassadors from Magnetio, and from the Triallians,
proffering the delivery of their Cities. Parmenio was sent to them with three
thousand Footmen, and two hundred Horsemen; with which Power he won Miletum,
that made-strong opposition: And marching from thence toward Hilicarnassus, he
got all the Towns thereabouts at the first approach, and afterward besieged
Hilicarnassus it self; which with great travel he overcame at length, and razed
it to the ground.

As Alexander entered into Caria, Ada, the Queen of that Country, who had been
spoiled of all her Dominions by O^ontobates, Darius Lieutenant (saving of one
strong City called Alinda^) met with Alexander, and adopted him for her Son and
Heir. He would not refuse the Name, and the proffer of her Liberality, but did
restore to her again the Command of her own City: And besides, for the Memorial
of her Benevolence, he put the whole Country of Caria under her Rule and
Subjection. From thence he marched into Licia and Pamphylia; to the intent,
that by getting the possession of the Seacoasts of those Countries, he might
cause the Sea-power of Darius to be of no effect. When he had subdued the
people of Pisidia, he entered into Phrygia, by which Country he was enforced to
pass, and marched toward Darius, with whom he had a great desire to encounter,
having understood that he was coming against him with a formidable Army.

THE THIRD BOOK OF QVINTVS CVRTIVS.
Of the Acts of Alexander the Great, King of Macedon.
ALexander, in the mean season, having sent Cleander to levy Recruits out of
Peloponnesus, established the Countries of Licia and Pamphylia, and removed his
Army to the City of Celenae: Through this City there ran, at the same time, the
River of Martia, made famous by the Poetry of Greece; whose Head springing out
of the top of a high Mountain, and falling down upon a Rock beneath, makes
almost deafning murmures flowing from thence, and watering the fields round
about, without increase of any stream saving his own; the color whereof being
like unto the calm Sea, gave occasion to the Poets to feign how the Nymphs, for
the delight they took in that River, did choose their dwelling under that Rock:
So long as it runs within compass of the walls, it keeps his own name; but
when it comes without, where the stream is more swift and vehement, it is then
called Lycus.

Alexander did enter into this Town, being forsaken of the Inhabitants; and
perceiving they were fled into the Castle, which he determined to win before he
departed, he first sent to summon them by an Herald, who declared, that except
they would yield themselves, they should suffer the extremity of the Law of
Arms. They brought the Herald into an high Tower, which was strong both by
Nature and Art, willing him to consider the height and strength thereof, and to
declare unto Alexander, that he had not a full dimension of the strength of the
place, for they did know it to be impregnable; and if the worst should fall,
yet were they ready to die in their Allegiance. Notwithstanding their words,
when it came to the point, that they saw themselves besieged, and all things
were scarce, they took Truce for forty days, with this Composition, That if
they were not rescued by Darius within that time, they would render it up into
his hands: Which they did afterward at the day appointed, when they saw no
Succors coming.

To that place there came Ambassadors to him from Athens, making request, that
such of their City as were taken prisoners at the Battle fought upon the River
Granike, might be restored to them. To whom answer was made, that when the Wars
of Persia were once brought to an end, both theirs, and all others that were
Greeks, should be restored to their liberty.

Alexander had his present care and resolution always upon Darius, who he knew
had not yet passed the River Euphrates: He assembled therefore all his Powers
together, purposing to adventure the hazard of the Battle. The Country was
called Phrygia that he passed through; plentiful of Villages, but scarce of
Cities: yet there was one of great Antiquity, called Gordium, the Royal Seat
sometime of King Mydas. The River of Sangaray does run through it, and it
stands in the midway betwixt the Seas of Pontus and Cilicia, being judged to
be the narrowest part of Asia, by reason of the Seas which lie on both sides,
representing the form of an Island; and if it were not for a final point of
Land that does lie betwixt those Seas, they would join both together. Alexander
having brought this City under his obeisance, entered into the Temple of
Jupiter, where he saw the Chariot wherein Mydas, the Builder of the City, was
accustomed to ride: The same, in the furniture and outward appearance, differed
little from other common Chariots; but there was in it a thing notable, which
was a Cord folded and knit with many knots, one so intricate within another,
that no man could perceive the manner of it, neither where the knots began, nor
where they ended: Hereupon the Country men had a Prophecy, That he should be
Lord of all Asia, that could undo that endless Knot. This possessed the King with
a mavelous desire to become the fulfiller of the Prophecy: there stood a
great number about him, both of Phrygians, and of Macedons, the one part of
them expecting the event, and the other fearing the rash presumption of their
King, for as much as they could perceive by no reason how the Knot should be
undone: The King himself also doubting, that the failing of his purpose in that
matter, might be taken as a token of his evil Fortune to come, after he had
considered the thing; What is the matter (quoth he) which way it be undone? and
striving no longer how to unknit it, he with his Sword cut the Cords asunder;
thereby either illuding, or else fulfilling the effect of the Prophecy.

This being done, Alexander purposed to find out Darius wheresoever he went;
and to the intent to leave all things clear behind his back, he made
Amphitorus Captain of his Navy upon the Coast of Hellespont, committing the
charge of the Field-Army to Egilochus: They two had Commission to deliver the
Islands of Lesbos, Scios and Coos, from the hands of the Persians; and for the
provision of their charges, had appointed to them fifty Talents, and sent to
Antipater, and such others who had the Governance of the Cities of Greece,
sixty Talents: He gave order, that such as were his Confederates, should with
their own power of Ships defend the Seas of Hellespont, according to the League
betwixt them. It was not yet come to his knowledge that Memnon was dead, whom
he most suspected; well knowing, that if he moved not against him, no man
should be his stop before he came to Darius.

Alexander came to the City of Ancira, where he made his Musters, and so entered
into Paphlagonia, whereunto the Grecians border, of whom it is said the Veneti
in Germany are descended: all this Country submitted to him, and gave him
Pledge, being excused from Tribute, seeing they never paid any to the Persians.
Calas was Captain there, who taking with him the Band of Soldiers that were
lately come out of Macedon, marched into Cappadocia: but Darius hearing of the
death of Memnon, was no less moved therewith then the case required; for then
all other hope set apart, he determined to try the matter in person; for he
condemned all things that had been done by his Deputies, believing Courage and
Conduct to be wanting in many of them, and that Fortune had failed in them all:
He came therefore to Babylon, where he encamped, and assembled all his Forces
together in sight of the City, because he would show the greater Courage; and
using the ensample of Xerxes in taking of his Musters, he entrenched so much
ground about, as was able to receive ten thousand men, within the which he
lodged in the night such as had been mustered in the day, and from thence they
were bestowed abroad in the plain Country of Mesopotamia. The number of his
Horsemen and Footmen were innumerable, and they yet seemed in sight to be more
then they were. There were of the Persians an hundred thousand, of whom thirty
thousand were Horsemen; of the Medians, ten thousand Horsemen, and thirty
thousand Footmen; of the Bactrians, two thousand Horsemen with broad Swords and
light Bucklers, and ten thousand Footmen with like weapons: There were of the
Armenians forty thousand Footmen, and seven thousand Horsemen: The Hircanians,
of great estimation amongst those Nations, had six thousand Horsemen: The
Dervicens were forty thousand Footmen, armed with Pikes, whereof part had no
heads of Iron, but the points of them dried in the fire: There were also of the
same Nation two thousand Horsemen. There came from the Gaspian Sea eight
thousand Footmen, and two hundred Horsemen: And with them of the rude Nations
of Asia, two thousand Footmen, and four thousand Horsemen. To the increase of
these numbers, there were thirty thousand Mercenary Soldiers that were Greeks:
Haste would not suffer to call for the Arachosians, Sogdians and Indians, with
others the Inhabitants of the Red Sea, Nations which had names scarcely known
to their own King. Thus Darius wanting nothing less then the multitude of men,
greatly rejoiced to behold them; and puffed up with the vanity and flattery of
the great men which were about him, turned to Charidemus of Athens, an expert
Man of War (who for the displeasure that Alexander did bear him, was banished
the Country) and asked him, if he thought not that company sufficient to
overthrow the Macedons? Whereat Charidemus, without respect of the Kings pride,
or of his own Estate, answered* Peradventure, Sir, you will not be content to
hear the truth, and except I tell it presently, it shall be too late hereafter:
This great preparation, and mighty Army of yours, gathered of the multitudes of
so many Nations, raised up from all parts of the Orient, is more fearful to the
Inhabiters hereabouts, then terrible to your Enemies: Your men shine in
Colors, and glister in Armor of Gold, exceeding so much in riches, that they
which have not seen them with their eyes, cannot conceive any such thing in
their minds: But contrariwise, the Macedons being rough Soldiers, without any
such excess, be terrible to behold: The Fronts of their Battles stand close
together, always in strength, furnished with Pikes and Targets for defense:
That which they call the Phalanx, is an immovable square of Foot, wherein
every Band stand close to each other, joining weapon to weapon: Every Soldier
is obedient to that which is commanded, ready at his Captains call, whether it
be to follow his Ensign, to keep his Array, to stand still, to run, to fetch a
compass, to change the order of the Battle, to fight on this side, or that
side; every Soldier can do these things as well as the Captains: And because
you shall not think Gold and Silver to be so effectual to this matter, they
began and observed this Discipline, Poverty being Master: when they be weary,
the ground is their bed; they are satisfied with such meat as they find by
chance; and they measure not their sleep by the length of the night. Think you
the Horsemen of Thessaly, the Achaians and Aetolians, which be invincible Men
of War, will be repulsed with Slings or Staves burned in the fire? It behooves
you to have like Force to oppose, and to be served of the same condition of
men: My counsel is therefore, that you send this Gold and Silver to levy
Soldiers out of those Countries from whence they come.

Darius was a man of a mild and tractable disposition, if the height of his
Estate had not altered the goodness of his Nature; which made him so impatient
to hear the truth, that he commanded Charidemus to be put straightways to
death, being a man that was fled to his protection, and that had given him
right profitable counsel: When he was going toward his death, he left not his
liberty to speak, but said, There is one at hand that shall revenge my death;
for he against whom I have given thee counsel, shall punish thee for not
following my advice: And thou being thus altered with the liberties thou have,
being now a King, shall be an example to such as shall come after; that when
they commit themselves to Fortune, they clearly forget their names. Whilst
Charidemus was speaking of these words, they which had the charge committed
unto them, did put him to death; whereof the King afterward took over-late
repentance, confessing him to have spoken the truth, and caused him to be
buried. There was one Thymones, the Son of Menter, a young man of great
activity, to whom Darius gave the charge of all the Foreign Soldiers, (in
whom he had great confidence) willing him to receive them at Pharnabasus hands;
and gave to Pharnabasus the Rule that Memnon had before.

Thus Darius being careful of the great business he had in hand, whether it
were through pensiveness of mind, or that his fancy did divine things to come,
was continually troubled with Visions in his sleep: He dreamed that the
Macedons Camp was on fire; and shortly after it seemed to him that Alexander
was brought to his presence in such kind of apparel as he himself did wear
when he was first chosen King; and that Alexander should be carried on
Horseback through Babylon, and so vanish out of sight. Hereupon the
Interpreters of Dreams betokened good fortune to himself, because of the fire
that seemed to be in his Enemies Camp, and for that Alexander, without any
vesture of a King, appeared in the vulgar apparel of the Persians. Others did
interpret it otherwise, that the Lightning in the Macedons Camp, signified
glory and victory to Alexander, and also the enjoyment of the Empire of Asia;
which they made more clear, forasmuch as Alexander appeared in the same
Vestures that Darius did wear when he was chosen King. Care besides, and
anxiety of mind (as often chances) brought things past again to remembrance.

It was rehearsed how Darius in the beginning of his Reign, changed the
Scabbard of his Sword from the Persian manner, into the fashion that the Greeks
used; whereupon the Caldees did prognosticate, that the Kingdom of the Persians
should be translated to those whose fashion he had counterfeited:
Notwithstanding, being glad of the interpretation of the Diviners, which was
every where published concerning his success, and of the Vision that he seemed
to have seen in his sleep, he commanded his Army to march forwards toward the
River of Euphrates. It was the Ancient Custom amongst the Persians, at
Sunrising, to raise their Camp, and a warning of their setting forwards, to be
by the sound of a Trumpet at the Kings Pavilion, upon which there stood the
Image of the Sun enclosed in Crystal, shining so bright, that it might be seen
thorowout the Camp: The order of their marching, was in this manner; the Fire,
which they call Holy and Eternal, was carried before on silver Altars; next to
them were the Diviners, singing after their Country manner; there followed
three hundred sixty five young men in Scarlet Robes, like in number unto the
days of the year; then came the Chariot consecrated to Jupiter, drawn with
white Horses, and a great Horse following, which they call The Horse of the
Sun: Such as did ride upon the Palfreys, did wear white Garments, bearing Rods
of Gold in their hands. Next in order came ten Chariots, garnished and wrought
with silver and gold: The Horsemen of twelve Nations followed in sundry sorts
of Armor; then came a Company that the Persians called Immortal, the riches of
whose Apparel exceeded far the rest, they had all Chains of Gold, Coats
embroidered with Gold, and Sleeves set with Pearl: These were followed, within
a small distance, by a Band of fifteen thousand Soldiers, called Doripherii,
reputed for the Kings Kinsmen, and apparelled almost like Women; more notable
for the variety of the riches of their Garments, then the Armor they did wear.
Such as were wont to receive the Kings Robes, did ride next before the Chariot,
upon the which Darius did sit on high, with great pomp and magnificence, his
Chariot being garnished on both sides with carved Images of their gods, made of
silver and gold; the beams whereof were set with Pearls and precious Stones,
with two Images of Gold standing thereupon, of a cubit length, one opposite to
the other; and over their heads an Eagle of Gold displayed: But amongst the
rest, the Kings Apparel seemed marvellously sumptuous, which was of Purple
empaled white, with a Border imbroidered of Gold, and Golden Faulcons, so
wrought, as if they were fighting together. He was girt Effeminately with a
Girdle of Gold, and the Sword that hung thereupon had a Scabbard of Pearl: the
Diadem which he did wear upon his head, called by the Persians Cydaris, had a
Roll about it of white and green. Next behind the King came ten thousand
Horsemen, who had all their Spears plated with silver, and their Spear-heads
gilded. He was enclosed on both sides with two hundred of the Blood Royal; at
whose backs there followed thirty thousand Footmen, and after them four hundred
of the Kings Coursers. Within the distance of one furlong, S^^ygambis, the
Mother of Darius, was carried in one Chariot, and his Wife in another, the
Train of their Women riding on Horseback. Next to them w^nt fifteen Chariots,
wherein the Kings Children were carried, and their Nurses, and their Eunuchs,
which are greatly esteemed in that Country: After them followed three hundred
of the Kings Concubines, all apparelled like Queens: Then came six hundred
Mules, and three hundred Camels that carried the Kings Treasure, guarded with a
Band of Archers. The Wives of the Kings Kinsmen, and the other that were about
the King, came riding next; and after them a great company of Slaves and
Varlets. Last* came the Rereward lightly armed, whereof every Captain severally
with his own Company closed the Army; such was the Order o^ Darius (...).

But on the other side, beholding Alexanders Army, there was to be seen a great
difference; neither the Men nor the Horse glistered so with gold and precious
Furnitures, but only with the brightness of their Harness: They were obedient
to their Captains Command, always in a readiness to stay, or to advance;
neither oppressed with the multitude, nor pestred with too much Baggage: They
wanted not in any place, either ground for their encamping, or victuals for
their feeding, whereby their small number was always sufficient when they came
to fight: Whereas Darius, the Lord of so huge a multitude, through the
straitness of the ground wherein he was driven to give battle, was compelled to
use the fewness of men, which he before had despised in the Enemy. Alexander
appointed to Abistamines the rule of Cappadocia; and marching with his Army
toward Cilicia, came to the place called Cyrus Camp, because Cyrus lodged
there when he passed into Licia against King Croesus. This place was distant
about fifty furlongs from the Straight entering into Cilicia: The Countrymen
use to call those Streights Pylae, where the natural situation of the place
had made a Fortification, as it were with man's hands. When Arsenes, Governor
of Cilicia, understood of Alexanders coming, remembering what Memnon persuaded
in the beginning of the Wars, he put it in execution when it was too late,
wasting and destroying throughout Cilicia all such things as he thought might
stand his Enemy in stead, leaving the Country waste which he was not able to
defend: whereas it had been much better to have taken the Straight before his
Enemies, where from the Hills lying over the way, he might without hazard have
hindered his entry, or have distressed his passage: But he leaving a small
number for the defense of the Straight, retired himself back to waste the
Country, which his part had been to defend from destruction. By his departure
it came to pass, that such as he left behind, thinking themselves betrayed,
would not so much as abide the sight of their Enemies, when a much less number
had been sufficient to have kept the passage; for the situation of Cilicia is
such, that it is environed about with a continual rough and steep Mountain,
which rising from the Sea on the one side, and fetching a compass about,
joyneth again with the Sea on the other side. Though the part of the Mountain
which lies furthest from the Sea, is plain and full of Rivers, amongst the
which two are most famous, Pyramus and Cydnus, but Cydnus most especial, not so
much for its greatness, as the clearness of the water, which from his first
Spring runs clearly through all the Country, and has no other River running
into him to disturb the pureness of the stream; for which cause it remains
always clear and cold, by reason of the Woods that do shadow all the banks.
Time has consumed many Antiquities within that Country, which are remembered of
the Poets: There may yet be seen the foundations of the Cities of Lirnessus and
Cebestus, with the Cave and Grove Corycian, where Saffron grows, with many
other things, whereof now remains but only their name.

When Alexander entered the Streights before mentioned, and beheld the
situation of them, he never in all his life marvelled more at his own
felicity; confessing, that it had not been possible for him to have passed, if
any had stood at defense against him; for that with stones only he might have
been overwhelmed; the Straight besides being so narrow, that there could not
pass above four in front: to the increase of which difficulty, the tops of the
Mountains hung over the way, which in many places was broken and hollow with
the streams that ran down from the Hills. Alexander sent the Thracians that
were light armed, to scour and discover the ways, for fear the Enemies should
lie there in ambush, and suddenly break forth upon him: He appointed also a
Band of Archers to take the top of the Hill; which were willed so to march,
that they might be always in a readiness to fight. After this manner he came to
the City of Tarsus, which was set on fire by the Persians, because Alexander
should find no harbor there: but Parmenio was sent thither with a choice
number of Horsemen to quench the fire; who understanding that the Enemies were
fled away at the news of their coming, entered into the City, and by that means
saved it from burning.

The River of Cydnus, spoken of before, did run through this City, where the
King arrived about midday, it being in the Summer season, at what time the
heat is no where more violent then in that Country: He took such delight in the
pleasantness of the water, that he would needs bathe his body therein, to wash
away the sweat and dust thereof; and being very hot, he entered naked into the
water, in the sight of all his Soldiers, thinking it should be a contentation
to them, to see that the Garments about his body were no other but such as they
commonly used themselves to wear.

He was no sooner entered, but all the parts of his body began to shake and
tr^mble, his face waxed pale, and the lively heat was mortified in all parts of
his body; his Servants took him up, and carried him into his Tent as one
besides himself, and at the extreme point of death: then there was a great
desolation and heaviness in the Camp; they wept, lamented and bewailed, that
such a King, so Noble a Captain, as had not been seen in any Age, should be
thus taken from them in the height of his Enterprise, and after such a manner;
not in Battle slain by his Enemies, but bathing in a River. It grieved them,
that Darius now being at hand, should obtain the Victory by such a chance,
without seeing of his Enemy; and that they should be enforced to return back
again, as men vanquished, by those Countries through which they had passed
before as Conquerours; in which Countries all things being destroyed by
themselves, or by their Enemies, they must of necessity die for hunger, though
no man should pursue them. It became a question amongst themselves, who should
be their Captain in flying away? or what he were that durst succeed Alexander?
and though they might safely arrive at the Sea of Hellespont, yet who should
prepare them passage there? When they had disputed these questions, their
argument, by and by, was turned into compassion toward their Prince;
lamenting, as men out of their wits, that such a Flower of Youth, such force of
courage as was in him, that their King and Companion in Arms, should after this
manner be plucked from them.

In the mean season, Alexander began to draw his wind somewhat better; and
when he came unto himself, he lifted up his eyes, and began to know his friends
that were about him: That the vehemence of his sickness somewhat assuaged, was
perceived, in that he began to understand the p^^il he was in: But the
solicitousness of his mind was a great hinderance unto his health; for tidings
came, that Darius within five days would be in Cilicia: He could not but take
it grievously, that such a Victory should be plucked out of his hands through
his infirmity, and that he should be taken as one tied in Fetters, and be put
to some shameful and vile death. He called therefore to him both his Friends
and Physicians, and said unto them, Ye see in what an extremity of condition
Fortune has surprised me; methinks the noise of mine Enemies does ring in mine
ears, and I who moved first the War, am now challenged, and provoked to the
Fight. When Darius did write to me such proud Letters, he was not ignorant of
mine Estate; yet peradventure he shall be deceived, if I may use mine own mind
in recovery of mine own health. My case requires no slack Medicines, nor slow
Physicians; I had rather die stoutly once, then to consume long time in my
recovery: wherefore if there be any hope or cunning in Physic, let it be now
seen; and think that I seek not remedy so much for mine own life, as I do for
the care I have to encounter with mine enemies.

When they heard him speak these words, they were in great doubt of his sudden
rashness; and therefore every one particularly did desire him, that he would
not increase his peril through any passion, but suffer himself to be ordered by
the advice of his Physicians: For they alleged, that unapproved Remedies were
not suspected of them without cause, seeing his Enemy had gone about to corrupt
such as were about him, by promising a thousand Talents to his Killer; they
thought no man would be so bold to make any experience of Physic upon him,
w^^ch for the want of trial thereof might in any wise give cause of suspicion.
There was amongst the excellent Physicians that came with Alexander out of
Macedon, one Philip of Acarnam, who was preferred to him for preservation of
his health, and had faithfully served him from his Childhood, and therefore
loved him with entire affection: He promised to provide for the King an
approved Remedy, but such a one as would work vehemently; but by the drinking
thereof he doubted not ^he said) but to expulse the force of his disease. That
(...) pleased no man, but only him who (...) thereof should abide the peril;
for he could (...) all things better then delay: Darius, and his power, were
always in his eye; and he had an assured confidence that the Victory should
fall on his side, if he might be able to stand in the fight of his men: the
thing that only grieved him was, that the Physician would not minister before
the third day. In the mean season, Parmenio, whom of all his Nobility he
trusted most, had exhorted him by his Letter, that he should not commit himself
to the cure of Philip, for that he was corrupted by Darius with a thousand
Talents, and the promise of his Sister in Marriage. Those Letters brought the
King into great jealousy, and moved him to consider secretly with himself all
those things that either fear or hope could put into his fancy. Shall I
adventure (thought he) to drink this Medicine? What if it be poison? Shall I
not then be accounted the cause of mine own death? Shall I suspect the fidelity
of my Physician? or shall I suffer mine Enemy to kill me in my bed? yet were it
better for me to perish by other men's Treason, then thus to die through mine
own faint heart. His mind being thus diversely perplexed, he would show the
Contents of the Letter to no man, but sealed it with his own Ring, and laid it
underneath his Pillow. Two days were passed in these imaginations, and the
third day the Physician came to his Beds-side with the Medicine ready made:
When the King saw him, he raised himself upon his Elbow; and taking the Letter
in his left hand, with the other hand took the Cup, and straightway supped it
off: When he had so done, he delivered the Letter to Philip to read; and
whilst he was reading, he beheld him continually in the face; supposing, that
if he had been faulty, some token would have appeared in his countenance. When
Philip had read the Letter, he showed more tokens of displeasantness then of
fear; and therewithal fell down upon his knees, and said; Sir, I see my life
does depend upon your health; but your Recovery shall declare, that I am falsely
charged with this Treason; therefore when by my means you shall get your
health, I trust you will not then deny me my life: In the mean season lay fear
aside, and suffer the Physic to work, and to have its operation; keep your
mind quiet, and suffer not your self to be troubled with the superstitious
carefulness of your friends; which though it proceeds of good will, is
notwithstanding a great impediment unto your health.

His words not only satisfied the King, but made him to conceive perfect hope
of his recovery; and said unto Philip, If the gods would have granted thee to
advise with thy self of a way to prove the confidence I have in thee, and the
good will I bear thee, thou could never have chosen so good a one as this;
for notwithstanding the Letter, I drank off the Physic, believing thee to be
no less careful for declaration of thine own truth, then for my health; and
therewith gave him his hand: Yet afterward, when the Medicine began to work,
it was such in operation, that it seemed to verify Parmenio his accusation;
for he fainted often, and had much labor to draw his breath. Then Philip left
nothing unproved, or undone, that might serve for his purpose: he laid warm
clothes to his body; and always as he fainted, revived him again with sweet
savours: and when he perceived him once come to himself, he ceased not to feed
him with discourse; and one while put him in remembrance of his Mother and
Sisters, another while of the great Victory that was at hand.

When the power of the Physic once entered into his veins, there appeared
straight in all parts of his body manifest tokens of health; First quickness
came to the Spirits, and afterward the body recovered his strength a great
deal sooner then any man looked for: For after the third day that he had been
in this sad condition, he walked in the sight of the Soldiers, who wonderfully
rejoiced to see him: And they showed no less affection unto Philip, whom every
one severally embraced, and gave him thanks, as if he had been a God. It cannot
be expressed, besides that Natural Veneration that Macedons use to bear unto
their Prince, in what Reverence they especially had Alexander, and how
fervently they loved him: They had conceived of him an Opinion, that he could
enterprise nothing, but that it was furthered by the Divine Assistance; and
Fortune was so favorable unto him, that his rashness was always an increase of
his glory: his age being scarcely ripe, and yet sufficient for so great things,
did marvellously set forth all his doings; and many things, which out of the
Wars would be counted lightness, were most acceptable to the Soldiers; as the
exercising of his body amongst them, his apparel not differing from the common
sort, with his courage and forwardness in the Field: which gifts given him by
Nature, and some things besides done of policy, did get him both the love and
reverence of his people.

When Darius heard of Alexander's sickness, he marched toward Euphrates, with
all the haste he could make in the conveyance of so multitudinous an Army: He
made there a Bridge, and in fifteen days passed over it, his people having a
great desire to get into Cilicia before his Enemy. Alexander had recovered his
strength, and was come to a City called Solos, which the Inhabitants yielded
unto him, and for two hundred Talents obtained assurance: Notwithstanding he
put a Garrison into the Castle, and there celebrated Plays and Triumphs which
he had vowed to Aesculapius and Minerva, for the recovery of his health; where
being so quietly given to his Sport, he showed how little he esteemed the
coming of his Enemies. Whilst Alexander was busied about these things, he
received pleasant news, how his men won a Battle against the Persians at
Halicarnassus; and that the Mindians and Cawnians, with diverse other Nations in
those parts, were brought under his obedience.

These Sports being once ended, he removed, and by a Bridge made over the River
of Pyramus, he came to the City of Malon; and from thence, with another motion,
came to a Town called Castabulum. There Parmenio returned to the King, who had
been sent to search the Streights that lay between them and the City of Issum:
He had prevented the Persians at that Passage; and so leaving men for the
defense thereof, he possessed himself of the City of Issum that was left
desolate: He departed from thence, and did drive the Persians out of the
Mountains, searching and clearing all the ways; so that having made all things
sure for the Army to pass, he returned again, both the Author of the Act, and
the Reporter of the thing done. Alexander encamped within the City of Issum,
and there debated in Council, whether it were better to pass on further, or
else to tarry there for a more sure power which was coming to him out of
Macedon: Parmenio was of Opinion, that this place was most safe to abide Darius
in, and to give him Battle, where both the Armies should be of like force, by
reason of the Streights, wherein no great multitude can fight at once. He
showed reasons why they ought to eschew the Plains, wherein their Enemies
should have great advantage through their great number, by which they might
close them about; wherein (he said) he feared not his Enemies stoutness, but
feared their own men might be overcome with weariness, where a multitude should
fight with a few, and fresh men succeed in the place of them that fainted. This
Counsel was received for good, and Alexander determined in the same place to
abide his Enemies.

There was in the Host of the Macedons one Sysenes a Persian, sent before time
from the Governor of Egypt unto King Philip; who being advanced with reward
and promotions, chose to live out of his own Country; and so following
Alexander into Asia, was esteemed among those that the King trusted well: A
Soldier of Greece delivered him a Letter from Nabarzanes, Darius Lieutenant;
he exhorted him to do some notable Enterprise, whereby he might win favor and
reputation with Darius: Sysenes innocent of this matter, was diverse times about
to present the Letter to the King; but seeing him full of weighty affairs in
providing for the Battle, he prolonged the matter: and whilst he waited for a
more convenient time, he brought himself in suspicion of Treason; for the
Letter was brought to the Kings hands before it was delivered to him, who
reading it, did seal the same with a strange Seal, and caused it to be
delivered to Sysenes, to prove thereby his fidelity: But because he concealed
the thing many days, and opened not the matter to the King, it seemed that he
consented thereunto; and therefore by the Kings Commandment he was put to death
by the hand of the Grecians.

The Greek Soldiers which Thimones had received of Pharnabasus (being those
that Darius trusted most) were now come to him: They persuaded much Darius to
retire back into the Plains of Mesopotamia; and if he would not do so, that at
the least he should divide his power, and not commit the whole force of his
Estate to one stroke of Fortune.

This Counsel was not so displeasant unto the King, as to such as were about
him; For they said, Mercenary Soldiers were always full of Treason, and were
to be doubted the more, for that they counseled the Army to be divided; which
was for no other purpose, but only that they might have opportunity to fly to
Alexander, when they should have any charge committed unto them: there is
nothing therefore more sure for us (quoth they) than to enclose them round
about with our Army, and to cut them in pieces for an example to the world,
that Treason may never be left unrevenged: but Darius, who was of a meek and
good disposition, refused to commit so cruel an act, in slaying such as had
betaken themselves to his trust: For he said, If we should defile our hands
with their blood, what strange Nation would ever then commit themselves into
our hands? and alleged, that there ought no man to lose his life for giving
foolish Counsel; for who would be bold to give counsel, if in counselling there
should be any peril? I call you (quoth he) to counsel daily, and hear the
diversity of your opinions, and mistrust not them that give me not always the
best counsel. He caused the Greeks to be answered, that he gave them thanks for
their good will: but in returning back, he said, that he should give up his
Country into his Enemies hands, which was not convenient; and considering the
force that Fame is of in War, in going back (he alleged) he should appear to
fly: But to defer the fight he thought it worst of all, seeing so great an Army
as he had (the Winter then approaching) could not be victualled in a desolate
Country, that had been wasted both by themselves and by their enemies. And for
the dividing of his power, he showed that he could not do it, observing the
custom of his Predecessors, who were not wont to hazard the Battle, but with
all their power: He declared, that Alexander before his coming seemed terrible
to the world; and through his absence was brought into a vain presumption: but
after he saw him come forwards, he became wary and well advised, hiding himself
in the straights of the Mountains, like those coward-Beasts, who hearing the
noise of the Passengers, do hide themselves in the dens of the Woods: He has
deluded his Soldiers (quoth he) with his counterfeit sickness; but now I will
not suffer him to prolong the fight any longer, which if he will refuse, I will
oppress him in his lurking holes.

These words he spoke with greater ostentation than truth: and sent his
Treasure and Jewels with a small Convoy to Damascus in Syria, and entered with
his Army into Cilicia, bringing with him, according to his Country manner, both
his Mother, his Wife, his little son and his daughter. It so chanced, that on
the same night, in which Alexander was come to the straight entering into Syria,
Darius came to the place which they call Pyla Amanica: the Persians not
doubting at all but that the Macedons would have forsaken the City of Issum,
and fly away for fear; for certain of them that were weak and could not follow
the Army, were taken; whom Darius, through instigation of the Great men about
him, raging in barbarous cruelty, caused their hands to be cut off, and to be
led about his Camp, to the intent they might behold the multitude of his Army;
and after sufficient view taken, he let them go, to declare to Alexander what
they had seen. Darius removed, and passed the River of Pyramus, purposing to
pursue after the Macedons, which he thought had been flying away: They who had
their hands cut off, came running in amongst the Macedons, informing that
Darius was advancing in great haste and fury. There was scarcely any credence
given to their words: but to be more certain of it, Alexander sent Spies
toward the Seacoast, to know whether Darius were there in person, or else had
sent some other to make a show of a power. The Spies returning, advertised that
his whole Army was at hand; and straightway the Fires might be seen, which gave
such a show (by reason they lay straggling so far abroad to get Forage) as
though the whole Country had been on Fire.

When Alexander was ascertained of the truth, he encamped in the same place
where the tidings came unto him, being marvellously glad because he knew he
should fight; especially in the streights, being the thing he had always most
desired. But as it is commonly seen, when danger and extremity is at hand, that
confidence is turned into fear; so now he doubted, not without great cause,
that Fortune might change upon him, by whose favor he had done so great acts;
and considered her mutability by such things as she had taken from others, and
given unto him. He saw there was now no prorogation of the time; but that after
one night passed, the Victory should be determined. On the other side, he
called to remembrance, that the honor of the Victory was a reward that far
exceeded the Adventure: and as it was doubtful whether he should overcome or
no; so he was certain if overcome, to die with honor and perpetual Glory. When
he had weighed th^se things, he gave order that the Soldiers should refresh
themselves, and at the third Watch be armed in a readiness to advance. He
himself went up into the top of a Mountain with many Lights and Torches about
him, where he made sacrifice unto the gods after his Country manner: And when
the hour was come, he appointed the Soldiers at the third sound of the
Trumpet, they should be in a readiness to march out to fight. Exhortation was
then given unto them, to pass on with courage and confidence; and by the break
of day they were come to the Streights, wherein their purpose was to prevent
Darius. By that time such as were sent before to scour the Country, came in,
and reported that the Persians were within thirty Furlongs. The Battles were
then stayed, and set in such order as they should fight.

As Alexander was advertised of Darius, so was he advertised of Alexander by
the Peasants of the Country, who came fearfully running, unto him, declaring,
that Alexander was at hand. These words were not believed; for they could not
think them to becoming, whom they thought before to be fled. But when they
perceived that it was so indeed, because they were in better order to pursue
their Enemies, then to encounter them in battle, they were struck with a
mavelous sudden fear. Every man took him to his Armor in haste; which haste,
and the calling that one made upon another, did greatly amaze them: Some run up
to the tops of the hills to view the Macedons, others fell to bridling their
horses; so that the Host full of diversity, and not ruled by any certain
government, with their hurley-burley did put all things out of order. Darius at
first had appointed one part of his power to take the Mountains, who setting
upon his enemies backs, might enclose them both behind and before: and assigned
another company to pass along the Seaside, which was on the right hand, to
keep his enemies doing on every part. He gave order also that twenty thousand
footmen with a Band of Archers, should pass the River of Pyramus, and give an
onset that way; but if they found any impediment why they might not do so, then
he willed them to retire into the Mountains, and invade their Enemies on their
backs: but fortune, which was of greater force than any policy, determined
those things that were well devised, according as she thought good. For some
durst not for fear execute the thing that was commanded them, and then the rest
labored in vain: for where the members fa^l; the whole body is confounded. The
order of Darius Army stood thus arranged to fight: his power was divided into
two Battles, one marching on the left hand, the other on the right; Nabarzanes
impaled the Battle on the right hand with a great power of Horsemen, and thirty
thousand Slingers and Are^^r.

Thymones was also in the Battle with 30000 mercenary Greeks, being in very
d^^d Darius chiefest Force, a power equal unto the (...) of the Macedons. In
the Battle on the left hand A^istem^nes was in the fore front with thirty
thousand Footmen, having planted for his succor and relief, such Nations as
were counted most Valiant: there were about the King, being also in the Battle,
three thousand choice horsemen that were of the ordinary Guard of his Person;
and forty thousand footmen, with the horsemen of Hercania and Media, and the
horsemen of other Nations were wings on both sides: And besides these numbers,
there went before his Battle in a forlorn Hope, six thousand slingers and
casters of Darts. All the plain ground between the Streights was filled with
Men of War; Darius Battle stood thus aranged from the Mountain down to the
Seaside. The mother and wife of Darius, with all the women, were received in
the midst of the Battle.

Alexander on the other side, set his square Battle of footmen called the
Phalanx (being the Macedons chiefest force) in the forefront: Nicanor the son
of Parmenio was Captain of the Battle on the right hand, and with him, Cenos
and Perdicas, Meleager, Ptolomeus and Amyntas, every one a Colonel of his own
Regiment: Parmenio and Craterus had the rule of the Battle on the left hand,
which stretched toward the Sea; but Parmenio had the chief charge. The Horsemen
were set in wings to both those Battles, the Macedons and Thessalian Horsemen
being appointed to the right hand Battle, and the Horsemen of Pelop^nnesus to
the Battle on the other side: before which Battle there were also set Slingers,
with Archers among them; and the Cretians that were lightly armed, advanced
before the main Battle. The Band of Agrians that were lately come out of
Greece, were assigned to encounter with those that Darius had sent to take the
top of the Mountain: He willed Parmenio, that as much as might be, he should
stretch out his Forces toward the Sea, and withdraw as far as he could from
the Hills which the Enemies had taken; but such as had direction by Darius to
take the Hills, neither durst resist such as came against them, nor yet compass
about such as were passed by them, but fled away at the first fight of the
Slingers: which thing chanced well for Alexander, for it was the thing that he
doubted most, that they from the higher ground should invade the open side of
his Battle, which lay unslanked toward them. The Macedons marched 32 in a
rank* for the streightness of the ground would not suffer them to move in a
broader body; but by little and little, as the plain between the Mountains
began to enlarge, so they had liberty to make their Battles broader, and also
for the horsemen to march upon the sides.

When both the Battles were come within fight of each other, the Persians first
gave a terrible and rude shout, which was again doubled by the Macedons, not
with their number, which was far inferior unto the Persians, but with the
r^bound of the Hills and the Rocks, which doubled every voice of theirs.
Alexander did ride up and down before the fronts of his Battles, making a sign
to his Soldiers with his hand, that they should not make too much haste to
join with their Enemies, for bringing themselves out of breath; and as he went
by, he used to every Nation sundry exhortations, as he thought convenient for
their dispositions and qualities: He put the Macedons in remembrance of their
ancient courage, and the number of Battles that they had won in Europe, that
they were come thither by his conduct not only to subdue Asia, but the
uttermost bounds of the Orient. He showed them to be the people that were
ordained to conquer the world, and to pass the bounds of Hercules and Bacchus;
he declared that both Bactria and India should be theirs; in respect of which,
the countries that they had yet seen were but trifles, and these were to be
gotten all with one Victory: Their Travel (he said) should not now be in vain,
as it was in the barren Rocks of Illyria, or in the Mountains of Thrace; but in
this Conquest the Spoil of the whole Orient was offered unto them; for the
getting whereof they should scarcely need to handle their Swords, since the
Battles of their Enemies wavered so already for fear, that with their approach
only they had almost put them to flight. He recalled his Father Philip unto
their memory, how he conquered the Athenians, with the Country of Boetia; how
he rased to the ground the noble City of Thebes: he made rehearsal to them of
the Battle won at the River of Granike, and of all the Cities that he had
taken, or that had been yielded unto him, with the Countries they had passed
through and subdued.

When he came unto the Greeks, he desired them to call to mi^d the great Wars
that had been made against their Country in times past by the Persians; first
by the pride of Xerxes, and after by Darius, who made destruction both by Sea
and Land, in such (...) that the Rivers could not serve them for Drink, (...)
the Earth furnish them with Victuals for Food: He rehearsed also how the
Temples of their gods had been by them polluted and consumed, their Cities
overthrown, and all Truces broken, which ought to be confirmed both by divine
and humane Law, when he passed by the Illyrians and Thracians, which were
accustomed always to theft and spoil; he invited them to behold their enemies
which glistered with gold, and bare no armor but spoil for them to take: he
encouraged them to go forwards like men, and pluck the prcy from those
effeminate women, and to make exchange of their craggy Rocks and Mountains full
of snow, for the plentiful grounds and lands of Persia.

By this time both Armies were advanced within the throw of their Darts, and
Darius Horsemen gave a fierce charge upon the right-hand-Battel of the
Macedons. For Darius desire was to try the Battle by Horsemen, rightly judging,
that the chiefest power of his Enemies consisted in their square Battle of
Footmen: So that the Battle where Alexander remained, was brought to the point
of being enclosed round, if he had not perceived the same in time; and
commanding two Bodies of his Horse to keep the top of the Hill, he brought all
the rest of them to the encounter of his Enemies. Having then drawn the
Thessalian Horsemen where they stood to fight, he commanded their Capt. to
bring them about behind the Battles, and there to join with Parmenio, to
perform with courage what he should appoint them.

By this time the Phalanx of the Macedons, in manner enclosed about with their
Enemies, fought notably on all parts: but they stood so thick, and were so
joined one to another, that they wanted (...) to wield their weapons. They were
so mingled, that in casting their darts they one let another, few lighting
on their enemies, and the most part falling on the ground without harm: and
being forced to join hand to hand, they valiantly used the sword. Then there
was great effusion of blood; for both the Armies closed so near, that their
Harness clashed together, weapon against weapon, and foined at one another
faces with their Swords.

There was no place for the fearful or the coward to fly back, but each set his
foot to other; and by fighting kept still their place, till they could make
their way by force; and so always passed forwards as they had overthrown their
Enemies: As they were wearied and traveled thus with fighting, they were ever
received with fresh Enemies; and such as were wounded might not depart out of
the Battle (as it had been seen elsewhere) their Enemies assailed them so
fiercely before, and their fellows thrust on so hard behind. Alexander that day
did not only such things as pertained to a Captain, but adventured himself as
far as any private Soldier, coveting by all means to kill Darius, which he
esteemed the greatest honor.

Darius rode aloft upon his Chariot, giving great provocations both for his
Enemies to assail him, and for his own Men to defend him: As Oxatres his
brother appeared most notable amongst them all in his furniture and personage,
so in affection toward the King he exceeded far the rest, especially in that
case of necessity; for when Alexander approached near, he thrust in before
Darius with the band of Horsemen, whereof he had the charge, and overthrowing
diverse, he put many more to flight. But the Macedons swarmed so about the King,
and were in such a courage by the Exhortation that each made to other, that
they charged again upon the Band of Horsemen: Then the slaughter was great, and
the overthrow manifest; about the Chariot of Darius the noblest of his Captains
lay, dying honorably in the sight of their Prince. For just as they received
their deaths wounds, so they fell, without turning their backs. Amongst them,
Atycies, Romithres, and Sabaces Governor of Egypt, having the charge of great
numbers of men, were overthrown and slain; and about them there lay by heaps a
huge number of the vulgar sort, both of horsemen and footmen. Of the Macedons
also some were slain, specially such as pressed most forward: among whom the
right shoulder of Alexander was lightly hurt with a sword. In this throng the
horses that drew Darius Chariot, were thrust in with Pikes, and growing
outrageous with the sense of pain, began to struggle and overthrow their
Master. He fearing therefore to be taken alive, leaped from the Chariot, and
was set upon a l^d Horse, and so fled away, casting his Diadem from his Head,
that he might escape unknown. Then the rest of his Army were dispersed by fear,
and flying by such ways as were open for them, they threw away the Armor,
which before they had taken for their defense: of such a nature is fear, that
it refuses the thing that should be its safeguard.

When Parmenio saw them fly, he straight commanded the Horsemen to pursue them,
and put all his Enemies to flight that were on that part. But on the other
hand, the Persians did put the Thessalian Horsemen to a fore distress, for at
the first shock they had broken one of their Troops; yet for all that they
wheeled about, and rallying themselves, they charged again the Persians with so
much courage, that they soon brake their Order, and overthrew them with a great
slaughter. The Thessalians had herein a great advantage, by reason that the
Persians, besides that they are armed themselves, have their horses also barbed
with Plates of Steel, which was the cause they could not on the Charge, or on
the Retreat, be so quick as the Thessalians were; for the Thessalians, by their
celerity, wherein the force of Horsemen chiefly consists, had overthrown many
of them before they could turn their horses about. When Alexander understood
that his men prevailed on their Enemies on that Wing likewise, he adventured to
follow in the Chase, which he durst not do before he knew the Battle to be
clearly won, and the Enemies repelled on all sides.

Alexander had not about him above a thousand Horsemen, with whom he slew many
thousands of his Enemies; for who is he that in an overthrow or Chase can
number men? Those few Macedons drove the multitude of their Enemies before them
like sheep; and the same fear that caused them to fly, stayed them likewise in
their flying. The Grecians that were on Darius side, under their Captain
Amyntas (who sometime had been in great Authority with Alexander, but then
against him) brake out from the rest, and marched away in order of Battle; but
the Persians fled diverse ways, some directly toward Persia, and some by
unfrequented ways escaped by the Mountains and the Woods. A few there were that
recovered their former Camp, which they could not defend any time against the
Macedons who were Conquerours, but the same immediately was won, abounding with
gold and silver, and most rich Movables, appertaining not only to the Wars,
but to all voluptuousness and excess; which riches, whiles the Soldiers
violently spoiled, they strowed the ways full of Packs and Fardels, in respect
of the covetous desire they had to things of greater value: But when they came
unto the Women, as their habiliments were more precious, so the more violently
they plucked them away: Their bodies also were not free from their lust and
inforcement; the Camp every where being full of tumult and lamentation, as
chance befell every one. The licentiousness of the Victors was such, that their
cruelty raged upon all Ages and Creatures, and no kind of mischief was wanting
amongst them. There might have been seen the variableness of Fortune; when they
which had prepared Darius Pavilion, did now reserve and keep the same for
Alexander, as for their old Master: For the Macedons had left that unspoiled,
according to their Ancient Custom, which are ever wont to receive their King,
when he is Victorious, into the Kings Pavilion that he has vanquished.

The Mother and Wife of Darius, that there were taken Prisoners, moved all men
to cast their eyes and inward contemplations toward them; whereof the one
deserved to be Reverenced for the Majesty that was in her, and for her Age; and
the other for the excellency of her Beauty, which through her misadventure was
nothing stained: She was found embracing her little Son in her arms, not yet of
the age of six years, born as an Inheritour to the Dominion which his Father
had lost: There lay also two young Virgins in his Grand-mothers lap, even then
marriageable, who languished and lamented, not so much through their own
private sorrow, as for the dolorousness of the old woman. About the mother and
the wife, were a great number of noble Women, that pulled their hair and tore
their clothes, without respect of what appertained to their estate; and
unmindful of the calamity which Darius wife and his mother were come unto,
called them still by the name of Queens, with such other titles of honor as
they did before. They all forgetting their own misery, were diligent to enquire
after the fortune of the field, and what success the Battle had, in which
Darius was in person; for if he were alive, they could in no wise think
themselves Prisoners: But he by the changing of many horses, was by that time
fled far away.

There were slain of the Persian Army, one hundred thousand footmen, and ten
thousand horsemen; and of Alexanders Company, only 504 hurt, and 32 footmen,
and 150 horsemen killed. So great a Victory was gotten with so small a loss.
Alexander that was wearied with pursuing of Darius, when he perceived the night
to draw on, and that there was no hope to overtake him whom he followed,
returned into the Persians Camp, which a little before his coming was taken by
his men. That night he made a banquet to such of his friends as he was
accustomed to invite; for the hurt on his shoulder, whereof the skin was but
smally perished, did not hinder him from keeping company. As they sat at meat,
suddenly they heard a pitiful cry, with a strange howling and lamentation, that
put them all in great fear; insomuch that they who kept the Watch about the
Kings Pavilion, fearing it to be the beginning of some great matter, began to
arm themselves.

The wife and mother of Darius, with the other Noble women newly taken
prisoners, were the cause of this sudden fear, by lamenting of Darius, whom
they supposed had been slain; which suspicion they conceived by one of the
Eunuchs, who standing before their Tent-door, saw a Soldier carry a parcel of
Darius Diadem, which he a little before had cast from his head. When Alexander
understood their error, he wept (as it was said) to consider Darius
misfortune, and the women's affections toward him; and for their comfort sent
to them one Mithrenes that betrayed Sardis, who was expert in the Persian
tongue; but yet considering that the sight of him, being a Traitor, should but
increase their sorrow, he sent a Nobleman called Leonatus, to declare unto
them how they were deceived, and that Darius was alive. He came toward the
Tent where the women were, with certain men in Arms, and sent word before, that
he was come thither from the King: But when such as stood at the Tent-door saw
armed men approaching, supposing their errand had been to murder their
Mistresses, they ran into the place where they were, and cried out, that their
last hour was come; for the men were at hand that were sent to kill them: the
servants therefore, that neither durst let Leonatus in, nor keep him out,
brought him no answer, but remained quietly to see what the event would be.
When Leonatus had long tarried at the door, and saw none come forth to call him
in, he left his men without, and entered amongst the Ladies, whose coming unto
them, before he was admitted, was the thing that frighted them most of all: The
mother therefore and wife of Darius fell down at his feet, requiring him that
before they were slain he would suffer them to bury Darius after his Country
manner; which last observance performed, they were content (they said) gladly
to suffer death Leonatus assured them, that both Darius was alive, and that
there was no harm meant toward them; but that they should remain in the same
estate they were in before. When Sisygambis heard those words, she suffered her
self to be lifted up from the ground, and to receive some comfort. The next
day, Alexander with great diligence, buried the bodies of such of his men as
could be found, and willed the same to be done to the Noble men of the
Persians, giving license to Darius mother, to bury so many as she listed, after
the custom of her Country. She performed the same to a few that were the
nearest of her kin, according to the ability of her present fortune; for if she
should have used the Persian pomp therein, the Macedons might have envied it,
who being Conquerours, used no great curiosity in the matter.

When these Rites were performed to the dead, Alexander signified to the
women-prisoners, that he himself would come to visit them; and causing such as
came with him to tarry without, he only with Ephestion entered in amongst them.
This Ephestion of all men was most dear to Alexander, being brought up as his
Companion from his Youth, and most privy with him in all things; there was none
that had such liberty to speak his mind plainly to the King as he had; which
he used after such sort, that he seemed to do it by no Authority, but by
sufferance. And as he was of like years unto him, so in personage he did
somewhat excel him: wherefore the Women thinking Ephestion to be the King, did
fall down and worship him (as their Country-manner was to do to Kings) till
such time as one of the Eunuchs that was taken prisoner, showed them which of
them was Alexander: Then Sisygambis fell down at his feet, requiring pardon for
her ignorance, for so much as she did never see him before: The King took her
up by the hand, and said, Mother, you be not deceived, for this is Alexander
also: Which his humility and continency of mind, if he had continually
observed to his latter days, he might have been thought much more happy then he
was; when he having subdued all Asia, from Hellespont to the Ocean Sea, did
counterfeit the Triumphs of Bacchus: or if that amongst the rest of his
Conquests, he would have labored to conquer his pride and his wrath, being
vices in him invincible; or if in his drunkenness he would have abstained from
the slaughter of his Nobility, and not to have put to death those excellent Men
of War without judgment, which helped him to conquer so many Nations. But at
this time* the greatness of his Fortune had not yet altered his Nature, though
afterward he could not bear his Victories with that virtue which he did win
them, but he behaved himself after such manner, that ^e exceeded in Continency
and Compassion all the Kings that had been before his time. He entertained the
two Queens, with those Virgins that were of excellent Beauty, so reverently, as
if they had been his Sisters: He not only abstained from violation of Darius
Wife, which in Beauty excelled all the Women of her time; but also took great
care and diligence, that none other should procure any dishonor to her: and to
all the women he commanded their ornaments and apparel to be restored; so that
they wanted nothing of the magnificence of their former Estate, saving only the
assured confidence that Creatures want in misery.

Which things considered by Sisygambis, she said unto the King: Sir, your
goodness toward us does deserve, that we should make the same prayer for you,
that we did sometime for Darius; and we perceive you worthy to surpass so great
a King as he was, in felicity and good fortune, who do so abound in Justice and
in Clemency. You vouchsafe to call me by the name of Mother, and of Queen, but
I confess my self to be your Handmaid; for I both conceive the greatness of my
Estate past, and feel that I can bear this present servitude: It lies only in
your hands how we shall be dealt withal, and whether you will make us notable
to the World, through your Clemency, or your Cruelty. The King comforted them
all he might; and willing them to be of good cheer, took Darius Son in his
arms; at which the Child was nothing afraid, having never seen him before, but
took and embraced him about the neck: He was so moved with the constancy of the
Child, that he beheld Ephestion, and said, Oh that Darius had some part of
this gentle disposition.

When he was departed from thence, he caused three Altars to be made upon the
River of Pyramus, and there did sacrifice to Jupiter, Hercules, and Minerva,
and so went forwards into Syria. He sent Parmenio before into Damascus, where
Darius Treasure did remain; who understanding by the way, that Darius had sent
one of his Nobles thither, fearing that for the smallness of his own number,
the Inhabitants of Dam^scus would keep him out, he determined to send for a
greater power: But by chance one Mardus fell into the hands of the Horsemen
that Parmenio had sent before to scour the Country, who being brought before
Parmenio, delivered him the Letters that the Captain of Damascus had sent to
Alexander; and besides the Letters, added of himself, that he doubted not but
that all Darius riches and his treasure would be delivered to him at his
arrival. Parmenio gave the charge to certain of his men to secure his person,
and then opened the Letters, wherein it was contained, that Alexander in all
haste should send one of his Captains thither with a small power: which being
known, he sent Mardus back again to Damascus, with a small Guard to accompany
him; but he escaped out of their hands, and came to Damascus before daylight.
That thing troubled Parmenio greatly, doubting that his Enemies had laid an
Ambuscado for him; and therefore he durst not adventure in an unknown way
without a Guide: Notwithstanding, upon the confidence he had in the felicity of
his Prince, he took some Peasants of the Country to conduct him the way, who
the fourth day brought him to the City of Damascus. The Captain doubting that
Credence should not be given to his Letter, pretended to mistrust the strength
of the Town, and made countenance as though he would fly away. On the break of
day he caused Darius Treasure (which the Persians call Gaza) with the rest of
all his precious things, to be brought forth of the Town, with a resolution to
betray the same into the Macedons hands: There were many thousands of men and
women that followed; a pitious sight to all that saw them, saving to him to
whose fideli^y they were committed: For he, to win himself thanks, purposed to
deliver to his Enemies a prey more precious then all the rest, which was such
of his Nobili^y as he had in his custody, with the Wives and Children of the
Great Men that bare Rule under Darius: And besides, the Ambassadors of the
Cities of Greece, whom Darius had left in his treacherous hands, as in a
Fortress, to his thinking, of most security. The Persians call those ( Gargabe)
that carry burdens upon their shoulders, and these having the carriage of
things of most value, when they could not endure the Cold for the Frost and
Snow that suddenly fell, they put upon them the Robes of Gold and Purple, which
they carried, together with the money, there being no man to let them; for the
adversity of Darius caused that base sort of men to use a wretched liberty.
Those kind of men seemed to Parmenio, at the first sight, to be no small Army;
and therefore weighed not the matter lightly, but gave Exhortation to those
that were with him, as though they should have fought a sore Battle; and willed
them to put their Sp^^s to their Horses, and give the Charge: which being
perceived by them that b^^e burdens, they (...) away for fear, and so did the
Men of War that were with them, by such ways as they best knew: The Captain of
Damascus counterfeiting such fear as others feared indeed, was the cause of all
this confusion. The riches of Darius were left unguarded, and lay scattered
abroad over all the Fields, with the money that was prepared for the wages of
so infinite a number of Soldiers; as also the apparel of so many great men and
Noble women, with Vessels and Bridles of Gold, ^avilions adorned with Regal
Magnificence, and Wagons full of infinite riches: A thing even sorrowful to
behold to the Spoilers, if any thing could stay the covetousness of men. Was it
not a pitiful thing to behold the riches that had been gathered together in so
great a number of years, whiles the state of the Persians stood in that
incredible height of Fortune, one part thereof to be torn with Bushes, and
another part sunk into the Mi^^? being so great besides, that the hands of the
Spoilers could not suffice for the Spoil, when the Horsemen had overtaken them
that fled: first they ^ound diverse women carrying their small Children, amongst
whom there were four Virgins, the Daughters of Occhus that reigned next before
Darius. They before that time had suffered change o^ Fortune, when the State
was altered from their Fathers Line; but this adversi^y was much more grievous
unto them.

There was in that number the wi^e of Occhus, the Daughter of Oxatres, that was
Darius's Brother, and the Wife of Artabasus, who was of the chief House of
Persia, with his Son called Ilioneus. The Wife and the Son of Pharnabasus were
also taken, to whom Darius had committed the charge of all the Seacoasts, and
with them the three Daughters of Mentor, the Wife and Son of the Noble Captain
Memnon.

There was scarcely any House of the Nobility of Persia free from that evil
adventure. There were also both Lacedaemonians and Athenians, that contrary to
the League between Alexander and them* took Darius part: amongst the Athenians,
Aristoiton, Dropides and Levertes, were of the greatest Line and Lineage: and of
the Lacedaemonians, the chiefest were Perisippus and Onomastorides, with Omais
and Callicratides. The sum of the coined money there taken, was two thousand
and sixty Talents, beside thirty thousand men, and seven thousand beasts that
carried burdens upon their backs. But the gods did persecute with due
punishment the Betrayer of such a Treasure; for one whom he had made privy to
the matter, pitying therein the Estate of his Prince, did slay the Traitor, and
brought his head to Darius; a comfort, not unapt in that season, to the
betrayed King; for thereby he was both revenged of his Enemy, and perceived
that the memory due unto his Estate, was not removed out of the hearts of his
people.

THE FOURTH BOOK OF QVINTVS CVRTIVS.
Of the Acts of Alexander the Great, King of Macedon.
Darius, who a little before was Lord of so great an Army, and who came unto
the Field carried aloft upon his Chariot, more like to Triumph then to Fight,
fl^d by the places then waste and des^rt, which he before had filled with his
infinite numbers of Men of War: There were but few that followed him; for
neither they fled all one way, nor such as followed, could keep pace with him
that so often changed Hors^s. At length he came to V^chae, where he was
received of ^our thousand Greeks, who conducted him to the River of Euphrates;
thinking all those his Countri^s lost, in the which by his speed he could not
prevent the com^ng of Alexander. Parmenio was appointed Governor of Syria, and
to be the Keeper of the Treasure and prisoners which he took at Damascus. The
Syrians could not at the first bear the new Government, because they had not
yet felt the Scourge of the Wars; but as they revolted, they were straightway
subdued, performing all that they were appointed to do. The Isle of Arade was
yielded to Alexander, whereof Strato was King, that had in subjection all the
Seacoast, with diverse of the Island-Countries; who being received into trust,
Alexander marched with his Army into the City of Marathon. There he received
Letters from Darius, that put him into great choler, because they were so
arrogantly written. The special point that moved Alexander was, for that Darius
writing himself King, did not vouchsafe to give him that Title, but did write
rather by way of Commandment, then of Request; proffering for the Ransom of his
Wife and Children, so much money as Macedon could receive: For the Government
of the Empire (he said) he put it to his choice, to try it by the Sword if he
list; but if he would be better advised, he willed him to be content with his
own Inheritance, and he would join in Amity with him, and become his Friend; in
which point he was ready to enter into Treaty with him. Alexander did write to
him again, after this manner:

Darius, whose Name thou ownest, wrought heretofore great destruction upon the
Greeks inhabiting the Coast of Helle^pont, and upon the Greek Colonies in
Ioni^, which are Greek Cities; and passed from thence to the Sea with a great
Army, to make War against Greece and Macedon: And also King Xerxes, thy
Predecessor, came to subdue us with infinite numbers, which being vanquished in
a Battle on the Sea, left notwithstanding Mardonius behind him in Greece, to
destroy their Cities, and burn their Countries: It is manifest besides, that
Philip my Father was slain by such as were corrupted thereunto with your money.
You undertake always unjust Wars; and being clad in Arms, go about, for all
that, to circumvent men with Treason; as thou of late, having such a number of
men in thy Army, did attempt my death with the promise of a 1000 Talents. I
am not therefore the beginner of the Wars, but only do repel such injuries as
are offered me; in doing whereof, through the help of the gods (who favor
always the right) I have brought the greater part of Asia under my subjection;
and having overcome thee in Battle by force of Arms, there is no cause that I
should grant thee any thing, because thou have not observed toward me the Law
of Arms: yet if thou will come and submit thy self, I promise thee that I will
deliver both thy Mother, Wife and Children; for I both know how to get the
Victory, and how to use such as I Overcome. But if thou fear to commit thy
self to us, I will give thee safe Conduct to come freely. As for the rest, when
thou writest to me, remember that thou writest not only to a King, but also
unto him that is thy King.

He sent this Letter by Thersipus, and marched from thence into Ph^nicia, where
the City of Biblon was yielded unto him; and so came unto Sydon, which was a
City of great Magnificence, by reason of the Antiquity and Fame of the
Builders: The same was under the Dominion of Strato, and supported by the power
of Darius; who yielding more by the constraint of the people, then of his own
good will, was thought unworthy to Reign there. Alexander made a Grant to
Ephestion, that he should make such a one King, whom the Sydons thought most
worthy of that Honor. There were diverse Noble young men in that City that had
familiarity with Ephestion, of whom he thought to have chosen one King; but
they refused his offer, affirming, that none might enjoy that Dignity, except
he were descended of the Blood Royal. Ephestion wondered at the magnanimity
that was in them, in despising the thing that others sought for by Sword and
Fire, and said, Continue you still in that virtuous mind, who are the first
that have understanding, how much better it is to refuse, then to receive a
Kingdom: Choose you therefore such a one of the Blood Royal, that may remember
he has received the Rule at your hands. But when they saw diverse gaping for
it, and for the greediness they had to Reign, they fell to flattering of such
as were near to Alexander; they resolved, that there was none more fit for that
Dignity then one Abdolominus, who being of the Ancient Blood of the Kings, for
poverty was enforced to dwell in a small Graunge without the City: His honesty
was the cause of his poverty (as it is to many other) and being exercised in
his daily labor, he heard no noise of the Wars that troubled all Asia. They,
of whom we spoke before, came into his Garden with Garments to apparel him like
a King, and found him weeding of his ground, whom they saluted King, and said,
You must make exchange of the vileness of your apparel, with these rich Ro^es
we here present you: Wash thy body that is now covered with Dust, and take upon
thee the Heart of a King; and in this Fortune, whereof thou art worthy, show
the same moderation and continency as at this present: And when as thou shall
sit in thy Regal Seat, having in thy hands the power of the life and death of
thy people, do in no wise forget the Estate thou were in when thou took'st the
Kingdom upon thee, nor yet for what purpose thou did receive it. The matter
seemed to Abdolominus like a Dream, who asked them if they were mad that would
mock him after that manner? But when he saw them affirm by Oaths the thing to
be in earnest, he washed himself; and receiving the Garment, which was of
Purple and Gold, he went with them into the Palace.

The Fame (as it is accustomed in such a case) did notably abroad of this
subject; some favored the cause, and some did disdain it; but such as were
rich, did upbraid his poverty and base Estate, to such as were near about
Alexander, who caused the King to send for him; and when he had long beheld his
behavior, he said: Your personage does not disagree from the Fame of your
Lineage; but I desire to know with what patience you did sustain your poverty: I
would to God (quoth he) I could bear my prosperity in like case now, when I am
a King: Th^se hands did get that I desired; and having nothing, I lacked
nothing. His words caused Alexander to conceive of him a mavelous good
Opinion; so that he gave unto him, not only the riches, stuff, and furniture
appertaining to the King before, but also many things that were taken from the
Persians; adding to his Dominion, all the Country near about that City.

In the mean season, Amyntas, who heretofore fled from Alexander to Darius, and
now he escaped in the last Battle, did come to Tripolis with four thousand
Greeks; where he imbarqued, and sailed to Cyprus; thinking the World to be such
then, that every one might enjoy what he could get, as if it had been his own
Inheritance. His purpose was to go into Egypt, thinking there to become an
Enemy both to Darius, and to Alexander, and to comply with the world, according
as time should serve. To bring therefore his Soldiers to think well of his
Enterprise, he declared how the Governor of Egypt was slain in the Battle, and
that the Persians left there in Garrison were but a small number, of little
force, and without any (...): He showed how the Egyptians used to Rebel against
their Governors; wherefore they were sure to be received as Friends: For
necessity (quoth he) has enforced us to prove our Fortunes, which failing us
in our first hope, we must now conceive that the time to come shall be much
better then the Fortunes we now enjoy. They all agreed with one voice, that he
should lead them where he pleased: Whereupon, thinking not good to pretermit
the occasion, whiles they were high with hopes, he conveyed them to Egypt, and
entered the Haven at Pelusium, under pretense that he had been sent thither by
Darius. When he had got Pelusium, he set forwards toward Memphis; at the Fame
of whose coming, the Egyptians being a light Nation, and more apt to raise a
Coil, then to maintain it when it was once begun, ran to him out of all their
Towns and Villages, with an intent to destroy all the Persians; who
notwithstanding the fear they were in, did not leave the defense of the
Country, but fought with the Greeks, and were put to flight.

After this Victory, Amyntas besieged Memphis, and his men destroyed so all the
Country thereabouts, that they left nothing unspoiled: Whereupon, Mazeches,
though he perceived his men much amazed with the fear of their late overthrow;
yet when he saw his Enemies scattered abroad, and without order, being overcome
with security, and the pride of their late Victory, he at length persuaded his
men to issue out of the City; and in setting upon their Enemies, to recover
again what they had lost: Which advice being good of it self, being thoroughly
followed, took most fortunate success; for they slew at that time both Amyntas
and all his company. This punishment he suffered for the offense committed to
both Princes, being neither faithful to Alexander whom he forsook, nor to
Darius to whom he fled. Darius Captains who escaped from the Battle of Issum,
gathering together such men as were scattered abroad, and such power beside as
they could levy in Cappadocia and Paphlagonia, did attempt to recover again the
Country of Lydia. Antigonus was Governor for Alexander there, who
notwithstanding that he had taken many Soldiers out of the Garrisons of
Alexander, yet he so little esteemed his Enemies, that he doubted not to
adventure the Battle. The Persians there received the like Fortune they did in
other places, and attempting the Fight in three sundry Countries, were
vanquished in them all.

At the same time, the Navy of the Macedons which Alexander had sent for out of
Greece, meeting Aristimones, (whom Darius had appointed to make War upon the
Coast of Hellespont) sought with, and drowned all his Ships. Pharnabasus,
Darius having exacted money of the Misonians, and put a Garrison in Scios,
passed into the Isle of Andros with a hundred Ships, and from thence he sailed
to Shiphnus; and putting Men of War into all the Islands, exacted of them
money. The greatness of the War that was in hand between two of the most
puissant Princes of Asia and Europe, did draw both Greece and Creet to Arms:
Agis, the King of Lacedemon, gathered together eight-thousand Greeks that were
come home out of Cilicia, and moved War against Antipater that was Governor of
Macedonia. The Cretians following sometime one part, and sometime another,
received one while a Garrison of Macedons, and another while of Lacedaemonians
to lie amongst them. But those Wars were of no great importance, for all men's
eyes were fixed upon the Wars that were between Alexander and Darius, whereupon
all the rest did depend.

The Macedons had subdued all Syria and Phenice, Tire only excepted; which
being the greatest and most notable City of all that Country, showed that they
esteemed themselves worthy rather to join with Alexander as Friends, then to
become his Subjects; for when he was come near unto them, and encamped upon the
main Land, which is divided from their City with a small Arm of the Sea, they
sent to him, by their Ambassadors, a Crown of Gold for a Present, with great
plenty besides of victuals for his Army: He received their Gifts as from his
Friends, and gave gentle Answers unto the Ambassadors; but he showed himself
much desirous to make Sacrifice unto Hercules, (whom the Tyrians specially
worshipped, and the Macedon Kings supposed themselves to be descended of him)
being admonished (as he said) by an Oracle. The Ambassadors made answer, That
there was a Temple of Hercules without their City, in the place which they call
Palaetiron, whereas he might do Sacrifice at pleasure. At those words Alexander
could not refrain from anger, whereunto he was much subject, but fell in a
great passion.

I perceive now ( quoth he) because ye dwell in an Island, ye trust so much in
the situation of your City, that ye despise my Land power: But I will shortly
make you understand, that you are situated upon the Main Land; and therefore
trust to it, that if ye receive me not in, I will enter into your City by force.

When the Ambassadors were dismissed with this answer, such as were near about
the King, persuaded them that they should not exclude him whom all Syria and
Phenicia had received: But they had entertained such a confidence, for that
their City stood in the Sea, being divided eighty furlongs from the Main Land,
that they absolutely determined to abide the Siege.

That Sea of theirs is much subject to the South-West-winde; which at every
Storm made the Waves beat so high against the shore, that it would not suffer
the Macedons to make any work for the uniting the Main Land to the City, it
being scarce possible to work any thing there when the weather was most calm.
The first work that the Macedons began, was by and by thrown down with the
vehemence of the Seas that were driven by the wind; nor could they make any
Fort so strong within the Sea, but that it was washed away, and brought down by
beating of the Waves; and when the Winds blew violently, they would bring the
Seas clean over the work. There was another difficulty no less then this; for
by reason that the Walls were environed about with the deepness of the Sea,
they could raise no Engine to shoot, but afar off out of the Ships; nor was
there any ground about the City, whereupon Ladders might have been reared
against the walls, or approach made unto them by Land. Alexander had no Ships;
and if he had any, and would have coveted to bring them to the walls, yet by
reason of the unstableness of the water, they might with shot easily have been
kept off. But amongst many other things, the Tyrians were wonderfully
encouraged by the coming of the Ambassadors, sent from Carthage to celebrate a
yearly sacrifice: for the Tyrians being the builders of Carthage, were ever
since that time had in Veneration of them, as their Parents and first Founders.
Those Ambassadors exhorted them in any wise to continue the Siege, and
promised them shortly aid; which thing they alleged might easily and soon be
done, for so much as at that time all the Seas were full of the Carthaginian
ships. Upon this encouragement, they determined to abide the extremity, and
placed their Engines upon the Towers and walls, dividing their Engines amongst
the Youth of the City. The Artificers, whereof the City had great plenty, were
divided into Workhouses, to make all such things as were necessary for the
Wars: There were devised certain Instruments wherewith they might pull down the
Works that their Enemies made, called Harpagons; and also Crows of Iron, named
Corvi, with all other things that might be invented for the defense of the
City. But a strange thing is reported, that when the Iron was put in the Forge,
and blown in the Fire, the same was seen to be full of drops of blood: which
Wonder, the Tyrians did interpret as a token of good Fortune toward
themselves, and as a signification of destruction toward their Enemies. A like
wonder was seen among the Maced^ns; for when a certain Soldier was breaking of
his bread, drops of blood appeared therein: whereat Alexander being astonished,
Aristander, that was most cunning of all the D^viners, did interpret thus the
matter: If the blood had appeared outwardly, then it had signified evil fortune
to the Macedons; but in as much as it was found within, it betokened
destruction to the City they went about to conquer.

Alexander considering his N^vy to be far from him, and that a long Siege
should be an impediment to his other affairs, sent Officers of Arms into the
City, to persuade them unto peace; whom the Tyrians, against the Law of
Nations, did drown in the Sea. Their u^^ust death stirred Alexander so much,
that he then utterly determined to go forwards with the Siege: But before he
could make his approach, it was of necessity for him to make a Peer or
Land-work, whereby they might pass from the main Land to the City: But in the
making thereof, there entered great despair into all men's hearts, considering
the deepness of the Sea, which they saw not po^^i^le to be filled scarcely by
any Divine power; for they thought no Stones so great, no Trees so high, nor
any Country to have such plenty, as might suffice for the building of a Bank in
such a place, considering the Sea remained always troubled; and the narrower
the place was between the City and the Land, so much more greater was the
violence of the waters. But Alexander, who had the policy to allure his
Soldiers to what effect he pleased, declared that Hercules appeared unto him
in his sleep, and gave him his hand, proffering him to be his Captain and his
Guide for his entrance into the City: Thereunto he added the killing of his
Ambassadors, whereby they had violated and broken the Law that all Nations
observed, and that there remained but one City which stayed his Victory:
thereupon he divided the work amongst his Captains, that every one might apply
his own Band, and put the work more forward.

There were great plenty of stones at hand of the ruins of the old City where
Tire stood before; and for the making of Boats and Towers, Timber was brought
from Mount Libanus: The work did rise from the bottom of the Sea like a
Mountain, but it was not yet brought to the High Water mark; and the further
the Peer was brought from the Land unto the Seaward, so much the sooner the Sea
did swallow up the materials whereof the Peer was made. Whiles the Macedons
were thus about their work, the Tyrians would come about them in small Vessels,
and give them words of reproach and scorn; as, they were now become goodly Men
of War, that would be made Pioniers, and carry burdens upon their backs: And
they asked them, if they thought Alexander to be greater then the god of the
Sea? But their reproach did not hinder, but increase the cheerfulness of the
Soldiers in their pain and travel; insomuch, that the work in a short space
surmounted above the water, and increasing much in breadth, approached near
unto the City: Then the Tyrians seeing the hugeness of the work, in the
increase whereof they saw themselves deceived, little thinking that it would
have grown to such a pass, in little Vessels came rowing about the Peer, and
drove the Soldiers with shot from their working; and because they could easily
bring their Boats suddenly forwards, return soon again, they hurt many of the
Macedons, without any danger to themselves, enforcing them to leave their work,
and fall to their own defense: For remedy whereof, and to avoid their Enemies
shot, they were compelled to stretch out Beasts skins upon Poles, like Sails,
and set those between them and their Enemies: and besides, at the head of the
Peer they raised up two Towers, from whence with shot, and casting of Darts,
they kept off the Boats that came about them.

On the other side, the Tyrians would land men with their Boats far out of the
sight of the Camp, and kill such as were carrying of stones. The Peasants of
Arabia also did set upon certain of the Macedons that were scattered abroad in
Mount Libanus, where they slew and took diverse? that was one cause which moved
Alexander to divide his Army; and lest he might seem to remain idle about the
Siege of one City, he appointed Perdicas and Craterus to take the charge of the
work he had in hand, and marched himself in person into Arabia, with such part
of his power, as was most apt for his present purpose. In the mean season, the
Tyrians prepared a great ship, laden with stones and gravel behind, so that
the forepart sloated above the water: which ship anointed over with pitch and
brimstone, they brought suddenly, by sailing and force of Oars, unto the Peer;
and there remaining, the Mariners set the ship on fire, and then leaped into
the Boats, which followed after to receive them. The ship thus set on fire, so
inflamed the Wood-work pertaining to the Peer, that before any rescue could
come, the fire had taken the Towers of the Peer, and all the rest of the Works
that were made in the head. When they, who leaped into the Boats, saw the
matter take such effect, they put betwixt the Timber, and other void places,
both Firebrarnds, and all such things as might give nourishment and increase to
the fire: So that the Towers, and all the rest, being on a flame, many of the
Macedons were consumed therewith; and the rest forsook their Arms, and threw
themselves into the Sea. The Tyrians, that were more desirous to take them
alive, then to kill them with staves and stones, did so beat them on the hands
as they were swimming, that for weariness they were glad to be taken up into
their Boats. The Towers were not consumed with fire only; for it chanced also
the same day a terrible wind to rise, which blowing from the Sea, brought the
Waves with such violence upon the Peer, that with often beating of the Seas,
the joints that knit the work together, began to loose and to leave their hold:
then the water that washed through, brake down the whole work in the midst; so
that the heaps of stones which were before sustained by the Timber and Farth
cast betwixt them, being broke asunder, the whole work fell to ruin, and were
carried away into the Deep.

By that time Alexander was returned out of Arabia, and scarcely found any
remainder or token, that any such work had been. In that case (as it is ever
used in things that chance evil) one laid the fault upon another, when indeed,
the violence of the Sea was the cause of all. Alexander began to make the Peer
again after a new manner; the head therefore lying into the weather and the
wind, and not the open side, as it did before; so that the forefront always
defended the rest of the work lying behind. He increased also the breadth
thereof, to the intent the Towers might be builded in the midst of the Peer,
whereby they should be less subject to the Enemies shot: whole Trees were put
into the Sea, with their tops and branches, and after, great stones were thrown
upon them; and over those a new course of stone and trees, and stone again; by
which device this whole work was joined and fastened all into one.

As the Macedons were busy to bring their work forwards, so the Tyrians were
as diligent to invent all such things, as might give impediment to their
proceeding. The chief practice was, for a great number or them to enter into
the Sea coast, afar off, out of the Macedons sight, and so come diving under
the water, till they came unto the Peer; where with Hooks they would pu^l the
branches of the Trees that appeared out of the stones, and (...) substance
followed after into the deep: For the Trees being discharged of their burdens,
were easily drawn away; and then the Foundation failing, the whole Work, that
stayed upon the Trees, fell to ruin. Amongst these impediments, Alexander
stood in great perplexity of mind, doubting whether he should continue the
Siege still, or else depart his way. When he was in this imagination, suddenly
his Navy arrived to Cyprus, and Cleander also with his Soldiers which he had
brought out of Greece: And having to the number of 180 Ships, divided them into
two Squadrons; whereof he committed the one unto Pythagoras, the King of
Cyprus, and to Craterus, and took charge of the other himself; committing his
own person to a Gallery called Cinquereme, which had five Oars on a side. The
Tyrians durst not adventure the Sea Fight, although they had a great Navy, but
set all their Galleys in a Front before the Walls of the City, which the King
assailed, and put to distress.

The next day, the Macedons, with their ships, environed the City round about,
and did beat down the Walls, especially with such Engines as they call Rams;
but the Tyrians straightway enforced, and made up their Walls with stones that
lay at hand, and raised up an inward Wall round about the City, which might be
their defense if the other failed: But their destruction approached on every
side; the Work was now wrought within the cast of a Dart, and the Ships gave
the approach round about the Walls* so that they were over-laid both by Sea and
Land: The Macedons had devised to join their Galleys, two and two together, in
such sort, that the fore-parts met close before, and the hinder parts lay far
off one from the other; and over the spaces remaining betwixt Poop and Poop,
they made Bridges, with Masts and Main-yards laid betwixt Galley and Galley,
fast bound together to carry Soldiers upon. When they h^d put their Galleys in
this order, they set forwards toward the City; and having rampired the Sterns
for defense of the Soldiers that were behind, they stood in their Galleys,
and did shoot and cast Darts against their Enemies, without any peril or danger
to themselves. It was Midnight when they had Commandment to set forwards,
after this manner; as the Ships were approaching on all parts, and the Tyrians
stood astonished for fear and desperation, behold, the Sky was overwhelmed with
dim Clouds, and a sudden darkness took away the light: Then the Sea, by little
and little, waxed terrible and rough; the Wind blew, raising the Waves, which
did beat the Ships one against another; the violence whereof, burst asunder the
Bands and Graspers wherewith the Galleys were fastened together: Which done,
the Bridges crashed, and flew asunder; and with the Soldiers that stood upon
them, fell into the Sea. There was great confusion; for the Ships entangled
thus together, could by no means be governed in such a Tempest; the Soldiers
disturbing the feat of the Mariners, and the Mariners giving impediment to
the Office of the Soldiers.

Thus (as it does often happen in such a case) the expert were obedient to the
ignorant; for the Ship-Masters that were accustomed to Command, for fear of
death, were directed by others. But at length, by force of Rowing, the Galleys
recovered the shore, the greater part of them being broken and torn. It
chanced, at the same time, thirty Ambassadors to come from Carthage to Tire,
who gave more comfort then assistance to them that were besieged: For they
showed how the Carthaginians were so assailed with Wars at their own doors,
that they could by no means send them succor; insomuch, that the Syracusans
were destroying Africa with Fire and Sword, and had encamped themselves under
the very walls of Carthage. The Tyrians yet were not discomfited, for all that
they were disappointed of their special trust; but delivered unto those
Ambassadors their Wives and their Children, to carry unto Carthage, thinking
to continue the Siege with greater resolution, if the things which were most
dear unto them were removed out of danger.

There was a Tyrian, who in an open Assembly declared, that Apollo (whom the
Tyriars greatly do worship) had appeared to him in his sleep, and declared to
him, that he had forsaken the City, and transformed the work that the Macedons
had made, into a great Wood. Hereupon, though the Author were of small credit;
yet for as much as men in fear are apt to believe the worst, they tied Apollo^s
Image with a Golden Chain, and bound fast also the Altar of Hercules, (to whom
the City was dedicate) thinking by detaining of the one, to keep safe the
other. The Carthaginians, in times past, had brought that Image from Syracuse,
and had placed it in the head-City, out of the which they were descended: For
their custom was to adorn Tire with such spoils as they had taken, no less then
they did Carthage it self. They, at that time, would also have been Authors
unto the Tyrians, for the renewing of an old sacrifice that had been omitted
many years, wherein they used to offer up to Saturn a freeborn child; which
being rather a sacrilege then a sacrifice, the Carthaginians received from
their first Founders, and still observed the same, till they were destroyed:
and had not the Ancient Men, by whom all things were governed, withstood it,
this wicked Superstition had taken place, which Nature and Humanity does abhor:
The necessity that was hanging over their heads, being more effectual then any
Art or Science, practiced not only such things as were accustomed for defenses,
but also found out what was never invented before: For to the disturbance of
the ships that approached the Walls, they devised long Rafters, to the which
they fastened grapp'es of Iron, and great hooks like Sythes; which let down
with Ropes by an Engine, either did tear the ships, or destroyed the men. They
invented also Targets or Me^tle to be made fire-hot, in the which they put
burning Sand, and scalding Lime, and then poured the same upon the Macedons
that came near to the Walls, being a mischief that they feared most of all
other: For when the hot Sand entered between the Harness and the body, there was
no means to avoid it; and where it touched, it burned to the bones; so that
they were forced to throw away their Harness, and tear away all things they had
upon their bodies; thereby they became subject to be hurt by their E^emies, and
were not in case to indamage them again: But specially the Grapplers that were
let down (called Corvi) took violently away many of the Soldiers that were
within the ships. Alexander seeing the obstinate defense of the Tyrians, was
weary of the Siege, and determined to raise it, and to go unto Egypt: For
considering in how short a space he subdued Asia, it grieved him to be detained
so long about the Walls of one City, whereby he omitted the occasion and
opportunity of greater Conquests. But he was as much ashamed to depart without
his purpose, as to continue there, and leave other things undone; judging, that
if he should leave Tire in that sort as a witness that he might be withstood,
it should much impair his Fame, by which he had gotten more then by force: And
it chanced at the same time, a Monster of an exceeding bigness did appear, as
well in the sight of the Tyrians, as the Macedons; which lying upon his back
above the water, came toward the Peer; and when he had lifted up himself at
the head of the Peer, it dived under the water again; and sometimes appearing
above, and sometimes hiding himself underneath, when it came near the walls of
the City, it vanished out of sight.

The sight of this Monster rejoiced both parties, the Macedons interpreting the
same to be sent them as a Guide for their direction to finish the work: And the
Tyrians divining, that Neptune, in revenging the usurpations that the Macedons
had made upon the Sea, would shortly destroy the work that they had made, in
such like sort as he had taken away the Monster. They, upon their own
imagination, conceived such a gladness, and prognosticated to themselves such
good Fortune, that they fell to banqueting and drinking; and when they were
well charged with Wine, at the Sunrising, they put Garlands of Flowers upon
their heads, and mounted into Galleys, not only with hope of Victory, but with
a Triumph made beforehand. It chanced at the same time, that Alexander had
conveyed his Navy to the contrary side of the City, and left upon the shore
thirty of the smallest Vessels, of the which the Tyrians took two, and put the
rest in danger of distress, until such time as the King hearing the Alarm, set
forwards with his Navy toward that part where the cry was heard. The first
Galley of the Macedons that came near them was a Cinquereme, the swi^test of
all the rest; which when the Tyrians espied, they came against her with two
Galleys cross upon her side; whereof the one struck at her full with her Spurn,
with whom the Cinquereme grappled; and the other, which was loose and at
liberty, fell upon her on the contrary side. But lest between them two she
might sustain some damage, one of Alexanders Trirems came to the rescue, with
such violence, that the Master of the loose Galley was struck into the Sea.
When the Tyrians saw that Alexander was come himself, and more of his ships at
hand, with strength of Oars, and great industry, they set their Galleys that
were entangled loose again, and at liberty, making toward their Haven with all
the haste they could: Alexander immediately pursued them; but when he came to
the Haven he could not enter, but was beaten off with shot from the walls, yet
did he take and drown the most part of their Galleys. After this Adventure, he
rested his Soldiers two days, and then commanded his ships to be brought
forwards, and the Engines in them; to the intent, that by assa^^ing the Tyrians
on all sides, he might put them into an extreme fear. Alexander with a
wonderful courage, not without great peril of his person, mounted up into the
top of a Tower that was made in a Ship, and there known by his apparel and rich
Armor, was chiefly assaulted, and shot on from all parts. He wrought wonderful
feats with his own person; for both with his Pike he slew diverse that stood at
defense, and afterward he fought hand to hand, with his Sword and Target,
throwing diverse down from their defense; for the Tower wherein he fought joined
hard to the Walls.

By that time the Engines, called Rams, with much beating, having laid low the
Walls, the Navy was got within the Haven, and certain of the Macedons had won
the Towers: The Tyrians then oppressed with so many miseries at once, were
clean discomfited; some fled unto the Temples for succor; some did shut their
doors, taking that kind of death they liked best; and others ran upon their
Enemies, to sell their lives at the dearest rate: but the most part got up into
the tops of their houses, and from thence did cast down upon their Enemies,
whatsoever came unto their hands. Alexander commanded all to be slain without
exception, saving such as fled into the Temples, and willed all the houses to
be set on fire. Though Proclamation thereof was made through the City, yet the
Tyrians that bore Arms could not save themselves; for as the women and Children
filled the Temples, so the men kept the Entries of their houses, ready to abide
the cruelty of their enemies: Yet the Sydonians were the occasion that many
were saved, who serving in the Garrison of the Macedons, and entering the City
with them, were mindful of their Affinity with the Tyrians (Agenor being the
Builder of both their Cities) and conveyed many into their ships, which they
privately sent unto Sydon; by that means fifteen thousand escaped the cruelty
of the Sword. The number of them that were slain may partly be conjectured, in
that there were found dead within the City, six thousand of such as did bear
Arms. The Kings anger against the City made the sight dolorous even unto the
Conquerours: For 2000, whom the fury of the slaughter had left alive, were
afterward hanged upon Crosses all along the Seacoast. The Ambassadors of the
Carthaginians were saved; but War was threatened to be made against them, from
the which he was then hindered by other business he had in hand.

Thus Tire was taken the seventh month after it was besieged; a City notable
to Posterity, as well through the antiquity thereof, as by the often change of
Fortune it had suffered. It was builded by Agenor, and many years was Mistress
of the Seas, not only thereabouts, but in all places where their Navies were
heard of; and if we may credit Fame, that City was the first which either
taught or learned letters. They builded Cities, and filled them with
Inhabitants throughout the greatest part of the world; as Carthage in Africa,
Thebes in Boetia, and Cades in Spain, upon the Ocean. It is believed, that by
reason of their free course through all Seas, and by visiting many strange
Countries, they had occasion to look out Seats in which to place their Youth,
wherewith they then abounded; or else, as some report, the Inhabitants
unwilling to dwell there, by reason of many Earthquakes, were compelled, by
force of Arms, to seek out new dwelling places. But when many casualties had
happened unto Tire, after this destruction being restored to its former height
of flourish, it now remains under the protection of the Roman Clemency. About
the same time Alexander received Letters from Darius, wherein at last he was
contented to name him King.

His request was, that Alexander would receive his Daughter Saptina for his
Wife, with whom he offered in Dower, all the Country between Hellespont, and
the River of Alys, would reserve unto himself only such Kingdoms as lay from
thence Eastward; and if peradventure he should refuse to receive this offer, he
willed to consider, that Fortune is not wont to continue long in one Estate,
and that the greater felicity men enjoy, the greater envy does attend them. It
was to be doubted ( he said) lest he exalted himself through some vain
affection, like as Birds use to do, whose natural lightness does convey them to
the Stars: for there was nothing more difficult, then in such young years, to
bear well the height and greatness of Fortune. He willed him also to consider,
that there remained yet many Countries that he had not touched, and that he
should not meet him always in the Streights, having to pass the River of
Euphrates, Tygre, Araxes, and Hydaspes, which were as Bullwarks unto his
Dominion; and when he should come unto the Plains, he would be ashamed of his
small number. He put him in remembrance, how long it should be e're he could
pass Media, Hircania, Bactria, and the Indians that bordered on the Ocean Sea;
and likewise the Sogdians and Arachosians, of whom men have no other knowledge,
then of their names only, with other Nations lying toward Mount Caucasus, and
the River of Tanais. And although no man should withstand him, or give him
Battle, yet he should grow in age ( he said) before he could pass so many
Lands. In the latter end, he advised him not to call him forwards, for he would
come soon enough to his destruction.

Alexander made answer to those Letters by the Messengers that brought them, to
this effect:

That Darius offered to him that which was none of his own, and made a proffer
to give that which he had already lost. For Lydia, Ionia, Aeolida, and the
Coast of Hellespont, which he appointed in Dower, were already become the
Rewards of his Victory: And as for Laws and Conditions, those were wont to be
given and appointed by the Victors, and received of such as were overcome; and
if he were ignorant in which of those two Estates he were, that he should
adventure the Battle once again: For he was not ignorant, he said, before he
passed the Sea, how Lydia and Cilicia were over small rewards for the making of
such a War. But his determination was to subdue and bring under his subjection,
both Persepolis, the chief City of his Empire, and also Bactria, and Ecbatana,
with the uttermost bounds of the Orient: He could fly no where but he was able
to follow; and therefore counseled him, that he should not fright him with
Rivers, who had learned how to pass Seas.

Thus the Kings wrote one to another; and in the mean season the Rhodians
yielded their City and their Haven unto Alexander, who committed the Rule of
Cilicia unto Socrates, and the Country about Tire unto Philotas. Andromachus
was made Parmenio his Deputy in Caria and Syria; for Alexander minding to
accomplish what he had begun, commanded Ephestion, that with his Navy he should
sail along the Coast of Phenicia; and so he came with his whole power to the
City of Gaza. About the same time there were solemn Triumphs and Plays at
Isthmos, accustomed to be celebrated by the confluence of all Greece. In this a
Council was had, and (as the Wits of the Greeks be sudden) they decreed to send
twelve Ambassadors unto Alexander, for the carrying unto him a Crown of Gold,
in gratifying the Victory he had won, and the Acts he had done for the
safeguard and Liberties of Greece; and yet a little before they hearkened how
the Fame went, and were ready to bend that way that Fortune inclined. Alexander
visited not in person all such Countries and Cities as refused to do their
obedience unto him, but made Conquest of them by his Deputies; for Gales
Mastered Paphlagonia, Antigonus Liconia, and Balachrus overcame Idarne, who was
Darius Lieutenant, and won Miletu^: Amphiterus and Egilachus, with a Navy of an
hundred and sixty Ships, subdued all the Islands between Asia and Achaia; and
also, by the consent of the Inhabitants, got Tenedos, always a Receptacle of
the Persians.

They were at the point to have gotten Scios, but that Pharnabasus, Darius
Deputy, having intelligence of it, did first apprehend all such as were of the
Macedons Faction, and committed the City with a small Garrison to Apolonides
and Athenagoras, that were inclined to the Persians. Alexanders Captains for
all this continued the Siege of the City, not so much in trust of their own
strength, as in hope of the Faction they had within the City; in which they
were not deceived: For through a Sedition which did arise between Apolonides,
and the Captains of the Men of War, occasion was ministered unto the Macedons to
enter the Town. When the Gate was broken up, and a Band of Macedons entered,
then the Citizens, which before had devised to Rebel against the Persians, took
part with Amphiterus and Egilocus; so that the Garrison of the Persians were
slain, and Pharnabasus, with Apolonides and Athenagoras, taken prisoners.

There were twelve Galleys taken, with their Soldiers and Rowers, besides
thirty Ships and Vessels of Pirates, with three thousand Greeks that were in
pay under the Persians, the Greeks serving to recruit the Forces of the
Macedons; and the Pirates being put to death, the other Ships were added to
their own Fleet.

It chanced that Aristonicus, the Usurper of Methyna, ignorant of any such
thing as chanced in the forepart of the night, came with certain Pirates Ships
to enter into the Haven; of whom when the Watch demanded what he was, he said
he was Aristonicus, and came to the succor of Pharnabasus: They answered, He
was at rest, and could not then be spoken withal; but it should be lawful for
him, being their Friend, to enter into the Haven for that night, and speak with
him when it was day. Aristonicus was the first that entered, and the ten Pyrate
ships followed him: But whiles they anchored their ships, the Watchmen drew the
Chain again over the Haven, and then called up such as lay near about them;
whereupon none of them durst resist, but were all taken prisoners, and
delivered to Amphiterus and Egilocus. From thence the Macedons passed to
Mytelene, which was kept by Chares of Athens, with a Garrison of two thousand
Persians; but when he was not able to endure the Siege, he yielded up the City,
on composition to have their lives saved, and to depart to Imbross. Darius
despairing of peace, which he thought to have obtained by his Letters and
Ambassadors, gave his mind to Muster a new Army, and freshly to renew the
War: Therefore he commanded the Captains and Rulers of his men to have a
Rendevouze at Babylon; and that Bessus, Governor of the Bactrians, should come
thither with all the power he could make. The Bactrians are the most hardy
people among those Nations, rough men, and much abhorring the delicateness of
the Persians* For by reason that they border upon the Scythians, which is a
Warlike Nation, they are accustomed to live by spoil, and are conversant
continually in Arms: But Bessus, who was suspected of Treason, affecting the
Kingdom, and who would not be content with a second place, put Darius in great
jealousies; who having an inkling that he aspired to be King, feared his
Treason; Bessus having no other way, but by that, to bring his purpose to pass.

Alexander wrought all the ways he could to obtain knowledge where Darius was,
and into what Country he was gone; and yet could not get any intelligence, by
reason of a Custom amongst the Persians, who are accustomed, with a mavelous
fidelity, to keep close their Princes secrets, in the uttering whereof, neither
fear of death, nor hope of reward, can cause them to bring forth a word. This
was an Ancient Discipline which the Kings there used among their Subjects, in
punishing, with loss of life, the lavishness of the tongue, which is there more
grievously chastised then any other crime: Nor is there, in those parts, any
Virtue looked for at any man's hands, who has not the gift of secrecy, whereof
Nature has given a facility in man. This was the cause that Alexander was
ignorant of all things that his Enemies did; and therefore continued his Siege
before Gaza. Betis was Captain there, who was a man of notable Fidelity toward
his Prince, and with a small Garrison defended the City that was of a large
compass: Wherefore Alexander perceiving the advantage of the Situation, caused
many Mines to be made; for the lightness of the ground covered the design,
having neither Rocks nor Stones to give any impediment: They began their Mines
on that side where they within could not behold them; and to avoid the
suspicion of any such work in hand, he caused an approach to be made to the
Walls with Towers that he had made of Timber; but the ground would not serve
for their carrying and removing, by reason of the looseness of the Sand
whereinto the Wheels sunk, and was the cause that the Joints of the Towers
brake asunder. About the carriage of them many were hurt, and much trouble they
had, both in withdrawing of them, and in setting them forwards. When he
perceived he could not prevail by that means, he drew off his men for that
time: But the next day he environed the City round about, to give an assault on
every part at once; and before he returned out of his Camp, he made Sacrifice,
after his Country manner, requiring the aid of the gods. It chanced, as he was
so doing, that a Raven flying by, let fall a Clod (which she carried in her
Claws) upon the Kings Head, where it brake in pieces, and the Raven flew unto
the next Tower, where her feathers were so entangled with pitch, that she could
not fly away, but was taken by the s^anders thereabouts. This was thought a
matter worthy on which the Diviners should consult, for he himself was not free
from the Superstition of such things: Therefore Aristander, to whom he gave
most credit, did interpret the same to be a sign of the destruction of that
City; but yet there was some peril (he said) appearing toward the Kings
person: for which cause he persuaded Alexander, that he should not go about any
exercise that day. Though it grieved him much, that one City should be a stay
and impediment unto him for his free passage into Egypt, yet he obeyed the
Prognosticators, and caused all his men, for that day, to retire. The Enemies
took courage at their departure, thinking fear to be the cause why they came
not forwards; and issuing out of the City, they set upon the Rear: But they
were more fierce in the beginning of the skirmish, then constant in the
maintaining of it: for when they saw the Macedons rally themselves, they
stayed, and pursued no further. Alexander hearing the Alarm, and quite
forgetting the peril that was prophesied unto him, at his Friends request put
on his Armor, (which he was seldom accustomed to do) and resorted thither
where the skirmish was most hot. There he was known by a certain Arabian, that
was one of Darius Soldiers, who took upon him a desperate enterprise to kill
Alexander; and therefore making his pretense to be as a Fugitive from the
Persians, kept his Sword secret underneath his Target, and fell down on his
knees before him; who judging that he had fled to him for succor, commanded
that he should be received among his own men: But the Arabian therewithal made
a violent thrust at the King with his Sword; which he stepping aside a little,
did avoid it from his throat, and cut off the Arabians hand that missed of the
thrust. Alexander then judged, that he had clean escaped the peril that should
have chanced to him that day: But (as I think) Destiny cannot be avoided; for
whiles he was eager in fight amongst the foremost, he was shot with an Arrow,
which passed through his Corslet, and did stick in his shoulder. Philip, his
Physician, did pluck it out, and great abundance of blood did follow, whereof
every man was afraid, for so much as they never saw an Arrow pass so far
through any Armor before: But he never changed countenance, nor color; but
causing the blood to be ^^enched, and his wound to be wrapped up, continued
still in the skirmish amongst the foremost, either suffering or dissembling his
pain. But when the blood that was stayed for the time did break out again, and
the wound, which for the newness thereof grieved him not much, began to swell
and rankle, as the blood waxed cold; then he began to faint and fall down, and
was taken up by such as were next unto him, and carried into his Tent. Betis
that perceived this, and supposing him to be slain, retired unto the City with
great joy and triumph. But Alexanders wound being yet unhealed, he caused a
Mount to be cast up as high as the top of the Walls, and the Walls to be cast
down in diverse places by the Miners.

They within made a Counter-work as high as the old Wall, but it did not reach
to the height of the Towers made upon the Mount; so that the inner parts of the
City were subject to the shot of the Enemy. But not long after, a Mine, the
Wall by it being overthrown, and a breach made, through which the Macedons did
enter, was the utter loss of the Town; where Alexander pressing on amongst the
foremost adventurously, had his leg hurt with a stone: Notwithstanding that, he
mounted up by the help of his Weapon (his former wound yet unclosed) and fought
amongst the foremost, being in a great fury, that in the Siege of one City he
had received two wounds. Betis that had fought notably, and received diverse
hurts, was forsaken of his own men; and notwithstanding which, he maintained
still the fight, and all his Armor was imbrued with his own blood, and his
Enemies: But when he was enclosed round, Alexander who was wont to wonder at
the Virtue of his Enemies, being puffed up with an insolent joy, said unto him:
Betis, thou shall not die as thou would thy self, but whatsoever torments
may be invented, believe that thou shall suffer them. For all which words,
there appeared in Betis no token of fear; but he beheld the King with an
undaunted countenance, and would not answer him one word: Whereupon Alexander
said; See you not how obstinate he does continue? He will neither kneel, nor so
much as ask mercy; but groans shall break his silence, if nothing else can do
it. Thus his Fortune did alter his Nature, and turned his Wrath into Fury: For
he causing Cords to be put through Betis feet, whilst he was alive, did draw
him about the City with Horses, glorying in that he did imitate Achilles (of
whom he was descended) in the like affliction of his Enemy.

There were slain of the Persians and Arabians ten thousand, and the Victory
was not unbloody to the Macedons. This Siege was not so famous through the
Nobility of the City, as it was by the double danger the King was in, who
making haste to pass into Egypt, sent Amyntas with ten Galleys into Macedon, to
levy more Soldiers: For though he were always a Conqueror, yet his men were
diminished; and he trusted not so much to the Soldiers of those Countries he
had subdued, as he did to his own Nation. The Egyptians being a people that
always were offended with the increase of the good fortune of the Persians, who
in their Government over them used much pride and covetousness: And therefore
seeking all occasions to revolt, had received Amyntas, who came to them rather
by way of treaty, then by force: and now especially at Alexanders coming, they
plucked up their spirits, and assembled a great number to meet him at Pelusium,
where they judged he would enter.

The seventh day, after he removed from Gaza, he came to the place in Egypt,
which now is called Alexanders Camp; from whence he sent his Army unto
Pelusium, by the Land-way, and he himself, with a choice Band of men, was
conveyed thither upon the River of Nile. The Persians durst not abide his
coming, being in doubt the Egyptians would revolt: And therefore, when
Alexander drew near unto Memphis, where Astaces, Darius Lieutenant, was with a
power of men, he came over the River to meet Alexander; and yiedling himself,
he delivered him eight hundred Talents, with all the riches belonging to the
King of Persia. From Memphis he passed upon the same River into the inward
parts of Egypt; and so ordered the Government of the Country, that he changed
nothing of their Laws and Customs: Which having effected, he had a great desire
to worship the Oracle of Jupiter Hammon. But it was declared unto him, that it
was not possible for him to march with any great number, the Country he had to
travel through being spread all over with barren sands, which being heated with
the Sun, would burn their feet in such sort, that it should be intolerable for
them to travel, not only with the heat and want of water, but also with the
rolling sand, which was so deep, and would so sink under their feet, that they
should not easily stir. All which difficulties the Egyptians set forth to be
greater then they were indeed. But Alexander, for the vehement desire he had to
exceed the condition of man, was so fervently bent to visit that famous Oracle
of Jupiter, whom either he believed, or desired that others should believe to
be his Father, that nothing could withhold him in performing of that
Enterprise: Therefore with such as he had appointed to accompany him in the
journey, he passed by water upon the Nile, until he came to the Marish of
Meotis. The Ambassadors of the Cyrenians came to him thither, and brought him
Presents; whom he gently entertained, assuring them of his Friendship; which
done, he went forward in his Voyage. The first and second days travel seemed
tolerable, not being yet come to the barren and desolate Wilderness; and yet
the ground they passed on was but unfruitful and barren earth: but when the
Plains appeared that were covered over with deep sands, they then looked round
about them, and sought for Land, as men be accustomed to do when they sail on
the Main Sea; for they could not judge themselves on Land, where they neither
saw Tree, nor any appearance of habitation, or haunt of men: And there was no
water to be found in that dry and burning place; and such as they had brought
with them in Bottles upon Camels backs, was consumed and spent: Besides, the
Sun was so hot, that it dried and burned up all things. When they were
afflicted after this manner, whether it were by the Will of God, or by chance,
the Clouds suddenly overwhelmed the Sky, and so shadowed them, that it was a
great comfort unto such as were wearied with heat, though they wanted water to
drink. But to supply their need, there fell by and by a great Shower, which
every man (for the great desire he had to drink) gaped to receive with open
mouth. When they had traveled four days in traveling these wild Deserts, and
were come near unto the place of the Oracle, there appeared a great swarm of
Crows flying low before them; and when the Army marched softly, they sat down
upon the ground, and sometimes flew forwards, as though they had been Guides to
show unto them the way. At length they came unto the place consecrate unto
Jupiter, where it was a wonder to see in the midst of so wild a Desert, a
ground so environed on all parts with high Trees, defending the heat of the
Sun, and such a number of Springs running every where, which caused the Woods
always to look green: The Air, all seasons of the year there, is like unto the
Springtime, wholesome, and temperate. This Country does border on the Ethiops,
toward the East; and upon the Arabians, whom they call Troglodites, upon the
South; whose Country stretched to the Red Sea: It confineth on the West with
other Ethiops, which are called Simnoes. Toward the North lies a Nation,
called Nalamons, who inhabiting upon a flat shore, are accustomed to live upon
the spoils of the Sea, and lie always in wait, upon the Coast, to spoil such
Ships as suffer wrack: The people which inhabit about the Wood, be called
Ammonians, and dwell in Cottages scattered abroad: The midst of their Wood,
closed about with a triple Wall, is unto them a Castle: In the first Ward is
the Palace of their Ancient Kings; in the second their Wives, Children and
Concubines were lodged; in which place the Oracle of Jupiter is also; and the
third is a place for their Men of War. There is also another Wood, having a
Spring, called the Fountain of the Sun; which in the morning is lukewarm, in
the midst of the day cold, and in the evening warm again: at midnight it is
scalding hot; and as it draws toward day, it diminishes his heat more and
more.

The same Effigies that is worshipped for Jupiter, has not the similitude of
other Images that Crafts-^^^^ do make for gods, but is very like unto the
fashion of a Navel, having in the midst thereof, an Emerald s^t about with
Pearls. When any answer is required, the Priests carry the same in a Ship of
Gold, that has many Plates of Silver hanging on both sides; the Matrons and
the Virgins follow after, singing a strange Song, after their Country manner;
whereby they believe they do oblige Jupiter to show his Oracle manifest and
true. When Alexander was come unto the place, the Eldest of the Priests, who
came to meet him, saluted him in the Name of Jupiters Son, for so (he said) his
mind was that he should be called: Whereupon Alexander forgetting the state of
his Mortality, said, That he did both receive and acknowledge the Name. Then he
demanded further, If the Empire of the whole World were appointed him by
Destiny? There the Prophet, prepared before to Flattery, answered, That the
whole World should come under his Obeisance. After that, he demanded, Whether
all such had suffered death that had murdered his Father? The Priest answered.
That his Father could not be harmed by the Treason of any man; but he said,
That all Philips Killers were put to death: And one thing he added more, That
he should be Invincible, till such time as he should depart to the gods.
Thereupon Alexander made Sacrifice, and both offered unto the Idol, and gave
great gifts unto the Priests. He permitted also his Friends to ask Counsel of
the Oracle for such things as they would demand: Yet they enquired no further,
but if it were Jupiters will that they should worship their King with Divine
Honors? To this it was answered, T^^^ if they honored their Victorious Prince
as a god, it should be acceptable unto Jupiter. If he had with judgment weighed
the Oracle, he might have well perceived the untruth that was therein: but whom
Fortune has brought to believe in her, she makes them, many times, more
desirous of glory, then able to receive it. Alexander not only suffered, but
commanded himself to be called the Son of Jupiter: and whilst he went about to
increase the Fame of his Acts, he did corrupt and deface them with such vanity:
and the Macedons, accustomed to be governed by Kings, but yet reserving a
greater shadow of Liberty then other Nations, did withstand him more
obstinately in affecting of his Immortality, then was either expedient for him
or them. But these things shall be declared in time convenient: I will proceed
to declare the rest of his Acts.

When Alexander was returned from Hammon, and come to the Marish of Meotis,
situate near unto the Isle of Pharos, he viewed the nature of the place, and
was at the first determined to build a City within the Island: But afterward,
considering the Isle not to be large enough, he chose out the ground where
Alexandria now stands (called by the name of the Builder) containing all that
ground between the Mear and the Sea; the walls whereof were in compass eighty
furlongs. When he had taken order for the building of this City, leaving such
behind him as he had appointed for the performance thereof, he departed unto
Memphis. He had a desire (not unreasonable, if it had been in time convenient)
to have seen both the inward parts of Egypt, and also of Ethiopia; and the
affection he had to view Antiquities, and the famous places of Mamnon and
Tyton, had near drawn him beyond the bounds of the Sun. But the Wars he had in
hand being of much more importance then any such idle Peregrination, gave him
no time to fulfill his fantasy; therefore he appointed Aestilus a Rhodian, and
Peucestes a Macedon, to the Government of Egypt, assigning them four thousand
Soldiers for defense of the Country; and gave Polymen thirty Galleys to keep
the Mouth of Nile. He made Apollonius Ruler of that part of Africa which
joyneth unto Egypt; and Cleomines Receiver of the Tributes in both Countries.
This new City was soon replenished with a great multitude; for Commandment was
given to all Countries thereabouts, to send Inhabitants unto Alexandria. It is
said, that when the King, according to the Macedons Custom, used the Ceremony
of steeping Barley at the raising of the Walls, the Birds came and fed
thereupon; which being taken by many for an unlucky Token, it was answered by
their Diviners, That there should be great resort of strangers to that City,
and that it should give nourishment to many Lands. As the King went down the
River of Nile, Hector, the Son of Parmenio, desirous to follow him, was
drowned; for the Vessel that carried him sunk, being crowded with over-many
men: He strived long with the Stream, but his garments gave impediment to his
swimming, so that his breath was near gone before he could recover the shore,
where for want of succor he died; whose unfortunate chance Alexander took
grievously, as one that did bear him special favor; and therefore caused his
body to be honorably buried.

The death of Andromachus, Lieutenant of Syria, whom the Samaritans had burned
alive, was the increase of Alexanders sorrow, for the revengement whereof he
made all the haste he could; and at his coming into Samaria, had the Authors of
the act delivered into his hands, whom he put to death, and then placed Memnon
in Andromachus Room. He delivered into the Methinians hands, Aristonicus and
Crijolaus, who usurped over them, whom they after many grievous torments did
hang over their walls: That done, he gave Audience to the Ambassadors of the
Athenians, the Rhodians, and the Scots. The Athenians did gratify unto him his
Victory; and required, that such Greeks as were taken prisoners might be
restored to liberty: The Rhodians, and the Scots, complained of their
Garrisons: He granted to them all their requests, and restored to the Mytelens
all their Pledges, increased their Territory and Dominion, in respect of the
fidelity they showed unto him, and gave them security for the money they had
employed in the Wars. He gave honor also, according to their deservings, unto
the Kings of Cyprus, who revolted from Darius unto him, and had aided him with
Ships at the Siege of Tire: Amphoterus, his Admiral, had Commission to drive
the Persians out of the Isle of Creet; but especially, that he should rid the
Seas of Pirates, who troubled and spoiled all the Islands, whilst these two
Princes, Alexander and Darius, converted their Powers the one against the other.

Having ordered these things, he did dedicate to Hercules, at Tire, a great
standing Goblet, and thirty Bowls of Gold: That done, he set his whole mind
and care upon Darius, causing it to be proclaimed, that every man should set
forwards toward Euphrates. But Darius understanding that his Enemy was gone
through Egypt into Africa, stood in doubt whether he should stay about
Mesopotamia, or withdraw into the inner parts of his Kingdom; judging, that he
in person should prevail with those remote Nations, in bringing of them
forwards to the War, which his Lieutenants should not be so well able to
effect: Yet when Fame had published, and he understood by assured
advertisement, that Alexander was returned out of Egypt, and fully resolved to
follow him with all his power into what Country soever he should go; he then
gave order, that the force of all the furthest Nations should draw toward
Babylon, knowing the resolution of his Enemy he had to match withal. Thither
resorted both Bactrians, Scythians, and Indians; (for the power of other
Countries were come thither before) and having the double number of men that he
had before in Cilicia, he prepared Armor for them with diligence, of which
many of them wanted: both Horsemen and Horses were armed with plates of Steel;
such as before had no Weapons but Darts, had Swords and Bucklers given unto
them; and to increase the power of his Horsemen, he delivered many Horses to be
managed and broken by the Footmen. He had prepared also two hundred Wagons set
with Hooks, which in those Countries were esteemed things of great force, and
judged to be of a wonderful terror to the Enemy: they were made with great
long Spikes sticking out before, and with Swords set overthwart on both sides:
The Wheels were also full of Iron Pikes right forth, and of great Hooks both
upward and downward, wherewith all things were cut in sunder that came in their
way. When his people were thus furnished with Armor, and provided sufficiently
for the Wars, he removed from Babylon, keeping the River of Tygris on his right
hand, and Euphrates on his left hand: He overspread, with his Army, all the
Plains of Mesopotamia, after that he had passed the River of Tygris; and
understanding that his Enemy was approaching, he sent Satropaces before with a
thousand chosen Horsemen, and afterward appointed six thousand to Mazeus, to
stop Alexander in the passage over the River; who had also Commission to waste
and burn all the Country where he judged his enemies should come, thinking to
famish them for want of victuals, considering that they had no other provisions
but what they got by plundering and by stealth; they themselves having plenty
brought of all things, both by Land and the River Tygris. At length he came to
a village called Arbella, which afterward was famous by reason of his
overthrow. There he left the greatest part of his Victuals and Carriage, and
made a Bridge over the River of Licus, and in five days conveyed over his Army,
as he had done before over Euphrates: passing forwards from thence about
fourscore furlongs, he came to another City called Boumello, and there
encamped. This Country served wonderful well for aranging of his Battles in the
large Plains, passable for Horses everywhere, and without shrubs, or short
brush to cover the ground withal, having so free a prospect, that the eye might
discern things a great way off. And if there appeared any Hills within the
Plain, Darius caused the same to be cast down, and to be made level to the
ground. Such as by conjecture made report to Alexander of Darius power, could
not be credited; for he could not think after so many slain, there could be a
greater power gathered together then he had before.

But he that doubted not any peril, much less the multitude of them, after the
eleventh encamping came to the River of Euphrates, over the which he made
Bridges, passing over his horsemen, and afterward his footmen. For Mazeus that
was sent against him with six thousand horsemen to hinder his passage, durst
not encounter him. When he had continued there a few days, not only to rest his
Soldiers, but also to confirm their minds, and to encourage them, he set
forwards resolutely against his enemies, fearing that they would have retired
back into the inward parts of Persia, where he should have been enforced to
follow them by waste places and deserts. Therefore the fourth day he passed by
Arbella, and came to the River of Tygris. All the Country beyond the River was
on a smoke, newly set on fire by Mazeus, who burned all things where he came,
even as he had been an enemy. Alexander at the first, by reason of the darkness
of the smoke, stayed for fear of Ambushments. But when they which were sent to
scour the Country, reported that all things were clear, he appointed a few
horsemen to prove the passage of the River, who found the deepness at the first
entry to come to the horse breast, and in the midst of the stream to the horse
neck. There is no River in all the East-part of the world that runs so
violently, which besides that the waters of other Rivers do run into it,
drives down stones with the stream; so that of its swiftness it is called
Tygris, which in the Persian tongue is to say an Arrow. The footmen thereof
divided into two Bands, and holding their Armor over their heads, were
enclosed on both sides with the horsemen, and so passed, till they came to the
deep of the channel, without any great difficulty. The King was the first
amongst the footmen that passed over to the further side, who (with his hand,
seeing his voice could not be heard) showed the shallow places unto the
Soldiers. But they had much to do to keep their footing, by reason of the
stones whereupon they stumbled, and of the violence of the water that took
their feet away. Such as carried burdens on their backs had the greatest
travel, not being able to stay themselves by reason of the trouble of their
carriage, were born down by violence of the stream. And whilst every man went
about to recover again his own, there ^ell greater strife amongst themselves,
then they had with the stream; and the heaps of fardels that every where flowed
upon the water, bare down many of them. The King cried to them, that it was
sufficient to keep their arms, and let the rest go, promising to recompense
every man: but they neither followed his counsel, nor did as he commanded them;
for besides the noise that was amongst them, Fear filled their ears as they
were swimming and wading through the water. At length where the stream was most
shallow they came forth, there being nothing miscarried or wanting amongst them
all, saving a few fardles. If their enemies had made but a proffer against
them, they might easily have been put to distress. But Alexander's good fortune
turned his enemies away from him, with which success he passed the River of
Granike, when so many thousands of horsemen and footmen kept the passage
against him. After that manner he overcame the multitude of his enemies in the
Streights* of Cilicia. Though his hardiness were such, that it sometimes wanted
praise, yet his felicity ever delivered him out of all extremity of peril.

If Mazeus had done his part, and set upon them as they were passing the River,
he might easily have put them to distress, being unarmed and out of order; but
after the Macedons had armed themselves (being then too late) he began to show
himself with a thousand Horsemen. When Alexander perceived the small number
that came against him, he caused Ariston Captain of the Peonians to give a full
charge upon th^n. The Horsemen that day notably behaved themselves, but
especially Ariston, who with his Sp^ar ran Satropaces the chief Captain through
the throat, and pursuing him into the midst of his Troop, thr^w him from his
horse, and cut off his head, which to his great commendation he brought and
thr^w down before the King. Alexander ta^ried there two days, and on the
morning caused warning to be given by Proclamation for his setting forwards.
But in the first watch of the night the Moon suffered an Eclipse; and losing
her brightness, became afterward red as blood, and then waxed dim and dark:
The strangeness of this sight did strike a religious fear amongst the Macedons,
whereof proceeded such a doubt and d^^ad, that they fell into a murmuring, why
they should be brought forwards in such a manner against the will of the gods
into the uttermost bounds of the Earth, where they could neither pass the
Rivers, nor enjoy the accustomed use of the Elements, finding nothing but waste
grounds and wild deserts* all which was endured (they said) for the ambition
of one man; for whose vainglory the blood of so many thousands should be shed.
He despises (says they) his own Country, he has forsaken Philip for his
Father, and has affected Heaven in his foolish imagination. And now it was
come near unto sedition, when Alexander, that in all things was without fear,
commanded the chief Rulers and Captains of his man of War to assemble at his
Pavilion, and there commanded the Astronom^rs of the Egyptians (whom he judged
to have most understanding o^ the Planets) to declare their opinions. They
understanding very well the revolutions of the time, and their appointed
courses, kn^w that the Moon was ever eclipsed, when that either she was
underneath the earth, or else when her light was bl^mished by opposition of the
Sun; which reason reserved amongst themselves, they accustom not to acquaint
the people with it. But affirm that the Greeks were under the Aspect of the
Sun, and the Persians under the Moon: and therefore so often as the Moon
^^^leth of her light, it signifi^d great destruction unto the Nations under
that constellation. And to confirm that opinion of theirs, they brought in old
Presidents of the Kings of Persia, to whom the eclipse of the Moon had
signified that the gods were against them in sighting of their Battle. There is
nothing more effectual then superstition to govern a multitude, which otherwise
is without rule, tumultuous, and mutable: but when they have once conceived a
religion, though it be but vain, they are more obedient to their Diviners, then
to their Captains; which thing might be well perceived, when the answers of the
Egyptians were divulged amongst the people. For they streightways were removed
from their dullness and despair, and stirred up to hope and confidence.

Alexander therefore that could use the time, and employ his Soldiers in their
good mood, in the second watch removed their camp, keeping Tygris on his right
hand, and the Mountains which they call Gordian on his left: By break of day
the Scouts that he sent before to discover the enemy, returned to him with
report of Darius his coming: then the Soldiers prepared themselves to fight,
and marched forwards in order of battle. But those who were discoverers for the
Persians were a thousand horsemen, who seemed to the Macedons to be a great
Army. The Scouts commonly have that property, that when they cannot find out
the truth, they imagine through fear things that be false. When Alexander
understood the certainty, he sent toward them a small number of his own
horsemen, at whose coming they fled, and were partly slain, and part of them
taken prisoners. That done, he sent forth another party, as well to discover
further, as also to quench the fire which the Persians had made through all the
Country; for as they fled away they put fire into the roofs of their houses,
and the stacks of Corn, which soon took hold above, and consumed all, till it
came to the ground. By the extinguishing of those fires, great plenty of Corn
was preserved, and abundance of all other things ensued amongst the Macedons*
this was a motive which encouraged the Soldiers greatly to pursue their
enemies* for they doubting that they might burn and consume all such things as
might serve to their use, pursued them with all the speed they could make
providence growing from necessity. For Mazeus, who before did burn the Country
at leisure, when he saw himself pursued, fled away, and left unto the Macedons
the greater part untouched.

Alexander understanding that Darius drew toward him, and was come within an
hundred and fifty furlongs, made provision of Victuals, and remained four days
in the same place. Darius Letters were there intercepted, which he had written
to the Greeks, in persuasion either to kill or betray Alexander. He doubted
whether he should recite the same Letters openly, or no, having no mistrust of
their fidelity and affection toward him. But Parmenio dissuaded him from
acquainting the Soldiers with any such promises of Darius, considering that
the committing of such an act consisted in one man's hands, and that
covetousness never judged any thing unlawful. He followed Parmenio's counsel,
and so removed his Camp. As they were marching, one of the Eunuchs that
attended upon Darius wife, brought word how she fainted, and was in great peril
of death; for she in very deed was so wearied with continual travel and
affection of mind, that she fell down in a swound betwixt her mother-in-law
and her young daughter, and so died. He had no sooner reported it, but another
came with tidings that she was dead indeed: whereat Alexander was no less
sorrowful than if his own mother had been in the same condition; and weeping no
less then Darius should have done, he repaired into the Tent where Darius
mother was sitting by the dead body: his sorrow there renewed, when he saw her
lie prostrate upon the ground, that present misfortune calling to mind her
passed calamities: she took in her arms Darius two Daughters, a comfort to her
in their mutual dolor, but that she was enforced to comfort them. Her young
Grandchild stood in her presence, the more to be pitied, because that for his
youth he yet understood not the calamity that was growing on him. A man would
have thought, that Alexander had wept for his own cause; he lamented and would
receive no comfort, but abstained from meat, and commanded all honor to be
done to the dead corpse after the Country-custome of the Persians. Worthy he was
thereby to receive the due reward of his meekness and continency. He had only
seen her once before, which was on the day she was taken, and then came not to
visit her, but Darius mother; the excellency of her beauty was no provokement
to him of lust, but of glory. Of those Eunuchs that were about the Queen,
there was one Tyriotes, who during this lamentation escaped by a Gate that was
unwarded, and fled unto the Persians Camp, where he was by the Watchmen brought
to Darius presence* When Darius saw him lamenting and tearing his clothes, he
was in a laboring expectation what his sorrow should be, doubting what thing
he might fear most. Thy countenance (quoth he) declares that some great
mischief is happened: Take he^d thou conceal nothing from my miserable ears: I
have learned to be unfortunate, and it is oftentimes a comfort to a man in his
calamity to know his mishap. Is it not the misusing of my wife and children*
that thou would inform me with? Which is the thing that I suspect most, and
fear to utter; and which (as I believe) is also most grievous unto them.
Nothing less (quoth Tyri^tes) the same honor that was given unto them by your
Subjects, the like is used by him that is the Conqueror: But your wife is the
cause of my amazement, who is even now dead.

When that word was once spoken, there was nothing but lamentation and mourning
throughout the Camp; and Darius could not be otherwise persuaded, but that she
was slain, because she would not consent to her misusement; and in the
vehemence of his sorrow, cried out:

O Alexander, what so great an offense have I committed against thee? Whom of
thy kindred have I slain, that thou should requite me with this cruelty?
Thou have done it without any provokement of my part. But be it so that thou
do move a just war against me, is it thy part therefore to make war with
women?

Tyriotes thereupon did swear by the immortal gods, that there was no kind of
villainy done unto her, but that Alexander lamented her death, and wept no less
then he himself would have done. Those words did drive him into a further
suspicion and jealousy, conjecturing that Alexander's behavior had proceeded
from the familiar conversation had betwixt them. Therefore he commanding all
persons from him saving only Tyriotes, that lies can take no place, Torments
streightways shall be brought before thee: I require thee therefore, if any
reverence of thy Prince remain within thy heart, tell me without compulsion the
thing that I desire to know, and am ashamed to enquire. Is it possible, being
of the age that he is, and having her in his hands, that he should not attempt
her? Tyriotes offered himself to be racked in trial of the cause, and called
the gods to witness, that she was never used but chastely and reverently. At
length, when he was thoroughly persuaded that his words were true; he covered
his face, weeping a long space, and afterward the tears yet distilling down
his cheeks, uncovered it, and holding up his hands to Heaven, said:

O you gods whom I worship, I require you chiefly to establish this Kingdom
unto my self: but if you have determined my ruin and decay, then my request
is, that none may reign as King in my Dominion, but even he that is so just an
Enemy, and so merciful a Conqueror.

And therefore, though he had twice before required peace at Alexander's hands,
and prevailed not, but had converted all his mind toward the Wars; yet he was
then so overcome with the continency of his enemy, that he sent twelve of the
chiefest of his blood as Ambassadors to treat with him upon conditions of
peace: Alexander calling a Council, gave them audience, to whom the eldest
spoke in this manner:

That Darius has now the third time demanded peace of you, no power has
compelled him, but your justice and continency has invited him unto it. He
cannot perceive that either his Mother, his Wife, or Children were prisoners,
saving for the want of their company. You take care of their chastities which
remain alive, like a Father; You give to them the honor appertaining to them,
and suffer them to continue in their former estate. I see that sadness in your
countenance which I saw in Darius when I parted from him, and yet he does mourn
for his Wife, and you for your Enemy: and if the care of her burial had not
been, you had now stood in Battle in readiness to fight against him. Is it any
marvel therefore if he require peace of such a man, that is so friendly
disposed toward him? What shall they need to contend with arms, between whom
there remains no hatred? In his former Treaty he offered that the River of
Alys, which boundeth upon Lydia, should be the Confines of your Empire: but now
he proffereth you in Dower with his Daughter to be delivered out of hand all
those Countries that lie between Hellespont and Euphrates. For the performance
of which his Promise, and for the observing of Peace, Occhus his Son now in
your possession shall be the pledge for his part. His request is, to have his
Mother and his two Daughters restored unto him, for which you shall receive
thirty thousand Talents. Except I knew the moderation that is in you, I would
not be so bold to say that this is a time when you ought not only to grant
peace, but also to seek for it your self: Look back and behold what a great
thing you leave behind you, and foresee how much it is that you covet before
you. An Empire over great is dangerous, and it is hard to hold that which you
are not able to receive. Do you not see, that th^se Ships which be of exceeding
greatness, cannot well be governed? Judge that to be the cause that Darius lost
so much, because that overmuch is the occasion of much less: It is more easy
to get many things, then to keep a few. How much more easily do our Hands
catch, then hold fast? The very Death of Darius wise now does show, that you
have not so great occasion to show mercy as you had before.

The Ambassadors did withdraw into another place, and he debated in Council
his opinion. It was long before any durst utter what they thought, because they
were uncertain how the King was inclined: at length Parmenio spoke, and said:

My opinion was ever, that the prisoners taken at Damascus should have been
delivered to such as would redeem them, whereby a great sum of money might have
been made of them, who now remaining in captivity, trouble the hands of many a
man of service. And now I think most necessary of all, that you exchange for
thirty Talents of Gold, this old Woman, and the two young Damzels, which be but
impediments and disturbance to your marches. Here is a rich Realm to be gotten
by Treaty, without any hazard of Battle. For there was never any before you (
quoth he) that was Lord of all the Countries in length and breadth lying between
Ister and Euphrates. He willed him therefore rather to have respect toward
Macedonia, then to look forward toward Bactria and the Indians.

These words liked not the King; and therefore so soon as Parmenio had made an
end of his Speech, he made this answer: And if I were Parmenio, I would rather
desire Money, then Glory. But now seeing I am Alexander, I am not in any doubt
of poverty, and have in consideration, that I am a King, and no Merchant: I
have nothing whereof I will make Sale, I will much less sell my Fortune. If I
were in mind to deliver the Prisoners, it were much better to give them
freely, then to ransom them for money.

Hereupon he called the Ambassadors, and answered them in this sort:

Show you to Darius, that giving of thanks is needless to an enemy, and let him
not think that I have had any respect to his friendship in those things that I
have done of mine own clemency and liberality. Nor let him impute the same in
any wise toward himself, but to the inclination of mine own nature; and that I
contend not against men's calamities, but against the force of mine Enemies. I
use not to make war with women and prisoners; for he must be armed to whom I
shall owe my hatred. And though it were so indeed, that he meant good faith in
his peace asking, yet peradventure I would take advice before I would consent.
But seeing that at one time he has provoked my Soldiers to betray me, and at
other times stirred up my friends with money to destroy me, I must pursue him
to the uttermost* not as a righteous enemy, but as one that works his ends by
treason. If I should accept the condition of peace that you do bring, I should
acknowledge him to be Conqueror. His liberality does give me all that is
behind the River of Euphrates, not considering in what place I speak now unto
you. Have you forgotten that I am passed the River of Euphrates, and encamped
beyond the bounds ye pr^ffer me in Dowry? Drive me from hence, that I may know
the same to be yours, wherewith you would infeoff me. He proffereth me his
Daughter with no greater liberality then he would do to one of his Servants.
Does he think to do me a pleasure in preferring me to be his Son-in-law before
Mazeus? Go and show this to your King, that both what he has lost* and what he
has yet in possession, shall be unto me the rewards of the War, which shall
determine the bounds of both our Empires, and by the fortune of the battle
which we shall fight to morrow, appoint to each of us our limits. Let him know,
that I came not into Asia to receive, but to give. If he would have been
content to have been the second person, and not coveted to be equal with me, I
would peradventure have granted his request. But as two Suns cannot shine on
the Earth at once, so likewise two such great Kingdoms cannot be at one time,
without the subversion of the world. Therefore let him either this day yield
himself, or else prepare against the morrows fight; nor let him persuade
himself to have any other fortune then what he has proved already.

The Ambassadors replied: That seeing he was resolved to proceed with War, he
did Royally that he was plain unto them, and did not feed them with hope of
peace. Their request was therefore that they might be dispatched to their
Prince, to warn him to prepare himself likewise. When they returned, there was
no way but to prepare for the fight. Wherefore Darius sent for Mazeus with
three thousand horsemen to keep the passages by which the Macedons should pass.
When Alexander had performed the Funerals of Darius wife, leaving a small guard
behind, with all such as were unprofitable for the fight, he set forward
toward his Enemies. His footmen were divided into two Battles, empaled with
horsemen on both sides, and his carriages were placed in the midst. He sent
Medinas with horsemen upon the spurs to discover where Darius was; but he not
daring to adventure far, because Mazeus was there strongly quartered, returned
back and reported, that there was nothing to be heard but the noise of men and
the neighing of horses. Mazeus also (the Scouts of Alexander being discovered)
gave intelligence to Darius of the approach of the enemy: Darius, who desired
to try the event of the Battle in the open Plains, commanded his Soldiers to
be armed, and put his Army in array of Battle. Two thousand of the Bactrian and
the Dahan horse, and four thousand of the Arachosians and Susians did make the
left Wing: These were followed by a hundred hooked Chariots. Next unto them was
Bessus with a thousand Bactrian horse, and two thousand of the Massagetae did
back him on his rear. To these the foot of many Nations, not mixed, but in
distinct Regiments, did join their formidable power: after them Ariobarzanes
and Oriobates, with the Mardians and Sogdians, did bring up the Army of the
Persians. This part of Darius Army was commanded in chief by Orsines, descended
from seven Persian Kings, and deriving also his Original from the noble King
Cyrus. There were other Nations that followed these, but hardly known to their
own Neighbors. After whom, Cradates having fifty hooked Chariots, placed a
Band of Caspian horsemen before them, and behind them were the Indians and the
other inhabiters of the red Sea, rather names of men then good assistance. This
square was also empaled with the other fifty Chariots, unto the which the
mercenary Soldiers were joined: after them followed the men of Armenia the
less, then the Babylonians, and next the Bellicans, with such as inhabit the
Cossean Mountains. The Gortuans came next, who sometime followed the Medians
out of Euboia; but at those days degenerated from their Country-customs. The
P^^ygians, Cathonians and Parthians did close the rear.

In the Battle on the right hand were the people of the greater Armenia, the
Cadusians, Cappadocians and Medians, who had fifty hooked Chariots: the sum of
his whole Army was forty five thousand horsemen, and two hundred thousand
footmen. When they were placed in order of Battle, they marched forward ten
furlongs, and then were commanded to make a halt. Whilst the Persians after
that manner tarried for their Enemies, there fell a sudden fear amongst the
Macedons, whereof there appeared no cause; and yet every man was amazed, and a
secret dread entered into their hearts. The lightning that fell out of the air,
it being in the Summer-season, seemed like fire, and the flames suddenly
appearing were thought to come from Darius Camp. If Mazeus, who was sent out to
observe their coming, had set upon them while they were in this fear, he might
have performed some notable act. But he was slow in the enterprise, and
remained upon the top of an Hill, contented that he was not assailed.

Alexander perceiving the terror that invaded his Soldiers, made a sign for
them to slay, and gave order that they should unarm themselves, and refresh
their bodies; giving them to understand, that there was not any cause why they
should entertain so vain a fear, seeing their Enemies were yet a good distance
from them. At length, when he perceived they had recovered their spirits, he
exhorted them to receive courage, and put on their armor; but yet he thought
nothing more expedient then to fortify his Camp in the same place. The next
day Mazeus, who had planted himself on a high Hill, from whence he might behold
his Enemies Camp, either for fear, or else because his Commission was but only
to discover the motion of his Enemies, returned again unto Darius. Upon his
departure, the Macedons immediately possessed themselves of the Hill which he
had forsaken, the same being of more strength then the Plain where they
remained before, from whence they might behold their Enemies Camp. And though
the Mist which the moist Hills did cast forth, took not away clearly the use of
their prospect, yet it hindered them to discern the division of their Enemies
Battles, and their order: their multitude overspread the fields; and the noise
of their number did fill their ears, though they were far off. Then Alexander
begun to revolve in his mind, and to debate with himself one while Parmenio's
Opinion, and another time his own; for he was come so far forth, that he could
not retire, except he were Victorious, without the great destruction of his
Army. The multitude of his Enemies moved him much, in respect of his small
numbers: Yet on the other part, remembered what great Acts he had done with
them, and how many Nations he had vanquished: So that his hope surmounting his
fear, he thought it of all most dangerous to defer the Battle any longer, lest
desperation should grow amongst his men; and therefore dissembling the matter,
he caused the Mercenary Horsemen, and the Peons, to pass on before, and divided
his Phalanx (as it has been said) into two Battles, and impaled the same with
Horsemen on both sides. By that time the Mist vanished, and it waxing clear,
the order of his Enemies manifestly appe^red.

The Macedons then, whether it were of courage, or for that they were impatient
to tarry any longer, made such a shout as men of War use when they join in
Battle: The like was also made by the Persians. Then the Woods and Valleys
rebounded with the terrible sound: The Macedons could not abstain any longer,
but would have gone forwards toward their Enemies: But Alexander thought it
better to fortify his Camp upon that Hill; and so commanded it to be
entrenched about: Which work being speedily performed, he entered into his Tent,
from whence he might behold the Field Marshalled, and the whole Army of his
Enemies embattelled; then the fashion and form of the danger that was at hand,
was presented before his eyes; both Horsemen and Footmen glistered in their
bright Armor, and all things were prepared with extraordinary diligence. He
beheld the care of the Captains in his Enemies Camp, how they did ride up and
down to set things in order: And many things that were but vain indeed (as the
noise of Men, the neighing of Horses, and the glistering of their Armor)
troubled yet the mind that was careful in expectation of the event: Therefore
whether it were that he was not fully resolved in his mind, or else to prove
the resolutions of such as were about him, a Council of War was called to
advise what was best to do. Parmenio, who was the most experienced among all
the Captains in the feats of War, thought it good not to give his Enemies open
Battle, but rather to set upon them in the dead time of the night, whereby he
thought they might easily be discomfited; supposing, that they among whom there
was such diversity of Customs, and alteration of Language, could never rally
well together, especially when in the dead of night they should have their
quarters beaten up; whereas in the day time, the shape of the Scythians and
Bactrians, with their rough faces, and long hair, beside the hugeness of their
bodies, should appear terrible. He alleged, how Soldiers were more moved with
the vain causes of fear, and such as were of no moment, then with such as were
just causes indeed. He declared also, how their Enemies, by reason of their
great multitude, should be able to enclose their small number round about; and
that they should not now fight in the Streights, and narrow passages of
Cilicia, but in an open and large Plain.

They all, in a manner, agreed to Parmenio; and Polipercon was directly of
Opinion, that the Victory consisted on the following of that counsel. The King,
that before had upbraided Parmenio more bitterly then was expedient, would not
check him again, but beheld Polipercon, and said:

That Policy that you advise me, pertains to Robbers and Felons, for it is
their propriety to work by darkness and deceit; I will no more suffer, that
either Darius absence, the streightness of the ground, or the stealth in the
night, shall be an hinderance to my glory. I am plainly determined to fight
with him in the open day; and had rather repent me of my Fortune, then he
ashamed of my Victory: Besides, this is to be considered, that the Persians
keep good Watch, and stand armed always in a readiness to receive us, whereof I
have advertisement, so that they cannot be deceived that way; therefore there
does remain no more, but that you prepare your selves to the Battle.

When he had by these words put them into courage, he dismissed them from
Counsel, to refresh their bodies. Darius conjecturing, that his Enemies would
have done that which Parmenio did persuade, caused the Horses to stand ready
bridled the whole night, and the most part of his Host to continue armed, and
to keep good watch. His Camp shone bright with the fires that were made, and he
himself, with his Captains and Kinsfolks, went about his Soldiers that stood
in order and in Arms, making invocation to the Sun, to Mars, and to the
Everlasting Fire, that they would inspire into them a fortitude of mind, that
might answer to the Ancient Glory, and the Acts of their Predecessors: And
declared, if the mind of man were able to conceive any tokens or signs of the
gods favor or assistance, it was no doubt but that they were bent on their
side, having already stricken a sudden fear amongst the Macedons, which (he
said) might be seen by their running here and there, by the carrying and
casting off their Armor; and that the gods, which took care of the Persians
Empire, were now determined to punish (...) Cowards, whose Captains (quoth he)
being of no other sort then the rest, are like unto those wild Beasts, which
through the greediness of the (...) they do covet, do fall into the snares that
are set for them.

The like care was amongst the Macedons; for as though the matter should have
been tried that night, they passed it over in doubt and fear. Alexander himself
(that was never seen in such fear before that time) called for Aristander to
make vows and prayers; who, in a white Garment, carrying Verbenes in his hand,
with his head covered, went before the King, calling upon Jupiter, Minerva, and
Victoria. When he had thus performed his Sacrifice, according to their
Religion, he returned into his Pavilion to rest the residue of the night; yet
he could neither rest, nor sleep, but continually debated with himself, which
way he should assail his Enemies: One while he was of Opinion, to give his
first Onset upon that Battle of the Persians that should come on his right
hand, sometimes he determined to meet his Enemies in the very front, and
otherwhile whether it were better to encounter them on their left Battle. At
length his body became heavy with the travel of his mind, and he fell into a
sound sleep* When the day appeared, the Captains assembled about the Kings
Pavilion, to receive their charge, where they stood amazed at the unaccustomed
silence: For they could not but wonder, that he who was ever wont to call upon
other men, and to reprove such as were slow or negligent, not to be then
stirring in the extremity of the utmost danger: And many were of opinion, that
he slept not, but shrunk for fear; yet for all that, none of them that were
about his person durst attempt to wake him. In the mean season^* the morning
past away, and the Soldiers might neither put on their Armor, nor stand in
order of Battle, without commandment of their Chief. When they had thus tarried
a great while, Parmenio gave commandment that they should fall to meat. At
length, when the time came, that of necessity the Army must be drawn into
Battle, he entered into the Kings lodging, and called upon him diverse times by
his name: but when he could not awake him with his voice, he stirred him with
his hand, and said:

It is far forth day, and your Enemies come forwards in order of Battle, and
your Soldiers being yet unarmed, have not commandment given them what they
should do: Where is that cheerfulness and courage of yours become, which were
wont to stir up even those who were most watchful?

Alexander made answer unto him:

Think you that I could sleep before that I had rid my self of the care that
hindered me to take my rest? And thereupon caused the Trumpet to sound to the
Battle.

But when Parmenio continued still in his admiration, that he in such a time
could sleep so quietly: It is no marvel ( quoth Alexander) when Darius burned
the Country, wasted the Villages, and destroyed the Victuals, I could then in
no wise be quiet: But now what cause have I to fear, seeing he now prepares
himself to fight? He has now fulfilled my desire; resort you where your charge
lies, and I will straightway come to give order amongst you, and we will
dispute this business afterward.

He used seldom to take his friends advice when any doubt or danger was at
hand. When Parmenio was gone, he armed himself, and came forwards amongst his
Soldiers: They seeing him look so cheerfully as they had not seen before time,
conceived by the courage of his countenance a certain hope of the Victory: Then
he caused the Trenches of his Camp to be cast down, that the Soldiers might
have free passage forth; and in this manner did set his Battles in order. The
Horsemen, of whom Clitus was Captain, were set in the wing on his right hand
Battle, to whom he joined Philotas, and other Captains. The last Band of
Horsemen was Meleagers, which were next unto the square Battle of Footmen, that
the Macedons name Phalanx: After the Phalanx, followed the Agaraspides, of whom
Nicanor, the Son of Parmenia, was Captain: Cenus, with his Band, was appointed
to be a Relief: Horestes and Lincestes advanced next; and after them
Polipercon, that had the Rule of the Strangers; and Phylagus, who had the Rule
of the Balacrons: And this was the order of Alexanders Battle in the right
wing, whereof Amyntas was Chief.

In the left Battle, Craterus had the charge of the Peloponnesian Horsemen; and
with him also were the Bands of the Achaians, Locrensians, and Malaeans; and
the hindmost Troops were the Horsemen of Thessaly, under Philip their Captain.
Thus the Horsemen covering the Foot, made the Front of the Battle: And lest
their Enemies, through their multitude, should enclose the Battle about, he
planted a great Force behind for a Reserve, and set a Relief also upon the
Wings; not in Front with the rest, but upon the sides, to the intent, that if
the Enemies attempted to compass round about the Battles, they should be ready
to keep them in action.

Those that maintained the places of Reserves, were the Agrians, of whom
Attalus was Captain, and the Archers of Creet were joined unto them: Such as
stood in the Rear of the Battle, were ordered to turn their faces from the
Frontwards, because that being in a readiness every way, the Battles in every
place should be of an equal force. They which stood with their faces
contrariwise, were the Illyrians, and the Mercenary Soldiers, with the
Th^acians that were light armed. These his Battles were so aptly set to move
every way, that such as stood in the hinder parts could not be enclosed about,
but might every way make their Front; so the Front, the Flanks, and the Rear,
were all of like force. When he had set his men in order after this manner, he
gave Commandment, that if the Persians should attempt upon them with their
Hooked Wagons with a cry, or noise, that then they should open their Battles,
and receive them with silence, not doubting but that they should pass through
without any harm, if no man did resist them: But if they should come without
any shout or clamor, that then they themselves should make a cry to fear the
Horses withal; and so with Pikes thrust them through on every side. They which
had the charge of Battles, were commanded to extend them so much in breadth as
possible they might, lest by standing over-close, they might be environed; and
yet not to stretch them so far out, as to leave the Ranks void, and thin in the
midst. The Carriage, and the Prisoners (amongst whom Darius Mother was one)
were set in the top of an Hill, with a small Guard about them. The charge of
the left Battle was committed unto Parmenio, as was accustomed before-time, and
Alexander himself was in the Main Body.

When they were drawn near to one another, one Byon came flying from the
Persian Host in a full gallop, and declared unto the King, that Darius had
planted iron Galtops where he thought his Horsemen should pass; and by a
certain sign, showed him the place, because it might be avoided: Alexander
willed the Fugitive to be kept safe, and assembled all his Captains together,
declaring the matter, and exhorting them to make their Soldiers privy to the
danger, for eschewing the place pointed out to them: But all that were in so
great an Army could not hear the warning given, the noise of both Armies taking
away the use of the ears. But Alexander riding betwixt the Battles, gave
Exhortation to the Captains, and to all other that were within hearing.

He declared, that there was but one hazard remaining to them that had passed
through so many Countries in hope of the Victory, which they were now ready to
fight for: Thereupon he reduced to their memory the Battles they had fought at
the River of Granike, in the Mountains of Cilicia; and with what speed they had
passed over both Syria and Egypt: The rehearsal whereof put them in great hope,
and did entice them forwards to the desire of glory. He showed, that the
Persians being withdrawn from their former flying, were now compelled to fight
of necessity, because they could fly no further; and how that three days
together, amazed for fear, they had remained still in one place with their
Armor on their backs; of whose despair (he said) there could be no greater
argument, then that they had set on fire their own Country, confessing all to
be their Enemies that they destroyed not. He exhorted them not to fear the vain
name of unknown Nations; for it was a thing nothing pertinent, which were
called Scythians, or which Caducians; for being unknown Nations, it was a sure
token that they were men of no valor, because such as be valiant could never
be unknown in the world: And contrariwise, Dastards, when they come forth of
their D^ns, bring nothing with them but names of men; whereas you (quoth he)
that be Macedons, have obtained by your Virtue and Manhood, that there is no
Country in the world ignorant of your Acts. He willed them to behold the evil
order that was in their Enemies Host, of whom some had no weapon but a Dart,
others a Sling to cast stones, and very few had such Armor as they ought to
have: So that though there was a great number on the other part, yet he said,
they had more on their side when they should come to fight hand to hand; and
that for his part he would not require any man to adventure himself, except he
were an example to him of Fortitude and Courage; for he assured them, that he
would be seen fighting with the foremost, knowing that so many wounds as he
should get, should be so many ornaments to his person: He said, they themselves
knew that he would be no partaker of the prey; but that it was ever his custom,
to bestow the rewards of his Victory upon the Soldiers. His former words he
showed to be spoken to men of courage; but if any were of another temper, he
was to inform them, that they were come unto the place from whence they could
not fly, having left so many Countries behind them which they had passed over,
and so many Rivers and Mountains at their backs; so that now there was no way
to their own houses and Native Country, but such as they must make open with
their own hands.

This was the Exhortation he gave unto the Captains, and to such of the
Soldiers as were next unto him. Darius, that was in his left hand Battle,
accompanied with a choice Band of Horsemen and of Footmen, despised the small
number of his Enemies, their Battles appearing to him thin, and void of men,
when he saw their Wings stretched so far abroad: He stood therefore on his
Chariot on high, and turning himself both on the right hand and the left, he
spoke in this manner to such as were about him:

We that were not long since Lords of all the Countries lying between
Hellespont and the Ocean Sea, are compelled now to fight, not for Fame and
Glory, but for our Safeguard, and our Liberty, which chiefly is to be esteemed:
This day shall either establish or make an end of the greatest Empire that has
been in any Age. At the River of Granike we fought with a small part of our
Power: When we were vanquished in Cilicia, Syria was able to receive us, and
the Rivers of Tygris and Euphrates were as Bull-warks to defend our Kingdom:
But now we are come to that extremity, that we have no place to fly unto if we
be put to flight: All things behind our backs are wasted with this long War;
neither Cities are inhabited, nor men left to till the ground: Our Wives and
our Children do follow this Army, a prey ready for our Enemies, except we put
our bodies for the defense of such as be dear unto us. So much as has
concerned me, I have performed, preparing such an Army as this huge Plain is
able to receive. I have distributed amongst you Horse and Armor* providing
that Victuals should not be wanting for such a multitude, and have chosen an
apt place to arange our Battles in: All the rest remains in your hands; do
but dare to fight, and the Victory is yours; and despise you the Fame of the
Enemy, which is but a weak weapon against men of Valor: It is rashness which
hitherto ye have feared as a Virtue, whereof when the first brunt is spent, it
waxes dull, as are Drones having once lost their stings. This Plain has
disclosed their small number, which the Mountains of Cilicia did hide: You see
how empty their Ranks are, how thin their Wings be extended abroad, how their
Battles be empty and void of men, and such as are in the Rear have already
turned their backs: They may be overthrown with your Horses feet, though I send
none against them but the Hooked Wagons: And if we win the Battle, we make an
end of the War, for they have no place to fly to: They are shut in with Tygris
on the one side, and with Euphrates on the other; and such things as before
made for their purpose, now are turned, and do make clear against them: Our
Army is light, and without much Baggage, and they are laden with preys and
booties; we shall kill them as they are wrapped in spoils: And the same one thing
shall be both our gain and the cause of our Victory. If any of you be moved
with the Fame of the Nation, you must think that the Armor, with the outward
show, and not the bodies of the Macedons, are there present; we have consumed
so much of their blood since the War began: And seeing they are but few, their
loss must needs be to them the greater. For how great soever Alexander does
seem to them that are Cowards, he is but a man, and if you trust me, both rash
and without consideration; and hitherto more fortunate through our fear, then
by his own valor. There is nothing can continue that is not governed by
reason; for though Fortune seems to favor for a while, yet at last she will
not support his rashness: Besides that, the estate of things are full of
change, and no man has a perpetual felicity. It may be that the providence of
the gods have so ordained it, that the Empire of the Persians, increased with
such prosperous success by the space of two hundred and thirty years, and
brought to so great a height of fortune, should now rather be shaken, then
utterly overthrown, thereby to admonish us of man's fragility, who uses to
forget himself overmuch in prosperous estate. It is not long ago, since of our
own motion and courage, we made War against the Grecians, and invaded their
Dominions; but now we stand at defense for our own Country. Thus we are tossed
one against another by change of Fortune; for one Nation cannot suffice the
greatness of the Empire which we both do covet: But be it so that hope were
taken from us, yet necessity ought to encourage us, the War is brought to such
extremity. He keeps now as Prisoners, both my Mother, my two Daughters, and
Occhus my Son, born to the succession of this Empire: He keeps Captive your
Prince, the Issue that is descended of the Blood Royal; yea, and your Captains
equal with Kings; and if you do not now bestir your hands, I my self am like to
become a Captive: Deliver you therefore my Bowels out of Prison, and restore to
me my Children, for whose sake I do not refuse to die. Be you all sure, that
both my Mother and my Children (for my Wife is dead in Prison) are holding up
their hands, crying unto the gods, and calling for your help, your courage and
fidelity, that you would free them from Servitude, from Fetters, and from the
Estate they are in, living at other men's will and appointment. Think you that
they can be content to live under such, as they could scarcely vouchsafe to
have for their Subjects? I see that our Enemies Battles do approach* and the
nearer the danger is at hand, the less the words I have spoken do satisfy me.
I make request to you by the gods of our Country, by the Eternal Fire that is
carried upon their Altars, by the brightness of the Sun that rises within the
bound^s of my Empire, and by the everlasting memory of Cyrus, who did take the
Empire from the Medes and Lydians, and gave it to the Persians, to deliver
their Names and this Nation from shame and reproach. Go forth cheerfully, have
you good hope, and see that you restore to your Posterity the glory you
received of your Predecessors. Behold, you carry in your hands your Liberty,
your Help, our Hope in time to come. Whosoever contemns death escapes it,
and death only overtaketh such as do fly from it. I ride here in a Chariot,
not only for that it* is my Countries Custom, but also that I may be seen of
you all: And I desir^ nothing so much, as that you will follow me, whether I
show you an example of Courage, or of Cowardliness.

In the mean season, whilst Alexander did covet to eschew the place of peril
whereof he was advertised, and enforced himself to encounter with Darius left
Battle, where he remained in person, he was compelled to fetch a compass about;
whom when Darius perceived, he turned likewise his own Battle toward him;
willing Bessus, to appoint the Horse of the Massagetae, to give a Charge on
Alexanders left Battle. He sent before him his Hooked Wagons, which by a sign
given, brake suddenly upon their Enemies with a full course, to the intent,
that by their coming unawares, they might work the greater destruction. The
Pikes that were set before in the Wagons, destroyed diverse, and many were torn
asunder by the Hooks that were on both sides: The Macedons gave not place to
them by a little and little, but troubled their Array with a main flight. When
Mazeus saw their disorder, he put them in more fear, and appointed a thousand
Horsemen to fetch a compass about the Macedons Battles to spoil their Carriage,
supposing that the Prisoners which were there kept would break their Bands when
they should see their own Nation approach: Parmenio, who was in the left Wing,
did easily perceive it, and immediately sent Polidamus unto Alexander, to show
him the danger, and know his pleasure what he would have done: which when he
understood by Polidamus; Go thy way (quoth he) and show Parmenio, if we win the
Battle, we shall not only recover again our own, but shall have also the Spoil
of our Enemies: Therefore I would not that any part of our Force should be
removed out of the Main Battle, but let him fight it out manfully, and not
regard the loss of Baggage; wherein he shall observe the Honor of me, and my
Father Philip, whose Custom was to do the like.

In the mean season, the Persians were entered among the Carriages, and had
slain diverse that were left there in defense thereof: whereupon the prisoners
began to unloose themselves; and taking up whatsoever came to hand, took part
with the Horsemen, and sharply assailed the Macedons; diverse were so joyful,
that they ran to bear tidings to Sisigambis, how Darius had won the Victory,
and had overthrown his Enemies with a great slaughter, and also that their
Carriages were taken, thinking the like Fortune had been every where, seeing
they saw the Persians fall to spoil. And although they exhorted Sisigambis that
she should leave her heaviness, and rejoice, yet she continued in the same
Estate she was in before, without speaking one word, or changing color or
countenance, but sat still immovable: She was so overcome (as it was thought)
with sudden joy, that she durst not stir, nor attempt Fortune; for such as did
behold her, could not perceive which way she was inclined. In the mean season,
Amyntas that was Master of the Horse to Alexander, came with a few Bands of
Horsemen to relieve the Carriages; but uncertain it was whether he did it of
his own head, or by the Kings appointment: He was not able to endure the force
of the Cadusians and Scythians; for scarcely attempting the skirmish, he was
driven back, and fled again unto Alexander, being a witness rather of the loss
of the Carriages, then a Rescuer of the same. The grief that Alexander
conceived at this matter, overcame the purpose he took before in hand, and
feared (not without cause) lest the Soldiers, through the carefulness to
recover their own, might leave the fight, and resort toward their Baggage: He
sent Arctes, Captain of the Spearmen that were named Sa^ssopherii, against the
Scythians. By this time the Hooked Wagons, which had before troubled the
forefront, were come within the square (which the Macedons call Phalanx) yet
the Soldiers never shrunk at the matter, but received them into the midst of
their Battle; whereas joining themselves close together, they stood like a wall
on both sides, thrusting their Pikes into the Bowels of the Horses; and ran
about the Wagons, throwing down such as stood in them at defense. The whole
Battle was entangled and troubled with the ruin and killing of the Horses,
with such as governed them: They could not rule their Horses when they were
once galled or hurt; who with much leaping and struggling, not only brake out of
their Traces, but also overthrew the Wagons, drawing at their Tails the men
that were slain; neither being able to stand still for the fear they were in,
nor yet go forwards, being so faint of their wounds: Yet a few of them passed
through the Battle; whereby such as the Wagons did light upon, were miserably
slain, lying upon the ground with their Members cut in sunder: Yet because that
through the greenness of their wounds they felt little pain, they kept their
Weapons still, notwithstanding they were maimed, and without strength, till
such time as, by continual bleeding, they sunk down dead. Aretes, in the mean
time, had slain the Captain of the Scythians that were spoiling of the
Carriages, and repulsed them back: But straightway came the Bactrians, by
Darius sending, and turned the fortune of the Field again. Many Macedons were
slain at the first encounter, but more fled unto Alexander: Then the Persians
made such a shout as men are wont to do that win the Victory, and fiercely
assailed their Enemies, thinking they had in evey place been put to flight.
When Alexander perceived his men shrink, and begin to faint, and give ground,
he rebuked such as he saw afraid, and encouraged many that withdrew from the
fight; so that he alone restored the Battle again. When he had put them in
heart, he required them to press forwards, and go freely against their Enemies.
Alexander perceiving that the Bactrians were departed to the defeating of the
Carriages, and by their going had left the right hand Battle of Darius thin and
naked, he bent his force wholly that way, and there made a wonderful slaughter
and destruction of his Enemies, who by reason of their loose Array, were not
able to withstand him; which the Persians in the left wing observing, were in
hope to have enclosed Alexander round, and came forwards to set upon his Rear,
whereby great danger had ensued to him, being environed both before and
behind, if the Agrians had not put their Spurs to their Horses, and given a
gallant Charge to their Enemies that were invironing the King about, and so
compelled the Persians to turn their faces again toward them.

The Battles thus were sore traveled on both sides; Alexander had his Foes
both before and behind, and his Enemies that come on his back were sore
oppressed by the Agrians: The Bactrians also that had spoiled the Carriages,
were excluded from their own company, and could not recover their place again.
Thus the Battles were divided in diverse parts, and fought one against another,
as their chance fell out. The two Kings, that joined their Battle hard to one
another, renewed again the fight: There were most of the Persians slain; but
the number of the wounded were li^^e on both sides: Darius did ride in a
Chariot, and Alexander upon a Horse: They both had a choice Band about them,
which were careless of their own lives; for if their Kings should miscarry,
they neither could be safe, nor yet desire to live. Wherefore every one of them
thought it a Noble thing to adventure themselves before the face of their
Prince; and he that coveted most to defend his Master, was in most peril; for
each man desired the honor to kill the King of the contrary part. There
(whether it were an imagination of the eyes, or visible indeed) such as were
about Alexander believed, that they saw an Eagle fluttering above his head,
which neither feared with the clashing of their Harness, nor by the crying of
them that were dying, hovered still in the Air a little above him. Then
Aristander, who did wear a white garment, and carried Laurel in his hand,
showed this sight unto the Soaldiers, being busy in the fight, as a certain
token of Victory. This sight caused them, which before were in some doubt,
cheerfully and with great confidence to assail their Enemies.

The fight continued after this sort until the time that he was slain who
governed the Horse that drew Darius Chariot: Then neither the Persians nor
Macedons doubted, but tha^ Darius had been slain: And the Persians, upon that
imagination, made a b^rbarous noise, and a sorrowful howling, wherewith they
sore troubled and astonished their whole Host, that were yet fighting with equal
Victory: Darius Kinsmen, and the Squires of his Body that were on his left
hand, left him, and fled away with a main flight: but such as stood in his
defense on his right hand, conveyed him into the heart of the Battle.

It was said that Darius drew out his Sword, and was determined diverse times to
kill himself, rather then to sustain the shame of flying away: But when he saw,
as he sat aloft on his Chariot, that a great part of his Army remained yet
fighting, he was ashamed to leave them in such sort. And while he thus wavered
in his own mind, the Persians by little and little gave ground, and shrunk
from their order. Alexander that had tired many Horses, did at that instant
change his Horse anew, and struck at the faces of them that did oppose: there
was none then that made resistance any longer, but a manifest slaughter fell on
the Persians, and Darius turned his Chariot to fly away: The Macedans pursued
hard after them that fled; and the dust that flew up to the Sky took away their
prospect, so that they wandered as in darkness, and ever drew together when they
heard any voice they knew; only the rattling and noise of the Chariots was a
taken for the Macedons to follow in the pursuit.

As Fortune was prosperous to the Macedons on this part, and contrary unto
their (...); so on the other side, where Parmenio in the left wing incountred
with the Persians, they had the better, and the Macedons the worse. Mazeus with
his whole Band gave a violent charge, and put the Horsemen that stood in the
wings to a sore distress; and thereupon, by reason he abounded with multitude,
he began to enclose the Footmen round. Then Parmenio sent word to Alexander in
what danger they were; which he signified to be such, that except they had
succor in time, they could not resist, but be enforced to fly away. Alexander
was gone far in the Chase when this sorrowful message was brought him;
wherefore he commanded his Horsemen to stand, and chafed wonderfully that the
Victory should be thus taken out of his hands, and that Darius had better
fortune in flying, then he in following. In the mean s^ason, the fame of Darius
overthrow was brought unto Mazeus, wherefore, though before he had the upper
hand, yet he was so stricken with fear at his Fellows misfortune, that he made
a slack pursuit upon their Enemies. Parmenio was ignorant of the cause why the
fight did slack so willingly on their part; and boldly using the occasion,
called the Thessalian Horsemen unto him, and said: See you not how our Enemies,
that even now gave us a fierce on^set, suddenly be afraid? I see the fortune of
our King does give us the Victory: All the Field is strowed with the Persians
that be slain; Why do you therefore stay? Are you not good enough for men that
fly?

They saw that his words had some appearance of truth; and therefore by and by
they took courage, and putting their Spurs to their Horses, gave a full charge
upon their Enemies; who retired not by little and little, but marched away a
great pace; and they wanted nothing of flying, saving that they had not yet
directly turned their backs: yet for all that, in so much as Parmenio knew not
what was become of the King, nor of his Battle, he stayed, and would not pursue
after them. Mazeus having liberty given him to fly at his leisure, passed the
River of Tire, not the next way, but by a further compass about with more
surety, and recovered the City of Babylon with the remainder of that vanquished
Army.

In the mean season, Darius, with a few that accompanied him in his slight,
came to the River of Licus, where passing over, he stood in doubt whether he
should break the Bridge or no; for it was showed him, that his Enemies were at
hand: but considering how many thousands of his men by the breaking thereof
should become a prey to his Enemies, he left the Bridge standing; and at his
departure said, That he had rather open the way to them that pursued him, then
to shut it against them that fled after him. But Darius left not his flying
till he came to Arbella, where he arrived about midnight: Who is able to
conceive in his mind, or express in words, the manifold chance in this
discomfiture, the slaughter that fell both upon Captains and Soldiers; the
chasing of them that were put to flight, and the destruction in general, and in
particular; Fortune heaped together in that one day the chances of the whole
world. Some took the way that came next to hand; others fled into the Woods,
and sought out by-ways to escape such as had them in the chase: There was a
confusion of Horsemen and Footmen mixed together without any head; the armed
with the unarmed, and the whole with the hurt.

At length, the compassion that one had of another, was turned into fear* and
they that could not follow, were left bewailing themselves one to another: But
Thirst chiefly afflicted the wounded and wearied, who lay along every where in
the ways where any water was, gasping after it with open mouth; and when for
greediness they had gulled in the troubled water, they began to swell, when the
Mud once entered into their Intrails; and being thus not in case to move, the
Enemy came and stirred them up with fresh wounds. Some; when the Brooks near
hand were taken up by others, sought out for Springs in every secret place: Nor
were there any Puddles so dry, or so far out of the way, that could be hidden
from the thirst of them that searched them out: The old men and women were
heard howling and crying in all the Villages near the way side, how Darius was
yet their King.

Alexander (as it has been said before) pursuing the Chase, was come to the
River of Licus, at which the multitude of the Flyers were more then could pass
the Bridge; so that many, when their Enemies pursued them, leaped into the
water; and there laden with their Armor, and wearied with sighting and flying,
were consumed in the stream: But within a while, neither the Bridge nor the
River were able to receive the throung that continually increased by their
indiscreet flying: For when fear had once entered into their hearts, they
doubted only that which put them first in fear. The Macedons were very eager in
pursuit of their Enemies, and required Alexander, that he would not suffer his
Enemies to escape free away: But he to stay them, alleged, that their weapons
were dull, their hands wearied, their bodies faint in the long pursuit, and the
night besides fast approached on them: But in very deed, the care of his other*
Battle, which he thought to be yet fighting, caused him to return to their
succor.

He had not so soon turned his Ensigns, but that certain Horsemen brought him
word from Parmenio, that he likewise had put his Enemies to flight. He was not
in so great danger all that day, as when he was coming toward his Camp; for
there were but few that followed him, and they were out of order, as men that
rejoicing of the Victory, judged all their Enemies either to be fled, or slain
in the Field: Suddenly there appeared a Band of Persian Horsemen coming against
them, which at the first stayed* but afterward perceiving the small number of
the Macedons, gave a charge upon them. The King rode foremost, rather
dissembling then despising the peril he was in: But his perpetual felicity
never failed him in his extremities; for at the first encounter, he struck the
Captain of the Persians (who in eagerness of the fight unadvisedly came against
him) through with a Spear. When he with that blow was stricken to the ground,
Alexander slew the next unto him with the same Staff; and after him, diverse
others.

When his Company saw their Enemies amazed with his doings, they brake upon
them, and threw many to the earth; yet they, for their parts, were not
unrevenged: for the whole Battle did not so earnestly fight, as that small Band
assembled so by chance. But at length, when they saw flying in the dark to be
more safe unto them then fighting, they fled away in diverse Companies.
Alexander having escaped this extraordinary peril, brought his men in safeguard
unto his Camp.

There were slain of the Persians, which came to the knowledge of them that had
the Victory, forty thousand; and of the Macedons, less then three hundred:
which Victory Alexander won more by his own Virtue, then by any fortune; and
with hardiness and courage, more then through any advantage of the ground: for
he both ordered his Battles politickly, and fought manfully: With great wisdom
he contemned the loss of the Baggage, considering the weight of the whole
matter to consist in the Battle it self. Whilst the fortune of the Field
remained doubtful, he used himself as assured of the Victory; and when he had
put his Enemies in fear, he ceased not till he had set them flying: and that
which scarcely can be believed, in that fierceness of courage, he pursued in
the Chase more wisely then greedily: For if he should have followed on still,
part of his Power yet fighting in the Field, he should either have lost the
Battle through his own fault, or else have won the Victory through the prowess
of another: Or if after he had obtained the Victory, he had showed himself
afraid of the Horsemen that he met, he must either shamefully have fled, or
have been miserably slain.

Nor were his Captains to be defrauded of their due commendation, for the
wounds that they did receive were tokens of their Manhood; Ephestions arm was
wounded with a Spear, Perdicas, Cenos, and Medinas, with shot of Arrows, were
almost slain outright: And if we will give a true judgment of the Macedons
that were there, we must confess, that he was a King worthy of such Ministers,
and they men worthy of so great a Master.

THE FIFTH BOOK OF QVINTVS CVRTIVS.
Of the Acts of Alexander the Great, King of Macedon.
IF I should here make mention of the Wars that in the mean season intervened
both in Greece, Italy, and in Thracia, and of the Revolters that were checked
and subdued by the appointment and Commission of Alexander, the proceedings in
Asia would thereby be interrupted, which I thought most convenient to put
wholly together, until the death of Darius; and then to join them in this work,
as they agree with the time. I will first speak of those things that ensued
after the Battle of Arbella, where Darius arrived about midnight; and, as it
chanced, the greater part of his friends, whom he called all together, and
spoke to them to this effect:

That he doubted not but Alexander and his Soldiers, greedy of the abundance
of the spoil which was in a readiness for them, would visit such Cities and
Countries of his as were most famous for their situation and wealth; which
thing, he said, considering his estate, could not but turn at length to his
advantage. His purpose was, in a swift March, to repair into the Deserts: And
seeing the uttermost bounds of his Kingdom were yet untouched, he might easily
repair his Power from thence to renew the War.

Let therefore that greedy Nation ( quoth he) take my Treasure, and satisfy
their hunger with gold, which shortly shall cause both the same, and themselves
also, to be a prey unto us: For ( he said) he had learned by experience, that
the Flocks of Concubines and Eunuchs, were nothing else but burdens and
impediments; which Alexander possessing, and carrying about with him, it would
at the last make him inferior unto them of whom before he was Victorious.

His Oration seemed to all men to be full of desperation; for they saw thereby,
that the rich City of Babylon should be given up unto the Macedons, and Susae
shortly after, with all other Ornaments of the Realm, which were the cause of
the War: But he proceeded in persuading them, how that men in adversity ought
not to do things that should seem goodly in the speaking, but necessary in the
experience: That Wars were made with Iron, and not with Gold; with men, and not
with the walls of Cities: for all things follow them that are armed, and in
strength. He showed, that his Ancestors, famous for their Achievements, were
afflicted after this manner, in the beginning, and yet recovered quickly again
their former estate. After he had spoken these words, either for that they were
thereby encouraged, or else that they rather obeyed his Authority, then liked
his Counsel, they followed him into the bounds of Media. Shortly after, Arbella
was delivered up to Alexander, which was full of Treasure, and precious
Movables; and besides, the pay of the whole Army was left there. The sickness
that began in Alexanders Camp, arising from the favor of the dead bodies which
were scattered over all the Fields, was the cause that he did the sooner
remove. The plain Country of Arabia, famous with the abundance of sweet Odours
there growing, lay upon the right hand as they marched: And so passing through
the Country lying between Tygris and Euphrates, which is so fat and plentiful a
ground, that the Inhabitants are fain to drive their Beasts from feeding, lest
a Surfeit should destroy them. The cause of this fertility, comes by the
moisture that issues from both Rivers, sweating by veins, through the ground.
Both these Rivers have their beginnings in the Mountains of Armenia, where they
are distant twenty five hundred furlongs; and so run forwards, keeping their
distance, till they come near unto the bounds of Media and Gordia: For there,
by little and little, they draw more near together, leaving less space betwixt
them. They enclose on both sides the Country that is called Mesopotamia, from
whence they run, through the bounds of Babylon, into the Red Sea.

After Alexander had changed his Camp four times, he came to a City called
Memnium, where there is a Fountain within a Cave, that belcheth out great
plenty of Pitch: So that it appears the Babylonians had their Cement from
thence, which they employed about the making of their walls of an incredible
breadth and compass. As Alexander was going from thence toward Babylon, Mazeus,
who was said before to have fled from the Battle, came to meet him in most
humble manner; whereas committing his Children into his hands, he yielded
himself, and rendered up the City. His coming was very grateful unto the King,
considering what travel he should have sustained in the siege of so strong a
City, if it had been kept against him: And besides, for so much as Mazeus was a
man both famous and valiant, and much commended for his achievements in the
last Battle, and conceived his example should provoke others to do the like, he
received both him and his Children in gentle manner; and yet gave order to his
men, that they should enter into the City in such Array of Battle, as if they
were presently to fight. A great number of the Babylonians stood upon the
walls, desirous to behold him that was their new King; but the most part went
forth to meet him. Bagistines that was Captain of the Castle, and Keeper of the
Kings Treasure, because he would show himself to be no less affectionate
toward Alexander then Mazeus was, strowed all the ways, where he should pass,
with Flowers and Garlands, and set Altars of Silver on both sides, with
Frankincense burning upon the same, and all other kind of sweet odours. Next
unto him came Droves of Beasts, great number of Horses, with Lions and Pardals
lying in their Dens, which he brought as Presents to give unto Alexander; and
after them the Wise Men, singing according to their Country manner: The
Caldeans followed next, with their Diviners and Prophets; and then the
Musicians with several kinds of Instruments, whose property was to sin^ the
praises of their Kings; and the Caldeans, who used to declare the motion of the
Planets, with the course and revolution of the times. Last, in order, came the
Babylonian Horsemen, whose sumptuous furniture, both for themselves and their
Horses, tended more to voluptuousness and delicacy, then to any magnificence.
Alexander, that was enclosed about with armed men, willed that the Babylonians
should come behind his Footmen; and he riding aloft in his Chariot, entered
into the City, and afterward into the Palace; where, the next day, he surveyed
Darius his Wardrobe, and his Treasures. The beauty and pleasantness of that
City gave just occasion to Alexander, and such as were with him, to admire it
much: Semiramis was the Builder thereof; or as some affirm, Belus, whose Palace
is to be seen there: The walls are made with Brick, interlined with Fitch; they
are thirty two foot in breadth; so that two Carts may easily go upon them on
front: They are in height one hundred Cubits, and the Towers are ten foot
higher then the Walls; the compass of the whole work about, is three hundred
sixty eight furlongs, being builded (as it is left in memory) in so many days:
The houses stand the breadth of an Acre distant from the walls; they are
contiguous, house to house, by the space of ninety furlongs; in other places
not joined near to one another, but for some considerations so divided asunder.
The rest of the ground is sowed and tilled; to the intent, that if any Foreign
Power come against them, they should be able to be relieved by the fruit
thereof. The River of Euphrates does run through the midst of the City, and is
kept in on both sides with walls of a wonderful workmanship: But the great
Channels made of Brick, and fastened with Pitch instead of Mortar, and wrought
low within the ground, to receive the violence of the Stream, do exceed all the
rest of the works there made: for except the same were of quantity and
largeness to receive the water when the Stream flows over the Banks that are
made to keep it in, its violence would beat down the houses of the City. There
is also over the River a strong Bridge, which joyneth both parts of the City
together, counted amongst the mavelous works of the Orient: For because that
Euphrates is so full of Sand and Owse, there can hardly ground be found to lay
that Foundation upon; and the Stream besides casts up such heaps of Sand
against the Bridge, that it is an impediment for the water freely to pass; and
therefore the River beats upon the Bridge with greater force, then if it had
his free course.

There is also a Castle that is twenty furlongs about, the Towers whereof are
thirty foot deep within the ground, and fourscore foot in height above the
ground; where also the Wonders are to be seen so often mentioned in the Greek
Poets: for in the same are whole Groves of Trees set by wonderful Art, as if
hanging in the Air, and so high as are the tops of the Towers, which Trees are
marvellously beautiful and pleasant through their height and shadow which they
make: The whole weight of them is sustained and borne up by huge Pillars made
of Stone, upon which there is a Floor of square stone, that both upholdeth the
Earth that lies deep on the Pillar, and also the humor wherewith it is
watered. The trees that grow thereupon are eight cubits about, and as fruitful
as if they grew on natural Earth. And although that process of time by little
and little does not only destroy things made with hands, but also the very
works of nature: yet this work, for all it is oppressed with the roots of so
many trees, and burdened with the weight of so much earth, does yet remain
unperished, being sustained up with twenty broad walls distant eleven foot one
from another. When these trees are seen afar off, they seem to be a wood
growing upon a mountain. It is said that the King of Syria reigning in Babylon,
builded this work for his wives fancy, who for the love she had to Groves and
shadowy places, moved her Husband in doing thereof to counterfeit the
pleasantness of nature.

Alexander tarried longer here then in any other City, which corrupted more the
discipline of the Macedons in their Wars then any other place. For nothing was
more licentious then the manners and customs of the City; nor was any other
place more abundantly furnished of all things, wherewith men are allured and
stirred to excess of pleasure. The Parents and Husbands were contented that
their children and wives should for gain embrace such strangers as came amongst
them. The Kings and Nobility of Persia delight much in plays and banqueting,
but the Babylonians are specially addicted unto wine and drunkenness* where the
women use a custom, that in the beginning of the Feast their apparel seems
civil and demure; but afterward by little and little they put off their
uppermost garments, and laying aside all modesty, they at last discover
themselves naked. Which vile custom is not used by harlots only, but by all
women in general, who esteem the making of their bodies common but civility and
good manners: in this voluptuousness the Conqueror of Asia wallowed by the
space of thirty four days, whereby he became much the weaker to have done other
enterprises, if there had been an enemy to have stood against him. But to the
intent the damage should be the less perceived, he increased his power with a
new supply out of Macedonia. For Amyntas the son of Andr^menes brought him from
Antipater six thousand footmen, and five hundred horsemen, and with them five
hundred of the Thracian horsemen, and thirty five hundred footmen of the same
Nation. He had also out of Peloponnesus four thousand footmen, and four hundred
eighty horsemen, being all mercenary Soldiers. Amyntas also brought him fifty
of the young men of the Nobility of Macedonia, to attend upon Alexanders
person: whose office it was to serve the King at Table, and to bring him his
horse when he went to Battle. They accustomed to be about him when he hunted,
and kept watch by course at his chamber door. These were they who afterward
proved great Captains, and out of whose lions the Rulers of the men of War did
come.

Alexander appointed Agathon Captain of the Castle of Babylon, with seven
hundred Macedons, and three hundred mercenary Soldiers, and left (...) and
Apolidorus Governors of the City and Country, to whom he assigned two
thousand footmen, and one thousand Talents, giving them Commission to levy more
Soldiers. He made Mazeus that gave the City into his hands, Lieutenant of the
whole, and caused Bagistines that yielded up the Castle to follow him in his
Wars. Armenia was given to Mithrenes that betrayed the City of Sardis; and to
encourage his men to enterprise new achievements, he gave out of the treasure
of Babylon to every Macedon Horseman five hundred D^niers, to every Horseman of
the strangers five hundred, and to every Footman two hundred. When he had set
all these things in order, he came into the Country called Atrapene, which
being plentiful of all things, and abounding in Victuals, caused the King to
tarry the longer there.

And lest idleness should be any abatement to the courage of his men, he
contrived a way to stir up their spirits, and to keep them occupied, by
appointing Judges to try out such as had showed themselves most valiant in the
Wars, to whom he assigned Rewards due to their deservings. There were Eight
found out, whose manhood appeared above the rest, and the charge of one
thousand Men was committed to every one of them, who were then called
Chiliarchi: this was the first time they put one Thousand into a Regiment; for
before this they were divided only into five hundred, which was not counted any
great preferment, or reward of service. The number of them were great that came
to plead their right in this behalf; who before the Judges that gave sentence,
brought in a testimony of their achievements, whereby it could not be unknown
which of them had justly purchased such honor or not. The first place was
adjudged to the elder Adarchias, for his valiantness in the Battle at
Alicarnasson, where he chiefly did restore again the fight, when the young
Soldiers had given it over. The second place of honor was given to Antigonus,
and Philotas Ang^us obtained the third; the fourth was adjudged to Amyntas, the
fifth to Antigonus; Amyntas the Son of Lyncesters obtained the sixth, Theodorus
the seventh, and Hellanicus the last. He also profitably altered many things
that were used by his Predecessors in the discipline of War: For whereas
before the Horsemen of every Country were in several Bands by themselves, he
without respect of any Nation, appointed them such Captains as he thought
expedient. And whereas at the removing of the Camp, warning was wont to be
given by a Trumpet, the sound whereof in any noise or tumult could not be
sufficiently heard, he caused an high Pole to be always set up before his
Pavilion, on the top whereof an Ensign was fastened, apparent to all men: the
other tokens which they observed, were fire in the night, and smoke in the day.

As he was marching toward Susa, Abulites that was Ruler of that Region,
either by Darius commandment, thinking by means of the spoil either to divert
Alexander, or by his own free will, sent his Son to meet him, proffering the
delivery of the City. The young man was entreated very gently, and by his
conduct Alexander passed forwards, till he came to the River Hydasp^s, which is
esteemed to be a very delicate water. Abulites there met Alexander with many
and Princely gifts, and presented him among other things, Dromedaries that were
wonderfully swift, and with twelve Elephants that Darius had sent for out of
India, to be a terror to the Macedons, which now were become an increase of
their strength. When the riches of the Conquered was come into the hands of the
Conqueror, he found in that City an incredible Treasure, fifty thousand
Talents of massy silver uncoyned: which Riches gathered together in the space
of many years by diverse Kings, for their succession and posterity, came thus in
a moment into the hands of a foreign Prince.

Alexander being lodged within the Palace, did sit down in Darius seat, which
being higher th^n served for his stature, by reason his feet could not reach to
the ground, one of the Kings Pages put a board for him, underneath, to tread
upon; whereat one of the Eunuchs that belonged to Darius looked heavily, and
fetched a deep sigh; whose sadness when Alexander perceived, he enquired of him
the cause: He answered, that when he beheld the board whereon Darius was wont
to eat, employed to so base a use, he could not behold it without grief.
Alexander being ashamed so much to misuse the thing that before was had in such
r^verence, caused the same to be taken away: But Philotas made request he
should not do so, but rather take it as a divination of his good luck and
fortune, that the Table whereon his Enemy did eat should now become subject to
his (...).

Alexander purposing from thence to pass into Persia, committed the City of
Susa to Archelaus with three thousand men of War, and to Zenophilus the charge
of the Castle, leaving such Macedons as were aged there in Garrison; but
bestowed the keeping of the Treasure unto Celicrates, and restored to Abulites
the Government and Principality of the Country of Susae, leaving within the
City, the Mother and the Children of Darius. And for as much as Alexander had
at the same time plenty of cloth of Purple sent him out of his Country, with
Garments ready made after the Macedons manner, for the honor he (...) to
Sisigambis (whom he had in reverence as if she had been his mother) he thought
good to present part of them unto her, with the persons that used to made them,
and willed that if she liked them, she should accustom her Neeces to make the
like, and give them for Presents. At the declaring of which Message the tears
flowed down her eyes, which declared the gift not to be acceptable to her; for
the Persian Ladies take nothing in more contempt then to put their hands to
Wool. When report was made to Alexander in what sort she had received his
Present, he thought the rudeness meet to be excused, and her to be comforted,
therefore he came to visit her, and said:

This Garment which I wear was both of the gift and making of my sisters: our
Customs brought me into error. Therefore I desire you, that you will not take
mine ignorance in evil part. I trust that otherwise I have observed
sufficiently all things which I knew to be your Customs. When I understood
that it was not lawful for the Son to s^t in the Mothers presence except she
does give him leave, I would never whenever I came into your presence sit,
until you willed me so to do. You would oftentimes have fillen down and
worshipped me, but I would not sufer you; but have ever (...) and given you the
name due to my (...) Olympias.

When the King with these words (...) her, he dep^^^ed; and by four encamp^^^^
came unto a River that the Contrymen call (...) which springing in the
Mountains of the Vxians, it runs (...) down amongst the Rocks with woody
bank by the space of fifty furlongs, but then descen^ng into a plain, it become
(...) navigable, and so runeth with a more quiet stream* and in a softer gound,
by the space of six hundred Furlongs, t^ such time as it does enter into the
Persian Sea. Alexander passing this River with nine Thousand Footmen of the
Macedons, with the Agrians, the mercenary Greeks, and with four Thousand
Tracians, came amongst the Vxians, whose County is near unto Susae, and
stretches out into Persi^ leaving betwixt it and Susae a narrow straight.
Madates had the rule of that Country, who wasuch a man as was rare at that
time; for he deterred to abide all extremities for his duties sake. ^uch as
knew the Country, did inform Alexand^ that there was a privy way through the
Mountains whereby men might get to the furthermost side (...) the chief City of
that Country; and if he wo^^ send but a sew that were light armed, they mi^t be
brought to a place where they should appear above their enemies heads. This
counsel liked him so well, that he made these Counselors Guides for his Army,
and committed them to Tauron, whom he appointed chief of the Enterprise. He
assigned unto him fifteen hundred mercenary Soldiers, and one thousand
Agrians, with whom, after the Sun was gone down, he entered into his journey.
Alexander in the third watch removed his Camp, and by the Spring of the day had
passed the Streights: there he set his men in hand for the cutting down of
Timber for making of Towers, and all such other things as pertained to the
assault of a City, and so beg^n his siege. It was a difficult matter to make
the aproach; the City stood ^o high, and the Rocks gave such impediment, that
the Soldiers were repuled, and received many hurts, contending both with the
Enemies, and the situation of the plac^: notwithstanding they gave it not
over, by reasn the King was always amongst the foremost, aching if they were not
ashamed, being the Conqurours of so many Cities, to be so long in the ^^nning
of a small Castle, that was so obscure and unknown in the world. As he was
traveling am^gst the foremost, with Darts and Arrows they ^ade many a shot at
him from the walls; but the ^ouldiers defended him with their Targets, becau^^
they could not persuade him thence. At lengt^ Tauron appeared above the Castle
of the City, a whose sight his Enemies hearts fainted, and (...) Macedons more
(...) did assail them. When (...) saw themselves in this extremity, and
perceive their power not able to withstand the Maceas, they became to diverse
dispositions; For some were determined to die, and many to fly away. But the
greater part retired themselves into the Castle, from whence they sent unto
Alexander thirty Ambassadors to ask mercy. But he returned a sad answer to
them, that there was no pardon to be obtained at his hands: whereupon they
being in the utmost danger of death, and excluded from all other remedies, sent
unto Sisigambis, by a privy way unknown to their Enemies, making their request
that she should vouchsafe to be a means to Alexander for the pacifying of his
rigor toward them. In her only they put their hope, knowing how much
Alexander loved her, and that he esteemed her as if she had been his mother.
And they thought she would the rather incline to their desire, because Madates
that was Captain there had married her sisters Daughter, whereby he became a
Kinsman to Darius. Sisigambis stood long in denial of their request, showing
that it agreed not with her fortune to become an intercessour for others;
adding thereunto, that she feared lest she might misuse his favors, and make
him weary of her importunities; for she said, that she had more remembrance
that she was a prisoner, then that she was a Queen. But at length she was
overcome with their solicitations, and by her Letters made intercession unto
Alexander, after such sort, that she first excused her self of her suit making,
and after required him that he would pardon them, or at the leastwise that he
would forgive her, being Petitioner only for the life of such a one as was her
Friend and Kinsman; and now no longer an enemy, but in readiness to submit
himself. This one thing is sufficient to declare the moderation and clemency
that was then in Alexander; for he did not only pardon Madates, but also left
the City untouched, granting to all that were within it their liberty, with
enjoyment of their Lands and Goods, without paying of any tribute. More then
this she could not have obtained of Darius being her Son.

When he had thus subdued the Vxians, he united them to the Province of Susa,
and purposing to pass forwards, he divided his Army into two parts; whereof he
committed the one to Parmenio to be conducted through the plain Country, and
reserving such a part as was pestered least with baggage, he took the way of
the Mountains, which with a continual ridge runs out in length from thence
into Persia. In his passage he plundered all the Mountain-Country, and arrived
the third day in the confines of Persia. The fifth day he entered into the
Streights of Pylae Susiae, which were defended by Ariobarzanes with fifteen
thousand Footmen, who on the tops of the high and steep Rocks that hung over on
both sides the way, at the first kept themselves quiet on purpose, pretending a
fear, until such time as the Army was entered into the narrowest of the
Streights. But when they saw the Macedons pass on forwards in contempt of them,
then they threw down great stones upon them; which falling upon the undermost
Rocks, and there breaking in pieces, rebounded amongst the Macedons, falling
with such violence, that they distressed whole Regiments at once. And besides
this, they did them great damage with shot of Arrows and Stones that they
casted out of Slings. Such as were men of courage were not so much grieved with
the death and destruction that they saw there present, as that they should be
slain after such a manner, like beasts caught in a pit, whereas they could not
be revenged upon their Enemies. Their wrath hereupon was turned into such a
rage, that they ran up against the Rocks, and there enforced themselves by
taking hold and by heaving up of one another, to mount up unto their Enemies.
But when they had caught hold of some outward part, and thereby labored to
ascend (by force of so many hands that fastened to it at once) they pulled in
sunder the thing they held by, and fell down all together. In this case they
could neither remain, go forwards, nor yet defend themselves by any device they
could make with their Targets, seeing the stones were of such weight that were
thrown down upon them.

Alexander was in great trouble of mind, not only for the grief he received by
the destruction of his men, but much more for the shame that he had so rashly
brought his men into such a dangerous straight. He had been invincible before
that day, and never attempted any thing in vain: He had passed the Streights of
Cilicia without damage, and opened to himself a new way by Sea into Pamphilia;
which felicity of his seemed to be now at a stay, if not to retreat; for he
could perceive no other remedy, then to return by the way he came. He caused
the retreat therefore to be sounded, and gave order to his Soldiers to go
close together, and by casting their Targets over their heads, to return the
same way they came, having then marched thirty Furlongs within the Straight.

When he returned, and had planted his Camp in an open ground, consulting what
was best to do, such a superstition invaded his mind, that he called for the
Priests and Diviners to help the matter by their invocation: But Aristander, to
whom he gave most confidence, could do nothing in that case. Alexander
therefore condemning their Sacrifices, which he thought then done out of time,
called for such as knew the Country: they showed him of another way that was
plain and open enough; but yet he liked it not, he was so ashamed to leave his
Soldiers unburied that were slain* For amongst all other Ceremonies observed
in the discipline of their Wars, there was not any more religiously kept, then
the burying of the dead. He caused therefore such prisoners as were lately
taken to be called before him; amongst whom, there was one expert both of the
Greek and Persian tongue, who showed to the King that he labored in vain, if
he thought to convey his Army over the tops of those Mountains; which (he said)
began at Mount Caucasus, and closed in the one side of Persia, by the space of
sixteen hundred Furlongs in length, and one hundred and forty in breadth, till
such time as they descended unto the Sea, which makes another Fence where the
Mountains ceased. The Country lying at the foot of the Mountains, he described
to be plain, fruitful, and replenished with many fair Cities and Villages, and
that the River of Araxes running through the same, falls into another River
called Medus, bringing with it the Tributes of many smaller streams; which
River of Medus being much less then the same which it does receive, runs
from thence toward the South. No place could be more abundant of grass, the
River every where clothing with Flowers, what it had bedewed with its waters.
The River was shadowed over with Plantain and Poplar-trees, which by reason
they stand somewhat high, and the water runs low in a deep channel, seem to
such as be afar off, to be woods adjoining to the mountains. He accounted no
Country in Asia to be more wholesome, or to have a more temperate air then
this, both by reason of shadowy Mountains that evermore keep off the heat; and
also of the Sea, which on that part being at hand, with a constant temperature
does nourish the ground.

When the prisoner had made a description of the Country after this manner, the
King enquired of him whether he knew those things by report, or else had seen
them with his eyes. He said that he had been a Herds-man, and knew the Country
very well, and all the passages, and that he had been twice taken prisoner;
once by the Persians in Lycia, and now the second time by him. Upon these words
Alexander called an Oracle to memory, whereby it was signified to him, that a
Lycian should be his Guide into Persia. Wherefore promising to him such rewards
as the present necessity required, and as his estate was meet to receive; he
willed him to be armed after the Macedons manner, and to be their Guide to show
them the way; which way, though he had declared to be straight and difficult,
yet Alexander made no doubt to pass it with a small number, thinking it no
difficult matter to pass that place for his glory, which the Herds-men had
passed oftentimes for the profit of pasture. Then the guide left not to
allege the difficulties of the way, specially for such as wear arms: but the
King said to him, Take me for surety, that not one of them that are appointed
thee, shall refuse to go where thou shall pass.

That done, he left Craterus with the charge of his Camp, and he himself passed
forwards with such Footmen as were accustomed to his person, with those bands
of whom Meleager had charge, and with a thousand Archers on horseback, taking
first order with Craterus that he should keep his Camp in the same form it had
been used before, and cause many fires to be made of purpose, that the Enemies
might rather think him to be there still present: he advised him further, that
if he perceived Ariobarzanes to get knowledge of his Enterprise, and so to send
part of his power to the stopping of his passage, that then by pretending of an
assault, he should show all the terror he could to draw his Enemies from him,
to the defense of that place. But if that he himself should deceive his
Enemies, and recover the Hill upon them, that then upon the hearing of the
alarm in the Camp of the Persians, preparing themselves to resist him, he
should not doubt to pass that way from whence they were repulsed the day
before, judging they should find no resistance, the Enemies power being
converted toward him. In the third watch he set forwards in great silence,
without sounding of Trumpet, and passed on by such a way as was showed him by
the Guide; every Soldier that was light armed carrying three days Victuals.
But when he was on his way, besides the wild Rocks and sharp stones that
caused them often to fail their footing, the Snow driven by the wind was a great
impediment to them in their journey, for they fell diverse times down into pits;
and such as coveted to pull them out, were oftentimes themselves drawn after.
The night also, with the Country unknown, and the Guide, of whose fidelity they
doubted, increased much their fear, considering that if they should not deceive
their Enemies watch, they should be taken and perish like beasts. They
considered also, that both their safeguard and the Kings lay in the hands of a
prisoner.

At length they came to a Mountain, where the way toward Ariobarzanes lay on
the right hand, where he sent before, under the guiding of such as they had
taken prisoners, Philotas, Cenon, Amyntas, and Polipercon, with a band of the
lightest armed, whom he advised, that forasmuch as they had both horsemen and
footmen, and the Country fertile and abundant in forage, that they should make
no haste, but pass forwards fair and easily; and he, with the Esquires of his
body; and the band of horsemen whom they called Agema, was guided by another
by-path, far off from the place where his enemies kept their watch: But the
passage was so straight and so hollow, that they suffered great trouble and
vexation in passing thereof. It was now midday, and they were so wearied, that
of necessity they must take rest, having so far to go, as they had traveled
already, saving that the way was not altogether so difficult and rough. He
refreshed therefore his men with meat and sleep, and in the second Watch did
rise up, and passed the rest of his journey without any great difficulty,
saving in that part where the Mountain began to fall aslope toward the plain;
their passage was there suddenly stopped by a great gull, occasioned by the
violence of the streams that ran down the Mountains, by wearing away the Earth;
and besides, the trees standing so thick, and the boughs that grew one within
another, appeared before them as a continual hedge. When they saw themselves
stayed after this manner, such desperation fell amongst them, that they could
scarcely abstain from tears, the darkness being a great increase of their
terror, seeing they could not enjoy any benefit of the Stars; for if any gave
light, the same was taken away by the shadow of the trees. And the use of the
ear could not serve for one to receive counsel and comfort from another, the
wind whirling amongst the leaves, and the shaking of the boughs making an
amazing noise. But at length the day increasing in its light, diminished the
terrors that the darkness of the night had made. Then by fetching a little
compass about, they passed the hollow gull, and every man began to be a guide
to himself. At last they got up on the top of the Hill, from whence they might
behold their Enemies in their Camp. Then the Macedons showed themselves stoutly
in their Armor, appearing suddenly on their backs, when they mistrusted no
such thing, and there slew such as came first to encounter with them: So that
on the one part, the grievous noise of them that were slain, and the miserable
shrick of such as ran in for succor amongst their own company, put the rest to
slight without making any resistance. When the Alarm was once heard in the Camp
where Craterus lay, the Army by and by passed forward to go through the
Streights, in the which they were repulsed the day before. Philotas also, with
Polipercon, Cenos, and Amyntas, who were gone the other way, arrived at the
same time, and gave a further terror unto their Enemies. When the Persians saw
their Enemies assailing them in all parts at once, though they were so oppressed
with their sudden invasion, that at the first they were in doubt what to do;
yet at length they assembled together, and fought notably, necessity stirring
up the faintness of their hearts; for oftentimes despair is the cause of good
hope. They being unarmed, closed with them that were armed, and with the weight
of their bodies pulled their Enemies to the Earth, and killed diverse with their
own Weapons. Ariobarzanes with forty Horsemen, and five thousand Footmen that
kept about his person, brake through the Battle of the Macedons, to the great
slaughter of his own men and his Enemies; and by making haste, recovered
Persepolis the chief City of the Country. But when he was excluded from thence
by such as were within, he renewed again the Fight with such as were with him,
and so was slain.

By that time Craterus, that made all the speed he could, was come unto them,
Alexander fortified his Camp in the same place, where he did discomfite his
Enemies. For though they were all fled, and he certain of the Victory, yet
because he found his way stopped in many places with great and deep Ditches, he
thought good to use circumspection, and not to make too great a speed: not so
much by fear of his Enemies Force, as by reason of the nature of the ground,
which he found apt for them to lay ambushments against him. As he was passing
forwards, he received Letters from Tyridates the keeper of Darius Treasure,
signifying that the inhabiters of Persepolis hearing of his coming, were about
to spoil the Treasure; and that therefore he should haste to prevent it, for
the way was ready enough, notwithstanding the River of Araxes interposed. There
was no virtue in Alexander more commendable then his celerity, which he showed
specially in this; for leaving his footmen behind, he traveled all night with
his horsemen, and by daylight came to the River of Araxes; there he found many
Villages and Houses, whose Timber being taken down, a Bridge was raised in a
moment, by the help of stones which were found in the bottom of the River.

When Alexander had passed the River, and came near unto the City, a company
met him so miserable, as seldom have been found in any memory. They were
Greeks, to the number of four thousand, whom the Persians heretofore had taken
prisoners, and afflicted with diverse kinds of torments. For some of them had
their feet cut off, some their hands, and others their ears, but all were
marked in the flesh with hot Irons. The Persians having maimed and deformed
them after this manner, kept and reserved them still, as a memory of their
despite toward the Nation. But when they saw they should come under the
obedience of another Prince, they suffered the Greeks to meet Alexander. They
seemed rather to be Specters then men: for nothing could be discerned or known
but their voice. The compassion of their wretched estate, caused the beholders
to let fall no fewer tears then they did themselves. For it could not appear
which of them were most miserable, though their afflictions were diverse. But
when they had cried out before Alexander, that Jupiter the revenger of Greece
had opened their eyes in beholding him that should deliver them, they judged
then all their gifts as one. Alexander wiped the tears from his eyes, and
willed them to be of good cheer; for that they should both see their Country
and their Friends: and he encamped at the same place where he met them, being
two furlongs from Persepolis. The Greeks drew themselves together to consult
what was best for them to demand of Alexander; and when some were of opinion to
ask dwelling places within Asia, and others had more mind to return into their
Countries, Euctemon the Cymaean spoke thus unto them: We that even now were
ashamed to put our heads out of the prison and darkness we were in, to make
suit for our own aid and relief, are become of such simplicity, that we
presently desire to show unto Greece as a pleasant spectacle, our deformities
and maims, whereof we have as much cause to be ashamed, as to be grieved. You
must think that such bear their miseries best, who can find the means to hide
them most; and that there is no Country so familiar to men that be
unfortunate, as solitariness, and forgetfulness of their former estate. For
they which make an account of their Friends pity and compassion, know not how
soon their tears may dry up: no Creatures can love those faithfully whom they
abhor. For as calamity of her own Nature is full of complaint; so Felicity is
always proud, and every one does use to think of his own Fortune, when he
judges of his Neighbors: For except we had all been in misery, one of us long
ago had been weary of another. What marvel is it then, though men in felicity
seek always their equals? My opinion is therefore, that we (who as men long
ago were as dead in this life) seek us a place wherein we may hide our maimed
members, and whereas exile may conceal our horrible deformities. If we shall
return into our Country, being in this case, how can we but be unwelcome to
our Wives whom we married young? Or shall our Children or our Brethren now
acknowledge us, being the vomits of so many Prisons? and though all things
should there succeed as we could wish, yet how small a number of us are able to
travel through so many Countries? How is it possible for us that are here
banished into the uttermost bounds of the Orient, being aged, impotent, and
maimed, to endure those travels which have wearied men who have been both
armed, and Conquerours? It is to be asked, what shall become of our Wives whom
Chance and Necessity has here procured us, for the only comfort of our
imprisonment? what shall we do with our Children? Shall we take them with us,
or leave them behind us? If we return with such as we have here, none of those
in Greece will acknowledge us; and shall we then be so mad to leave those
comforts we have already, being uncertain whether we shall arrive at those
which we desire, or not? Verily much better it were for us, to conceal our
selves amongst them who have been acquainted with us in our misery.

These were Euctemon his words: but Theatus, the Athenian, reasoned to the
contrary.

There is no wise man ( quoth he) that will esteem us by our outward shape,
seeing that our calamity is not come by Nature, but by the cruelty of our
Enemies: Such as are ashamed of the injuries of Fortune, are well worthy to
suffer misadventures: They give a grievous sentence upon the state of man's
Mortality, and despair much of mercy, who deny their compassion to men in
misery. Now therefore, since the gods have offered to you what ye durst never
have wished for, that is, your Country, your Wives, and your Children, being
(...) things which men esteem more then life, and redeem oftentimes with death;
Why do you doubt for the enjoyment of those things, to break out of this
imprisonment? I judge the Air of our own Country most natural to us, where
there is another manner of living, other Customs, other Religion, and another
tongue; which for the pleasantness of it, is coveted of the Barbarous Nations.
What great things then be those which ye would willingly leave, the want of
which only is the cause of your misery? My Opinion is plain, that we visit our
Country and our Home, and not to refuse so great a benefit as Alexander has
proffered us. If any be detained with the love of such wives and children as
they have gotten here in servitude, let such be no impediment to others, that
esteem most their natural Country.

There were but few of this opinion; for custom, that is of greater force then
nature, prevailed in that point. They agreed therefore to demand of Alexander
the gift of some place to inhabit in, and chose out a hundred to be Petitioners
to him in that behalf. When Alexander perceived them coming toward him,
thinking that they would have required what he had conceived, he said unto them:

I have appointed to every one of you Beasts to carry you* and a thousand
Deniers; and when you shall come to Greece, I will so well provide for you,
that excepting your misfortune, no man shall think himself in better case then
you.

But when he saw them looking still toward the ground, and that they neither
lifted up their eyes, nor spoke one word, he enquired the cause of their
heaviness. Then Euctemon rehearsed again those words in effect, which he had
spoken before in Council. The King therefore pitying no less their demand, then
he did their misfortune, commanded three thousand Deniers to be given to every
one of them, and ten suits of apparel, with Cattle and Corn, whereby they might
Till and Sow the Land that should be appointed to them. The next day he
assembled all the Captains of his Army together, and represented to them, that
there was no City more enemy to the Greeks then the same that was the chief
Seat of the ancient Kings of Persia; from whence all the great Enemies had been
sent into Greece: how Darius first, and after him Xerxes, had come out of that
place to move their un^ust War against Europe, with the destruction of which
City he thought good to revenge the blood of their Predecessors. The
Inhabitants had abandoned that City, and fled where their fear did drive them.
Whereupon, the King straightways brought in all the Phalanx to the spoil
thereof. He had before that time won many Cities; some by force, and some by
composition, that were full of riches, and of Princes Treasure; but the
abundance of that City did exceed all the rest, as being the place where the
Persians had laid up all their substance: Gold and Silver was found in heaps,
and great plenty of rich habiliments and furniture of houses, not only for
necessary use, but for excess and ostentation; which was so great, that it gave
the Conquerours occasion to fight for it amongst themselves, each taking other
for their enemies that had gotten the richest spoil. The abundance there was
such, that they could not employ the riches which they found; but when they saw
things of value, they esteemed them rather, then took them away. At last, every
one of them coveting to have a part of every thing, did tear and break asunder
the Princely Robes, and the precious Plate of curious workmanship, with the
Images of Gold and Silver, which were plucked in pieces, as every one caught
hold; nothing was left untouched, nor any thing carried away whole: cruelty
bearing no less rule then covetousness, every one was so laden with gold and
silver, that they esteemed not the keeping of their prisoners, but killed such
as at first they spared in hope of gain. There were many therefore that
prevented their Enemies by a voluntary death; and diverse clothing themselves
in their most precious apparel, leaped down from the walls with their wives and
children. Certain there were that set their own houses on fire, (which they
judged their Enemies would else have done) and burned themselves with their
Family together. At length, the King did forbid any violence to be done to
women, and that no man should meddle with any thing pertaining to them. The sum
of money taken within this City, was greater then any man can well credit; but
either we must doubt with others, or else believe what has been left in
memory, that the Treasure there found, amounted to a hundred and twenty
thousand Talents: which Treasure, because Alexander would employ in his Wars,
he caused Horses and Camels to be brought from Susae and Babylon, to convey the
same. The taking of the City of Persagadis, wherein were found six thousand
Talents, was an increase to this sum; which City being built by Cyrus, was
yielded up by Gobates, who had the Government thereof.

Alexander left in the Castle of Persepolis three thousand Macedons in
Garrison, under Nic^rides Captain of the same, and reserved to Tyridates, that
delivered him the Treasure, the same honor that he enjoyed with Darius.
Leaving in this City the greater part of his Army, with his Carriages, under
the Rule of Parmenio and Craterus, he with a thousand Horsemen, and a Band of
Footmen, without any Baggage, went to visit in the Win^^^ ^^^son the inward
parts of Pers^a: There he was (...)ed with Storms and Tempests that were in a
manner intolerable; but yet he advanced forward in (...)is Enterprise, to the
place appointed. In his march he came unto a Country that was covered with
Snow, and frozen by the violence of the great cold. The melancholy of the
Wilderness put the Soldiers that were wearied with travel in such a terror,
that they imagined they had seen the uttermost bounds of the world: For when
they beheld all things waste, and no sign appearing of the habitation of men,
they were amazed, and made request to return again, before that the Light and
Elements should fail them. The King would not chastise them, being in this
terror, but leaped from his Horse, and marched on foot before them in the Snow
and the Ice: Which thing when his Friends saw, they could not for shame but
follow; then the Captains did the like, and finally the Soldiers: The King was
the first that made himself a way, by breaking the Ice with a Pick-Axe; whose
example the rest did follow. At length, having passed the desolate Woods, they
found here and there some appearance of habitation, and discovered Flocks of
Sheep: When the Inhabitants, who dwelled in the Cottages dispersed thereabouts,
saw armed men advancing, whom they judged to be their Enemies, thinking they
had been enclosed about, they slew such as were not able to follow them, and
fled themselves to the Mountains that were full of Snow. But at length, by
communication with such as they took prisoners, their wildness was somewhat
mitigated, and they yielded themselves to Alexander, who did them no hurt at
all. When he had conquered all that part of Persia, and brought the Towns under
his obedience, he came into the Country of the warlike Mardians, who did
differ much from the rest of the other Persians in their manner of living: They
with their wives and children did dig themselves Caves in the Mountains, and
lived with the flesh of sheep and wild Beasts: nor had the women any
appearance or disposition more soft or mild then the men* their shagged hair
hung down before upon their faces, and their garments came but to their knees;
the bands of their Slings were fillets for their foreheads, which they used
both for ornament and defense. This Nation, for all their uncivility could not
escape from being subdued with the same force of fortune that others were; so
that on the thirtieth day after he departed from Persepolis, he returned to it
again. Then he gave rewards to his friends, and to all the rest according to
their deservings, distributing in a manner all the riches which he found within
that City. But all the excellent virtues of his mind, his Princely qualities,
wherein he excelled all Kings, that constancy in all dangers, that dexterity in
contriving and performing all Enterprises, the keeping of his promise with
those that submitted, his clemency toward prisoners, and that temperance in
lawful and accustomary pleasures, were all defaced through the intolerable
desire and delight he had in drinking. For notwithstanding that his Enemy my
which contended with him for the Empire, did make then great Levies for the
Wars, and was gathering his power together; and although the people newly
conquered were not yet in a quiet subjection, yet he gave himself continually
to feasting and banqueting, where women were ever present; not such to whom
men had respect for honesty, but Harlots, who had in the Camp more liberty,
then beseemed the discipline of men of War.

Amongst them there was one Thais, who upon a day in her drunkenness, affirmed
to Alexander, that he should wonderfully win the favor of the Greeks, if he
would command the Palace of Persepolis to be set on fire; the destruction
whereof (she said) they greatly desired; for so much as the same was the Seat
of the Kings of Persia, which in times past had destroyed so many of their
Cities. When the drunken Harlot had given her Sentence, a second and a third
(they being likewise drunk) confirmed her words. Alexander, who then had in him
more inclination to heat then patience, said, Why do we not then revenge
Greece, and set this City on fire? They were all high with Wine, and rose
immediately upon those words to burn that City in their drunkenness, which the
men of War had spared in their fury. The King himself first, and after him his
Guests, his Servants, and his Concubines set fire on the Palace; which being
builded for the most part of Cedar, became suddenly on a flame. When the Army
that was encamped near unto the City beheld the fire, which they thought had
been kindled by some casualty, they came running to quench the same: But when
they saw the King there present nourishing the flame, they poured out the water
which they brought, and helped likewise to increase the fire.

Thus the Palace that was the Head of the whole Orient, from whence so many
Nations before had fetched their Laws to live under; the Seat of so many Kings,
the only Terror sometimes of Greece, that had set forth a Navy of ten thousand
Ships, and Armies that overflowed all Europe, who made Bridges over the Sea,
and undermined Mountains where the Sea has now his course, was consumed, and
had his end, and never rose again in all the Ages that did ensue; for the Kings
of Macedonia made choice of other Cities, which are now in the hands of the
Parthians. The destruction of this City was such, that the Foundation thereof,
at this day, cannot be found, but that the river of Arraxes does show where it
stood, which was distant from Persepolis twenty furlongs, as the Inhabitants
rather do believe then know. The Macedons were ashamed that so Noble a City was
destroyed by their King in his drunkenness: yet at length it was turned into a
work that carried gravity in the performance; and they were content to think it
expedient, that the City should have been so destroyed. But it is certain, that
when Alexander had taken his rest, and was better advised, he repented him of
this deed, and said, That the Persians should have done the Greeks more harm,
if it had been his chance to have Reigned in Xerxes stead. The next day he gave
thirty Talents for a reward to him that was his Guide into Persia; and from
thence he advanced forwards into Media, where a new supply of Soldiers (of
whom Plato of Athens had the Conduct) came to him out of Cilicia, being five
hundred Footmen, and a thousand Horsemen.

When he had by this means increased his power, he determined to pursue Darius,
who was come to Ecbatana, the Head City of Media, and was purposed from thence
to have passed into Bactria: But fearing to be prevented by the speed which his
Enemies made, he altered his purpose, and his journey. Alexander was not come
near by fifty hundred furlongs; but he could not think any distance sufficient
to defend him against his celerity; and therefore prepared himself rather to
fight, then to fly: He had with him thirty thousand Footmen, amongst whom there
was four thousand Greeks, whose Fidelity never failed in all his adverse
Fortune: He had also four thousand Archers and Slingers, besides thirty three
hundred Bactrian Horsemen, which were under Bessus charge, being Governor both
of the City of Bactria, and the Country. Darius, with those Forces, withdrew a
little from the highway, and commanded such as had charge of the Carriage to
pass on before: He called a Council, where he spoke to this effect:

If Fortune had matched me with Cowards, and with such as preferred a vile life
before an honest death, I would rather have held my peace, then at this instant
consume words in vain; But I have had greater experience then I could wish,
both of your valor and fidelity toward me: So that I for my part, ought
rather to seem worthy to have such Friends as you are, then to doubt whether ye
yet remain the same men toward me ye were before; For of so many thousands
that were under my Empire, you only have followed and adhered to me: Though I
have been twice overthrown in the Field, and twice enforced to fly away, your
fidelity and your constancy does make me think that I remain still a King.
Traitors and Fugitives do reign in my Cities; not for that they be thought
worthy of such honor, but that you might be provoked by their rewards to
revolt against me. Notwithstanding you have chosen rather to follow me in my
misfortune, then be partakers of the felicity of the Conquerours. You are
worthy, whom the Gods shall reward if I may not, as undoubtedly they will.
There can no Posterity be so silent, nor Fame so ungrateful, which shall not
with due commendations extol you to the Stars. Though I had within me thoughts
of Flight, whereunto my heart never agreed; yet I have now conceived such a
trust of your Virtue and Manhood, that I purpose to advance against my Enemy:
How long shall I be as a banished man within mine own Dominion, and fly from a
strange and Foreign Prince within the bounds of mine own Kingdom? When may I
by hazarding the Battle, either recover what I have lost, or else die an
honorable death? Except peradventure it seems better to some men, that I
should submit my self to my enemies will, and by the Example of Mazeus and
Mithrenes, receive by Petition the Dominion of some one Nation; wherein I judge
that Alexander had rather follow the inclination of his glory, then of his
wrath. No, let the gods never grant, that it may lie in a man's power, either to
take away, or give unto me this Diadem upon my head; nor that I lose this
Empire, so long as I have breath. For in this I am resolved, that my Life and
my Kingdom shall end both together. If this mind, if this resolution remain in
you, there is none of you that can want liberty, there is none that shall be
compelled to endure the arrogance of your Enemies. Every man's right hand shall
give unto himself either a revenge, or an end of his evils. I my self am an
Example of Fortune; and therefore it is not without cause that I look for a
better change. And if the worst fall out, that the gods do continue against us
in our Wars that be lawful and honest; yet this cannot be denied, but that we
may manfully and honestly die. I require and conjure you, by the honor of our
Predecessors, who with such Fame and Glory have possessed the Kingdoms of the
whole Orient; by those men to whom Macedon sometimes was tributary, by so many
Navies of Ships sent into Greece, and by so many Victories won, that ye will
take such courage unto you, as may seem worthy your Nobility and your Nation;
and that with the same constancy of mind wherewith you have endured things
past, you attempt whatsoever Fortune shall produce hereafter. I am resolved for
my part, to purchase to my self a perpetual Fame, either by Victory, or by some
notable Adventure in the Fight.

When Darius had spoken these words, the representation of the present peril so
amazed them all, that they were not able either to show their advice, or to
speak a word, until such time as Artabasus, the most ancient of his Friends
(who before-time had been with King Philip) began to declare his resolution:

We are come into the Field ( quoth he) with you that are our King, in our most
precious Apparel, and richest Armor, with intent to win the Victory; and we do
neither despair of Victory, nor do we refuse to die.

To those words all the rest with one voice seemed to agree, saving Nabarzanes,
who being present in that Council with Bessus, and of his Opinion, conspired a
Treason so prodigious; that the like has seldom been heard of: Their
determination was, by force of the Soldiers they had under their charge, to
put their King in hold; with this purpose, that if Alexander pursued them, to
deliver him then alive into his hands, to win thereby his favor, as a thing
which they thought he would greatly esteem: But if they could escape
conveniently, then they were in mind to kill Darius, and dividing the Kingdom
betwixt them, renew again the War against the Macedons. They having imagined
this Treason long before in their minds, Nabarzanes thought this an occasion
to make a preparative to his wicked intent, by this persuasion which he uttered:

I am confident ( quoth he) that I shall speak what at the first appearance
shall not be grateful unto your ears: But Physicians use to cure Diseases that
be great, with sharp and bitter Medicines: And the Ship-Masters, when they fear
a Shipwreck, accustom to redeem such things as may be saved, with the
destruction and loss of the rest: Yet this what I shall persuade unto is not to
your detriment, but an Expedient by what means you may preserve your self and
your Kingdom. We make a War wherein the gods seem manifestly to be against us,
and fortune cease not obstinately to pursue us: It is needful^ therefore that
we lay new Foundations, and seek out men who have other Fortunes: My Opinion
is, that you deliver up your Kingdom unto some man's hands who shall have the
Name of King, so long as your Enemies are within Asia: And when they be once
departed (which my mind gives me to be shortly) he shall restore unto you the
same again: The Country of Bactria is yet untouched; the Indians and Sacans be
at your appointment: so many People, so many Armies, so many thousands of
Horsemen and Footmen have their Forces in readiness to renew this War: So that
a much greater Force remains, then that which the War has consumed. Why do
we then like Beasts, wilfully run to a destruction that is not necessary? It is
the property of such as are men of courage, rather to despise death, then to
hate life; and oftentimes, by weariness of travel, Cowards are driven to take
little regard of themselves; but Virtue leaving nothing unproved, and Death
being the end of all things, it is sufficient if we go not to it like
Sluggards: Therefore if we shall go unto Bactria, which is now our next Refuge,
let us, for the present, make Bessus our King, who is already Ruler of that
Country; and when the Affairs be once brought to some stay, he shall restore to
you the Empire again, as to their Right King.

Although Darius perceived not the greatness of the mischief that lay hidden
under his wicked words, yet it was no marvel that he could not abstain; for he
turned toward him, and said, Thou vile Slave, have thou now found out a time
meet to disclose the Treason that lies in thy heart? And therewithal he pulled
out his Sword to have slain him, if Bessus, and the other Bactrians about him,
had not hindered his purpose. These pretended to be sorry for the matter, but
minded in very deed to bind him, if he had continued in his purpose.

In the mean season, Nabarzanes escaped away, and Bessus followed after; who
immediately did separate the Bands they had charge of from the rest of the
Army, because they would use them apart to their own purpose. When they were
departed, Artabasus framed his talk according to the estate of the time then
present, and began to pacify Darius with words; putting him in remembrance,
how his case was such, that it behoved him to bear quietly the foolishness, or
rather the error of his own men, for as much as Alexander was at hand, too
sore an Enemy for them, although there were no disobedience: But if we shall be
at variance (quoth he) when he does pursue us, our affairs shall stand in very
evil condition. Thereupon Darius inclined somewhat to Artabasus advice; and
though he was minded to remove, yet because he perceived every man to be
troubled in mind, he remained still in the same place. But he himself was so
astonished with sorrow and desperation, that he kept himself close, and came
not forth of his Pavilion: Whereupon the Camp being without Government, the
Heads not consulting together as they did before, there arose amongst them a
great diversity of Opinions, and motions of mind: Which thing when Patron saw,
that was Captain of the Greek Soldiers, he willed his men to put on their
Armor, to be in a readiness to do as they should be appointed: The Persians
encamped by themselves, and Bessus remained amongst the Bactrians, practicing
to carry away the Persians into Bactria, and to leave Darius; signifying to
them the riches of that Region yet untouched, and the peril they were in if
they remained there; but they were all in a manner of one Opinion, that it was
an overgreat offense for them to forsake their Prince.

In the mean season, Artabasus executed the Kings Office, and went amongst the
Persians in their lodgings, admonishing and exhorting them, sometimes apart,
and otherwhile all together, and would never leave them, before it appeared
that they would do as the King would have them. That done, with great pain and
difficulty, he persuaded Darius to take his meat, and set his mind upon his
business.

But Bessus and Nabarzanes were so greedy to get the Government into their
hands, that they resolved to put in execution the thing they had long conspired
betwixt them; for so long as Darius was in safety, they could not hope to
compass nor attain so great Authority. The Majesty of a King is had in great
Veneration amongst those Nations, at whose Name only they assemble together;
and the Reverence used to them in their prosperity, causes men to show them
the like obedience in adversity: The greatness and power of those Countries,
whereof of Bessus and Nabarzanes had the Rule, not being inferior to any other
Nations in that part of the world, either in men, in furniture, or largeness of
their Territory, gave a great encouragement unto their wicked dispositions, in
attempting of this matter: For they possessing the third part of Asia, were
able to make as great a number of men as Darius before had lost. In confidence
whereof, they not only despised Darius, but Alexander himself; purposing, when
they were once become Lords of that Country, to reinforce from thence again
the power of the Empire, and maintain the Wars against the Macedons.

When they had long devised and debated these things, they determined to take
Darius by the Bactrian Soldiers, of whom they had the Rule; and (...) to send
word to Alexander, that they reserved him alive, to deliver him into his hands:
And if so be that Alexander should not not accept it, which indeed they
doubted, then their purpose was to kill Darius, and with their power to fly
into Bactria. But for so much as they saw that Darius could not be taken
openly, seeing there were so many thousands ready to aid him, and fearing also
the fidelity of the Greeks, they determined to work by slight, the thing that
they could not bring to pass by force. The plot was, to counterfeit a
repentance of their former doings, in excusing unto the King the fear they were
in, and in the mean season, they sent certain to practice with the Persians,
and to prove their minds. The Soldiers were tossed to and (...) with hope and
fear; sometime they thought, that by leaving of their King, they should commit
themselves to manifest ruin and destruction: And again, they remembered what
entertainment was promised them in Bactria, that lay open for them, where they
should be received with such gifts and riches, as they could not well imagine.

Whiles Bessus and Nabarzanes were beating of these things in their heads,
Artabasus came unto them, declaring how Darius was well pacified, and that they
might, if they would, be in the same Estate and Degree with him that they were
before. Thereupon they fell to weeping, and purging themselves; requiring
Artabasus, that he would take upon him the defense of their Cause, and carry
their Request and Submission unto the King. The night was consumed in this
kind of business: When it was day, Nabarzanes, with the Bactrian Soldiers,
stood at the Entry of the Kings Lodging, coloring his privy Treason with the
solemn pretense of doing his duty: Darius caused warning to be given for his
remove; and so mounted upon his Chariot, after his accustomed manner.
Nabarzanes, and the other Traitors, fell upon the ground to worship him, and
shed tears in token of repentance; notwithstanding that they determined shortly
after to put him in Fetters; so apt is the nature of man to dissimulation.
Darius being of a simple and gentle Nature, was enforced through their
behavior, not only to believe what they pretended, but also it caused him to
weep for joy: yet that could not cause the Traitors to alter their purpose,
when they perceived what kind of man, and what manner of Prince they went
about to (...). Darius doubting nothing of his peril that was next at hand,
made all the haste he could to escape Alexander, whom he only doubted. Patron,
that was Captain of the Grecians, commanded his Soldiers to put on their
Harness, which they carried before in Trusses, and to be ready, and attend to
every thing that should be appointed them: For he understanding the Treason
that was contrived, followed the Kings Chariot, seeking occasion to speak with
him.

And Bessus doubting the same thing, would not depart from the Chariot, but
followed rather as a Watch then a Waiter. Patron therefore having tarried long,
and being interrupted oftentimes as he was about to speak, stood in a stay,
betwixt fear and fidelity, beholding the King in the face. When Darius
perceived that he beheld him after that manner, he willed Bubace, his Eunuch,
that rode next him, to enquire of Patron if he had any thing to say to him:
Patron said, Yea: but his matter was such, as he would no man should hear. Then
he was willed to come near; and (without any Interpreter) Darius understanding
somewhat of the Greek Tongue, Patron said unto him:

Sir; Of fifty thousand Greeks that served you, there is a small number of us
remaining, which have continually followed you in all Fortunes, bearing unto
you the same fidelity and affection that we did in your most flourishing
Estate: And we were determined, wheresoever you are, to take that for our
Country and home; both Prosperity and Adversity has so coupled us together: By
which Invincible Fidelity that is in us, I desire you, and require you, that
you would vouchsafe to lodge within our Camp, and suffer us us to be the Guard
of your Person. We have lost Greece, we have no Bactria to go unto* all our
h^pe is in you; and the gods grant that all other men may do the like. It is
not necessary I should speak any more; nor would I demand the custody of your
Person, being an Alien and a Stranger, if I knew that others were as
well-minded toward you.

Although Bessus were ignorant of the Greek Tongue, yet his Conscience pricked
him to believe, that Patron had disclosed something; and therefore carrying
away some part of his words, by a Greek Interpreter became out of doubt: Darius
nothing afraid, as it appeared by his Countenance, enquired of Patron what
moved him to give such advice? Whereupon, he thought not good to defer it any
longer, but said; Bessus and Nabarzanes work Treason against you, so that your
Life and your Estate stand in extreme peril; and this day shall be the last,
either to the Traitors, or to you. Whose words, if Darius had well weighed and
regarded, Patron had received the glory of the preservation of the Prince. But
let them mock that list, who say that the state of men is governed by Chance: I
do believe every man runs his Race by an Immutable Order, and by a
concatenation everlasting appointment unknown, appointed long before. Darius
answer was:

That although the fidelity of the Greek Soldiers was sufficiently known unto
him, yet he was determined never to depart from his own Nation, by whom though
he might be deceived, yet it was hard for him to mistrust them: Whatsoever
should befall him, he said, he was minded rather to suffer it amongst his own
Subjects, then to part away from them; not desiring to live, if his own
Soldiers desired not his Safeguard.

Whereupon Patron despairing of the Kings welfare, returned them of whom he had
the charge, ready to adventure any thing for his sake. Bessus, in the mean
season, had absolutely determined to slay Darius; but fearing that he could not
win Alexanders favor, except he delivered his Enemy into his hands alive,
deferred his purpose to the night following.

In the mean season, he came to Darius, and gave him thanks that he had so
warily, and with such wisdom, avoided the Treason of that false Grecian, who
being corrupted by Alexander, sought nothing but how to make a present of his
head; whereat (he said) He could not marvel that a Mercenary man should leave
any thing undone for Money, being without any Pledge of his Honesty, without
house and home, banished out of the world; a fair Friend, and a doubtful Enemy;
tossed here and there at the beck of all men that would corrupt him. And then
he fell to purging of himself, calling the gods of his Country to witness his
Innocence in this matter.

Darius, by his countenance, seemed to believe him; yet he doubted not of the
truth of what Patron had told him: but he was come to such a point, that it was
as dangerous for him not to believe his own men, as to be deceived. There were
thirty thousand, whose lightness was feared to have consented to this
Conspiracy; and Patron had but four thousand, unto whom if he had committed his
^afety, and thereby condemned the fidelity of his own Nation, he saw that then
they might have had a goodly color and pretense to perform their Enterprise;
and therefore chose rather to be killed Innocently, then to give any occasion
whereby he should seem to have deserved death: And yet when Bessus purged
himself, he answered, That he knew that there was no less Justice in Alexander,
then Manhood; and that they were deceived that looked for any Rewards of
Treason at his hands; knowing there was none a greater Punisher or Revenger of
the breach of Fidelity. When the night drew near, the Persians, after their
accustomed manner, put off their Armor, and repaired to the next Villages, to
provide things necessary: But the Bactrians, as Bessus had commanded them,
stood still armed. In the mean season, Darius had sent for Artabasus, and
showed him what Patron had declared: Whereupon Artabasus made no doubt, but
that he would straightways commit himself among the Greeks; thinking that the
Persians, when the Kings peril should be published abroad, would join with the
Grecians: Yet Darius, predestinate to his chance, could not hear that saving
counsel, nor sought for any help in that case, but embraced Artabasus, as
though he should never see him more; and being wet with the tears that one of
them let fall upon the other, he caused Artabasus to be removed from him; and
because he would not see his sorrow in departing from him, he covered his face,
and fell flat upon the ground: Then such as were accustomed to the Guard of his
Person, who should have been his Defense in all perils, fled away, thinking
themselves over-weak for such a number of armed men as they supposed to be
coming: There was a great solitariness within Darius his lodging; for none
remained about the King but a few Eunuchs, that had no place to repair unto:
Then he debated and devised with himself alone, sometime one thing, and
sometime another; and anon he waxed weary of that solitariness, in which before
he took a comfort, and called Bubace unto him, whom he beheld, and said:

Go, provide for your selves, who, according to your duties, have been true to
your Prince till the last hour; here I do tarry for the fatal Law of my
destiny: Peradventure you do marvel that I do not end mine own life; I had
rather dye through other men's wickedness, then by mine own.

After these words, Bubace filled both the Kings lodging, and also the whole
Camp with mourning and lamentation; and diverse brake into the place where
Darius was, and tearing their clothes, bewailed his case with a great
lamentation. When the cry came unto the Persians, they were so amazed with
fear, that they durst neither put on their Armor, lest they might give
occasion to the Bactrians to set upon them; nor could they remain quiet, lest
they might so wickedly leave their King.

Then were clamours heard throughout the Camp of diverse sorts, without any
Head, and without any appointment. Such as pertained to Nabarzanes and Bessus,
deceived by such lamentation as they heard, brought tidings to the rest, that
the King had killed himself: Whereupon, they repaired thither so fast as they
could gallop; and such Followed after, as were chosen to be Ministers of their
Mischief. When they were entered into the Kings Pavilion, because the Eunuchs
declared that he was alive, they commanded him to be bound.

Thus he, who before was carried in a Chariot, and honored of his men like a
god, was made a prisoner by his own Servants, without any Foreign Power; and
put into a vile Cart, and covered over with Beasts skins: and spoil was made of
the Kings Stuff, in such sort, as if it had been taken in the Wars. When they
had laden themselves with the Prey got after so soul a manner, they conveyed
themselves into their Countries: But Artabasus, with those of whom he had the
charge, and with the Greek Soldiers, took their way toward Parthina; thinking
to be more sure any where, then in the Fellowship of those Traitors. The
Persians, whom Bessus had overcome with so many fair promises, specially
because they had no other man to follow, joined themselves to the Bactrians,
and the third day overtook them. But to the intent Darius should not want such
honor as was due to his Estate, Bessus caused him to be bound with Golden
Fetters; such were the despites that his Fortune made him subject unto: And for
that he should not be known by his Apparel, they covered the Cart with foul
Hides of Beasts, and caused unknown men to drive it forwards: and lest by
enquiry in the Army he might be discovered, such as had the charge of him
followed afar off.

When Alexander heard that Darius was removed to Ecbatana, he left the way that
he was in, and with all the speed he could make followed after Darius, who was
said to be gone into Media. But when Alexander was come to Taba, which is the
Chief City of Paratacene, it was there showed him by Fugitives that came out of
Darius Camp, how he was fled with all speed into Bactria; and afterward
understood the matter more certainly by Bagistines of Babylon, who could not
say directly, that Darius was used as a prisoner; but said, that either he was
in danger of death, or of captivity. Alexander, upon that intelligence, called
his Captains together, and showed them that he had a great Enterprise, but such
a one as the travel was very short; Darius (he said) was not far off, forsaken
of his own men; and either taken as a prisoner, or else slain: in whose person
he showed the whole Victory to consist, and the greatness of the matter to be a
reward of their haste making. They all cried with one voice, that they were
ready to follow him wheresoever he should go; and that he should not spare
their labor, nor their peril: Whereupon he conveyed his Army forwards with
mavelous speed, rather in Post, then after the common order of Marching;
neither resting day nor night, till they passed five hundred furlongs, and came
to the Bridge where Darius was taken: There Melun, Darius Interpreter, who by
reason of his sickness could not follow the Army, was taken by Alexanders
celerity; who feigning that he fled from his Master, declared the whole matter:
But how great soever his desire was to overtake his Enemies, it was necessary
for him to give his men rest in their travel: So that determining to leave the
rest of his Army behind, he did choose out six thousand Horsemen, and added to
them three hundred, called Dimichas, that were Footmen, heavy harnessed, but
yet riding on Horseback; and when the occasion required, alighted and fought on
foot. When Alexander was taking order about these things, Orsellus and
Mithracenes, who for the hatred they bare to Bessus for his Treason, fled from
him, declared to the King, that the Pers^ans were but five hundred furlongs
off, and proffered to guide him by a nearer way. Their coming was grateful to
the King; for by their Conduct, in the beginning of the night, he took his
journey with such Horsemen as he had appointed, willing his Foot-Battel to
follow after with all speed possible. He marched forwards in a square Battle;
and kept such an order, that the first might join with the last, and such as
came behind relieve them that went before.

When they had passed three hundred furlongs on their way, Broculus, the Son of
Mazeus, that sometime had been Governor of Syria, met Alexander, and declared,
that Bessus was within two hundred furlongs, marching with his men out of all
order, as one that did cast no doubts: It seemed to him (he said) that they
went toward Hircania; wherefore, if haste were made, they might soon be
overtaken, and found dispersed out of all Array. And by reason he affirmed
also, that Darius was yet alive, Alexander that was hot before in the pursuit,
was with his words much more quickened forwards; so that he caused them to put
Spurs to their Horses, and in a gallop followed* so fast, that they might hear
the noise of their Enemies as they marched: but the dust that did rise, obsured
their sight; and therefore he stayed a while, till the dust was vanished away:
Then both Bessus perceived the Macedons, and they saw the Persians as they
fled; notwithstanding, they had not been able to have marched with them, if
Bessus had had as great courage to fight, as he had to betray his Master: For
besides that they exceeded the Macedons in number and power, the Macedons
fore-wearied and over-travelled, should have had to do with them that were
lusty and fresh: But the Name of Alexander, and his Fame, which was of great
moment in the Wars, put them in such fear, that they could not stay themselves.

Then Bessus, and others that were Partners in this Conspiracy, came to the
Cart where Darius was, and persuaded him to leap on Horseback, and fly from his
Enemies that were at hand: But he cried out, that the gods were come to his
revenge; and calling for the assistance of Alexander, said, That in no wise he
would go with Traitors: Whereat they were so stirred to wrath, that they threw
darts at him, and left him wounded in many places of his body: They thrust the
Beasts into their bodies that drew the Cart, to the intent they should not be
able to pass forwards, and slew his two Servants that did attend upon him. When
they had committed this act, they thought it expedient to disperse themselves
in their flying; and so Nabarzanes took his way to Hircania, and Bessus to
Bactria, with a few Horsemen that each of them had in their Company.

When their Soldiers were thus forsaken of their Captains, they were scattered
here and there, as their fear did lead them: There were only five hundred
Horsemen who assembled themselves together, and stood in a doubt, whether it
were better to resist, or to fly. Alexander understanding the fear his Enemies
were in, sent Nicanor before with part of his Horsemen to keep them on work,
and he with the rest followed after. There were slain to the number of three
thousand of such as stood on their defense, and the rest were driven in flocks
like beasts, from killing of whom, Alexander commanded his men to abstain.
Amongst all the prisoners, there was none that was able to show the Cart that
carried Darius; for every one was so desirous to find him, that as they saw
any Cart, they sought him therein, and yet they could not perceive by any means
what was become of him. Alexander made such haste, that scarcely three thousand
Horsemen followed him of all his Cavalry; but great numbers of the Persians
fell into their Laps that followed behind. It is scarcely to be believed, that
there should be more prisoners taken, then there were men to take them: But
Fortune in that fear had so taken away their sense, that they could not
consider their own multitude, nor the small number of their Enemies. In the
mean season, the Beasts which drew Darius Wagon, having no man to govern them,
were swerved out of the highway, and wandering here and there, had drawn Darius
four furlongs from the place where he was wounded, into a Valley, where they
fainted, by reason of their heat and their hurts. There was a Spring at hand,
which certain that knew the Country had showed to Polistratus a Macedon, that
was overcome with thirst: and while he was drinking the water out of his
Helmet, he espied the Beasts that were thrust in with Darts; and marvelling
that they were not rather carried away, then hurt after that manner, he looked,
and found in the Wagon the body of a man half alive; and at length perceived
it was Darius that lay there sore wounded, and drawing his last breath: Then
Polistratus brought to him a Persian, whom he had taken prisoner* whom when
Darius knew by his voice to be of his Country, he said, That he took it for
some comfort in his present fortune, that he should speak before he died to one
that understood him, and not utter his last words in vain.

He required him to declare unto Alexander, that though he had never deserved
any thing at his hands, yet it was his chance to die greatly his Debtor; and
had thanks to give him, for the favor and goodness that he had showed toward
his Mother, his Wife, and his Children, to whom he had not only granted life,
but also the Reverence due to their former Estate and Dignity; whereas he, of
his own Kinsmen and Friends, to whom he had given both Life and Lands, was now
by them bereaved of all. He prayed therefore, that he might always be
Conqueror, and that the Empire of the whole world might come into his hands;
requiring, that he would not neglect to take revenge of so foul an act, not
only for his cause, but for an example, and for the honor of other Princes;
which should be a thing worthy of him, and profitable to his Successors in time
to come.

When he had spoke these words, he fainted, and calling for water, after he had
drunk, said to Polistratus that presented it unto him: Whatsoever thou art,
this is unto me the last misery in all my adverse chance, that I am not able to
requite this benefit; but Alexander shall reward thee, and the gods shall
requite him for his great Humanity and Clemency showed toward mine; unto whom
thou shall give my hands as a Pledge of a Kings Promise.

Having spoken these words, and given Polistratus his hand, he died. When his
sayings were reported to Alexander, he repaired where the dead Corpse lay, and
with tears lamented, that it was his chance to die a death so unworthy of so
great a personage; and taking off his own Cloak to cover the dead body, he
adorned the same with all things that pertained to a King, and sent it to his
Mother Sisigambis, to be buried in such sort as the Country manner was to bury
Kings, and to be laid amongst the rest of his Predecesso^rs.

THE SIXTH BOOK OF QVINTVS CVRTIVS.
Of the Acts of Alexander the Great, King of Macedon.
A great part of the Sixth Book is defective; wherein was contained the Cause
of the War betwixt the Lacedaemonians and Macedons, with the preparation of both
Nations to the Battle that was fought betwixt Antipater, Alexanders Lieutenant
in Macedonia, and the Kings of the Lacedaemonians.

HE pressed forwards where the fight was most dangerous, and put the greater
part of his Enemies to flight: Then such as were Conquerours before began to
fly, till they had drawn their Enemies, greedily following them, out of the
straight, into a more plain ground: In the Retreat many of them were slain; but
when they had once recovered such a ground where they might stay and fall in
order, the Battles joined equal on both sides. Amongst them all, the King of
the Lacedaemonians appeared most notable in all men's eyes, not so much by the
beauty of his Armor and goodly Personage, as through the greatness of his
courage, wherein only he could not be overcome. He was assailed at on all
parts, both near at hand, and afar off: Yet for all that, he endured long in
Arms against his Enemies, avoiding their strokes, part with his Target, and
part with his Body, till such time as he was thrust through both Thighs with a
Spear, when by great ^^^usion of blood, he was not able any longer to endure
the fight: Then the Esquires of his body took him up upon his Target, and
carried him into their Camp, when with great pain he endured the stirring of
his wounds. The Lacedaemonians, for all their Kings departure, gave not over the
fight; but as soon as they could recover any ground of advantage, they rallied
themselves, and received stoutly their Enemies that came full upon them. There
is not sound in any memory, of a Battle more vehemently fought then that, where
the Armies of two Nations that were most excellent in the Wars, contended
together for the Victory, not yet inclining to any part: The Lacedaemonians
called to mind their Ancient Manhood and Prowess, and the Macedons considered
their present estimation they had in the world: The Lacedaemonians strived for
their liberty, and the Macedons for the Sovereignty; the one part lacked a
Captain, and the other room to fight in. The manifold adventures and chances
that fell that day, increased both the hope and fear of both parties; fortune,
as it were of purpose, bringing such valiant men to fight together, neither of
them prevailing upon other: But the streightness of the place where they
fought, did not suffer them to join with their whole force at once, for more
were beholders then fighters; and such as stood without danger, encouraged the
others with their cry. At length the Lacedaemonians began to faint, and scarcely
able for sweating to sustain their Armor, began to draw back, to have the more
liberty to flee from their Enemies that pressed sore upon them.

When they were once broken and scattered abroad^, the Conquerours pursued
after; and passing the place whereupon the Lacedaemonians Battle was first
arranged, made a sore pursuit upon Agis: who seeing his men flying, and his
Enemies approach at hand, willed his men to set him down; where stretching
himself, to feel if the force of his body could answer unto his heart, when he
found himself unable to stand, remaining upon his knees, put on his Helmet; and
covering his body with his Target, shaked his Spear, and provoked his enemies
to draw near, if any were desirous of his spoil: but there was not one that
pressed near him, but did cast Darts afar off, which he always took, and threw
at his Enemies again, till such time as he was thrust into the bare breast with
a Spear: But when the same was pulled out of the wound, he fainted; and bowing
himself upon his Target, shortly after fell down dead, blood and life failing
both together. There were slain of the Lacedaemonians 5340, and of the
Macedonians not above three hundred; but there was scarcely any of them that
escaped unwounded. This Victory not only brake the hearts of the Lacedaemonians,
and of their Confederates; but also of others who lay in wait, looking for the
success of that War.

Antipater was not ignorant how the countenances of such as did gratify his
Victory, differed much from the intents of their hearts: but desirous to finish
the Wars that were begun, he perceived it necessary for him to dissemble, and
suffer himself to be deceived: And though he rejoiced much in the Fortune of
the Battle, yet he feared the envy that might ensue thereof, it being a greater
matter then the Estate of a Lieutenant did bear. For Alexander was of such a
nature, that he desired his Enemies had won the Victory; showing manifestly,
that he was not contented with Antipaters good success; thinking that
whatsoever chanced to another man, was a derogation to his own glory. Antipater
therefore, who knew full well his stomach, durst not use the Victory according
to his will, but assembled a Council of Greeks, to advise what they thought
expedient: The Lacedaemonians made no other request, but that they might send
Ambassadors to Alexander, who upon their Address to him, and their suit made,
obtained a General Pardon for all men, saving for such as were the Authors of
the Rebellion. The Megapolitans, whose City did abide the Siege, were compelled
to pay, as a Fine for their Rebellion, twenty Talents to the Athenians and the
Aetolians. This was the end of the War, which being suddenly begun, was ended
before Alexander had overthrown Darius at Arbella. As soon as his mind was
delivered of those present cares, as one that could bear better the wars then
quietness, he gave himself up to pleasures, by the vices whereof he was
overcome, whom no power of the Persians, or any other, were able to subdue. He
was given to banqueting out of season, and to a fond delight of drinking, and
watching in Plays amongst Flocks of Concubines, that drew him into strange
manners and customs: which he following, as things more pleasing then his
Country Customs, offended thereby greatly both the eyes and the hearts of his
Nation; and caused many that loved him before entirely, to hate him then as an
Enemy: For the Macedons, that were obstinate in keeping their own Discipline,
and unaccustomed to be curious, being so penurious in their Diet as might
suffice Nature only, when they saw him go about to bring in amongst them the
Vices of those Nations which they had subdued, Conspiracies began to be made
against him, Mutinies arose amongst the Soldiers, and every one complaining to
another, freely uttered their griefs, whereby he was provoked to wrath, to
suspicion, and sudden fear; Diverse other inconveniences ensuing thereupon,
which shall be declared hereafter.

Alexander being given, as has been said before, to unreasonable banqueting,
wherein he consumed both day and night; when he was satisfied with eating and
drinking, he passed the rest of the time in Plays and Pastimes: And not
contented with such Musicians as he brought out of Greece, caused the Women,
that were Captives, to sing before him such Songs as abhorred the ears of the
Macedons, not accustomed to such things. Amongst those Women, Alexander espied
one more sad then the rest, who with a certain shamefacedness did strive with
them that brought her forth: She was of excellent Beauty, and by her Modesty
her Beauty was much augmented: And because she did cast her eyes toward the
earth, and covered her face so much as she might, she gave suspicion for him to
think that she was descended of Noble Parentage: And therefore being demanded
what she was, she showed her self to be the Ni^ce of Occhus that lately reigned
in Persia; and the Wife of Histaspis, who was Darius Kinsman, and had been his
Lieutenant over many great Armies. There yet remained in the Kings heart some
small sparks of his former Virtue; for in respect of her Estate, being
descended of the Blood of Kings, and in Reverence he bare to such a Name as the
Niece of Occhus, he commanded her not only to be set free, but also to be
restored to her Goods, and her Husband, whom he willed to be sought out.

The next day he appointed Ephestion to bring all the prisoners to the Court,
where inquiring of the Nobility of every one, he commanded them who were
descended of Noble Blood, to be severed from the rest; amongst whom they found
Oxatres, Brother to Darius, that was no less Noble of mind then of blood:
There were made of the last spoil twenty six thousand Talents, whereof twelve
thousand were consumed in rewards amongst the Men of War; and the sum amounted
to no less value, that was conveyed away by them that had the keeping thereof.
There was one Oxidates, a Nobleman of Persia, that was imprisoned by Darius,
and appointed to suffer death, whom Alexander delivered, and gave unto him the
Seignory of Media, and received Darius Brother amongst the number of his
Friends, reserving to him all the accustomed honor of his Nobility. Then they
came to the Country of Parthenia, being then but obscure and unknown, but now
the Head of all those Countries which lie upon Tygris and Euphrates, and
bounded with the Red Sea. This Country being fruitful and abundant in all
things, was conquered by the Scythians, who possessing part of Asia and Europe,
are troublesome Neighbors to them both.

The Scythians, who inhabit upon the Bospheron Sea, are ascribed to be in Asia;
and such as be in Europe, possess the Countries lying on the left part of
Thrace, so far as Boristhenes; and from thence right forth, so far as the River
Thanais, that parts Europe and Asia. It is certain, that the Scythians of
whom the Persians be descended, came not from Bospheron, but out of Europe.
There was a Noble City, in those days called Hecatonphilos, builded by the
Greeks, where Alexander remained with his Army, conveying Victuals thither from
all parts. Among the Soldiers lying in idleness, there arose suddenly a
rumor, which entered into their heads without any certain Author or beginning,
which was, that Alexander satisfied with the Acts he had done, purposed
immediately to return into Macedon. This Fame was not so soon blown abroad, but
that they ran like madmen to their lodgings, and trussed up their Baggage and
their Stuff, making such preparation to depart, that every man judged warning
to be given to remove, and that the thing had been done by appointment. The
tumult that did rise in the Camp by lading of Carriage, and by the calling
which one made to another, came unto the Kings ears. This rumor obtained the
sooner credit, by the dispatch of certain Greek Soldiers, whom Alexander had
dismissed into their Country, with the gift of six thousand Deniers to every
Horseman: Thereupon occasion was given to think that the War had been at an
end. Alexander, whose purpose was to pass into India, and the uttermost bounds
of the Orient, was no less displeased at this rumor then the case required:
And therefore calling before him the Captains of his Army, with the tears in
his eyes, he made a great complaint unto them, that in the middle course of his
glory he should thus be pulled back, and compelled to return into his Country,
rather as a man vanquished, then as a Victor: Which misfortune, he said, he
could not impute to his Soldiers, nor judge that their cowardliness did give
an impediment to his proceedings, but that it was only the envy of the gods
that put so sudden a desire of their Country into the minds of valiant men,
who within a while should have returned with greater glory and fame. Thereupon
they all promised to travel in Reformation of the matter, offering themselves
in all things (were they never so difficult) to do as he would have them: And
they promised also the obedience of the Soldiers, if so be that he would make
some gentle and apt Oration to pacify them, who were never yet seen to depart
from him in any desperation or disturbance of mind, if they once beheld the
cheerfulness of his Countenance, and the courage proceeding from his heat. He
promised so to do, and required in the multitude an inclination to give ear
unto him. When all things were prepared which were thought expedient for this
purpose, he assembled all his Army together, and made this Oration unto them:

When ye consider (my Soldiers) the greatness of the Acts which ye have done,
and the manifold Conquests that ye have made, it is no marvel at all that ye be
inclined to quietness, and fully satisfied with Fame and Glory: For not to
speak of the Illyrians and Tribals, of Boetia, Thracia, and Sparta, of the
Achaians and Peloponnesians, whom I have subdued, part in person, and the rest
by appointment; I will not make rehearsal of the War we began at Hellespont,
and how we delivered from servitude the Barbarous Nations, the Ionians and
Aeolides, and got unto our possession Caria, Lydia, Cappadocia, Phrygia,
Paphlagonia, Pamphilia, Pysidia, Celicia, Syria, Phenicia, Armenia, Persia,
Media, and Partheniae. We have gotten more Countries, then others have taken
Cities; and yet (I am sure) the number of them have caused me to leave some of
them unrehearsed. If I could think that the possession of these Lands that we
have conquered in so short time could remain sure unto us, then (my Soldiers)
I would, though it were against your wills, break from you to visit my house
and my home, to see my Mother, my Sisters, and my Countrymen, to enjoy there
the Land and Glory that I have gotten with you; where the joyful Conversation
of our Wives, our Children and Parents, our peace and quietness, and a sure
possession of things gotten through our valor, do tarry for us, as large
rewards of our Victory. But if we will confess the truth, this new Empire which
we have not yet at Commandment, but is kept, as it were, by way of entreaty,
does require a time that this stiff-necked people may learn to bear our yoke;
and by framing their dispositions to more Humunity, bring their cruel nature to
a more civil conversation. Do we not see that the Corn in the field asks a
time for its ripening; and though the same be without sense, yet has it its
course to be brought to perfection? Do you believe that so many Nations not
agreeing with us in Religion, in Custom, nor in one use of Language, accustomed
to the Empire and Name of another man, will be conquered and brought to
subjection with the winning of one Battle? No, trust me, they are kept under
with fear of our Power, and do not obey us of their own good wills: And they
which show you obedience when ye be here amongst them, when you be absent will
be your Enemies: You must think that you have to do with wild Beasts, which
being fierce of Nature when they be first taken, must be shut up and tamed by
time. Hitherto I have reasoned with you, as though we had conquered the whole
Dominion that pertained to Darius, which is nothing so; for Nabarzanes
possesses Hircania, and the Traitor Bessus not only enjoys Bactria, but also
threatens us. The Sogdians, Dahans, Massagetes, Sagans, and the Indians,
remain yet in their own Liberty and Jurisdiction, who shall not see our backs
so soon turned, but they will follow in our Rear: They all have a certain
Friendship and Amity one with another, but we are all Strangers and Foreigners
unto them: There is no Creature but that will more gladly be obedient to Rulers
of his own Nation, then to Foreigners, be their Government never so terrible.
We are driven therefore of necessity to purchase that we have not, or else to
loose that we have already gained: As Physicians, that in sick bodies will
leave no humor that may hurt, so likewise we must cut away whatsoever shall be
an impediment unto our Empire: Have you not seen great fires to arise from
small sparks not regarded? We may not neglect any thing in our Enemies, whom
the more we despise, the more strong we make them. And because you should not
think it such an impossibility for Bessus to make himself King, where a King is
wanting, you shall understand that Darius came not to his Empire by
Inheritance, but got into the Seat of Cyrus by the benefit of Bagoas his
Eunuch. We commit (...) heinous offense (my Soldiers) if we make war against
Darius, and put him down, for the intent to give his Kingdom unto his servants;
yea, and to such a one as attempted so vile an act against his Master, at such
a time as he had most need of help, and whom we being his Enemies, would have
spared: He being his subject, put him in chains as a Captive, and finally slew
him, because he should not be preserved by us: Shall you suffer such a man as
this to reign? No, let us make all the speed we may to see him crucified* (...)
to show unto all Kings and Nations a Justice done (...) one that so vilely
falsified his faith. If the report should come unto you in your own Countries,
that the same man was destroying of the Greek Cities about Hellespont, how
sorry would you then be, and how much would you lament that Bessus should enjoy
that which you have got, and usurp the rewards of your Victory? Then would you
make haste to recover your own; then would you bend your selves to the Wars:
But how much better is it now to oppress him while he remains in such fear,
and is uncertain what way to take? Shall we forbear to spend four days to come
to him, that have marched over such Snows, that have passed so many Rivers,
that have climbed so many Mountains, to whose journey the flowing-Sea could be
no impediment, nor the Streights of Cilicia could shut up our way? Now all
things are made plain and open, and we stand in the entry of our Victory: There
are but a few Fugitives and Killers of their Master that do remain. What more
notable work can you leave unto your Posterity, to be registered by Fame unto
your glory, then to revenge such as were Traitors to Darius? You shall thereby
show, that when you were Enemies unto him, yet your hatred ended with his
death, and that no wicked man can escape your hands: Which thing if you bring
to pass, how much more obedient do you think the Persians will be unto you,
when they perceive you to take just Wars in hand; and that it was not with
Bessus name whereat ye are offended, but with his sins and treacheries?

His Oration was received of the Soldiers with such gladness, that they
straightways desire him to lead them whither he would: And he that knew well
enough how to make use of this opportunity, immediately advanced into
Parthenia, and came to the bounds of Hircania, leaving Craterus with those
Regiments whereof he had the Rule, and six thousand Horsemen, of whom Amyntas
had the charge, with the like number of Archers, to defend Parthenia from the
incursion of the barbarous Nations. He appointed Erigonus, with a small power,
to attend upon his Carriages; willing him to pass with them through the plain
Country, and he himself with his Footmen, and with the rest of his Horsemen,
marched forwards a hundred and fifty furlongs, and encamped in a Valley at the
entry into Hircania. In the same place are great woods full of high and thick
Trees, and the bottom of the Valley is very fruitful, by reason of the Springs
that come forth of the Rocks. Out of the foot of the Mountains there arises a
River called Zieberis, which within three furlongs of the head, is divided by a
Rock standing in the midst of the Stream, causing the water to go two sundry
ways; which afterward coming into one Channel, runs more violently then
before, by reason of the fall from the Rocks: And suddenly it sinketh into the
ground, and so runs hidden, by the space of three hundred furlongs* and then
comes forth again, as it were, out of a new Spring, being then in breadth
thirteen furlongs; and as it runs forwards, grows more narrow, and falls
into another stream, named Rhydago. The Inhabitants of the Country affirm, that
any thing cast in where the Stream sinks into the ground, will appear and come
out at the next Mouth of the River. For the proving of which conclusion,
Alexander caused two Bulls to be cast in, where the water sank down, whose
bodies were found by such as were appointed for the purpose, to appear where
the Stream brake out again. In this place he refreshed his Army four days,
during which time Nabarzanes (who was Confederate with Bessus in killing of the
King) did write Letters to him to this effect:

How that he was no Enemy to Darius, but counseled him ever to do such things
as he judged most profitable; and for his faithful counsel, was put in danger
of his life by him, who against all reason intended to commit the custody of
his person to Strangers, condemning thereby the fidelity of his own Nation,
which they had kept unspotted toward their Kings the space of two hundred and
thirty years: Therefore seeing himself in that danger, he took counsel of the
present necessity, and alleged, that nothing was more dear to miserable
Mortality then life, for the love whereof he was driven to this extremity, in
committing an act which necessity rather compelled him to do, then his own
disposition: For in a general Calamity, every man seeks after his own Fortune.
If he would command him to come to his presence, he said, he would not refuse
to do it; for he could not fear that so great a King would violate his promise,
seeing one god is not used to deceive another. But if he should seem unworthy
of his assurance, there were many Countries for him to fly unto; for all men
having virtue in them, count always that for their Country where they make
their residence.

Alexander made no stay to give him his word, after such sort as the Persians
used to receive promise, which was, safely to come and go: Notwithstanding he
marched in order of Battle, sending ever Scouts before to discover the Country:
The light armed were appointed to the Vaward; the Phalaux followed after, and
the Baggage behind: For by reason they were a warlike Nation, and the Country
hard to enter upon, it caused the King to be circumspect. The same Valley
stretches to the Caspian Sea, the Banks thereof resembling the Horns of the
Moon, before it comes to the full, the Sea lying betwixt them like a great
Bay. Upon the left hand the people inhabit, that are called Cercetes, which lie
open toward the North; and upon the other part the Leucosirians, Mossynes, and
Chalibes; and the Plains of the Amazons lie toward the West.

The Sea, which some call the Caspian Sea, and some the Hircanian, being more
sweet then any other, brings forth Serpents of a wonderful bigness, and
Fishes differing in color much from all the rest. There be diverse of opinion,
that the Lake of Meotis should run into this Sea, which they conjecture by the
water, thinking the same to receive its sweetness of the Lake. Toward the
North the Sea grows into a Beach, and shoots forth his waters far upon the
Land, which rising high, make many Mears and Plashes. And as by a constant
course of the Planets they flow out, so at a certain time, by an Ebb, they
return again, restoring the ground to its former estate: Some believe these
waters to be no parcel of the Caspian Sea, but that they come out of India, and
run into Hircania, which lies low in the foresaid Valley.

The King being removed from that place, marched forwards twenty furlongs in a
wild Desert, where great woods hung continually over their heads, and Brooks
of water, and the dirt, gave great impediment to their journey. But at length,
without any opposition of his Enemies, he passed those difficulties, and came
unto a fair Country; wherein, besides other Victuals (wherewith it did abound)
there grew great plenty of Apples, and the ground was very apt for Vines. There
were also plenty of a certain kind of Trees much like unto Oaks, whose leaves
were covered with honey, which the Inhabitants gather before the Sunrising;
for else the moisture would be dried up with the heat.

When Alexander had passed thirty furlongs further, Phrataphernes met him,
yiedling both himself and such others as fled away after Darius death; whom he
received gently, and came to a Town called Arnas: Thither came Craterus and
Erigonus, bringing with them Phradates, that had the rule of the Tapurians; his
friendly receiving and gentle entertainment, was cause that many followed his
example, in committing themselves to Alexanders Mercy. Menape was there made
Prince of Hircania, who being a banished man in the time of Occhus, came to
King Philip for Refuge: and Phradates also was restored to the Office he had
before.

When Alexander was come to the uttermost bounds of Hircania, Artabasus, whom
as we declared, did show himself always faithful to his Master, did meet him
with Darius Kinsmen and Children, and with a small Band of Greek Soldiers. The
King at his coming proffered him his hand, because he had been entertained
before by King Philip, when he was banished by Occhus. But the chief cause that
he received him so well, was for the fidelity that he observed toward his
Prince. He being thus gently entertained by Alexander, did say unto him; Sir,
long may you flourish and reign in perpetual felicity: I that rejoice in all
other things, am grieved only at this, that by reason of mine old age, I shall
not be able long to enjoy your goodness. He was eighty five years of age, and
brought with him nine Sons born of one Mother, whom he presented to the King;
praying God to continue their lives, so long as their service might be
acceptable unto him.

Alexander was accustomed much to walk on foot; but then lest the old man might
be ashamed to ride, himself going on foot, he called for Horses for them both.
When he was encamped, he sent for the Greeks that Artabasus brought; but they
made request, that he would first give assurance to the Lacedaemonians that were
amongst them, or else they would take advice amongst themselves what were best
to do: The same were the Ambassadors that the Lacedaemonians had sent to
Darius, which after the Battle, joined themselves to the Greeks that were in
pay with Darius. The King willed them to leave all assurances and compositions,
and come to receive such appointment as he would give them: They stood long in
a doubt, va^ying in opinions; but at length they agreed so to do, saving
Democrates of Athens, who had always opposed the success of the Macedons, and
despairing of pardon slew himself: But the other, as they had determined,
submitted themselves to Alexanders will, being ten thousand five hundred in
number, besides ninety of such as were sent Ambassadors unto Darius. The
greatest part of the Soldiers were distributed amongst the Bands, to fill up
the numbers that wanted; and the rest were sent home, except the Lacedaemonians,
whom he commanded to be put in prison.

There was a Nation called Mardons, bounding next to (...), rude in their
manners and usages, accustomed to live by theft: They neither sent
Ambassadors, nor gave any signification that they would be at Alexanders
Commandment: He took thereat great indignation, that any one people should give
impediment to his Victory; and therefore leaving a Guard for his Carriages, he
advanced against them with a strong power. He marched forwards in the night;
and by the time that the day appeared, his Enemies were in sight. But the
matter came rather to an Alarm, then to any fight; for the Enemies were soon
driven from the Hills, who flying away, left their Villages to be sacked by the
Macedons: But the Army could not pass into the inward parts of the Country
without great trouble and v^xation, the same being compassed about with high
Mountains, great Woods, and desert Rocks; and the parts which were plain, were
defended with a strange kind of fortification, that is to say, with Trees set
thick of purpose; the Boughs whereof, when they were young, were wreathed one
within another, the tops bowed down were put into the ground again, from
whence, as out of another root, there sprung new branches. They would not
suffer the same to grow as Nature brought them forth, but did knit them so one
within another, that when they were full of leaves they covered the earth. The
Trees thus wreathed one within another, enclosed in the Country, as it were,
with a continual hedge, and were as snares to entangle such as would enter.
There was no way could be devised to go through the same, but only by cutting
down the wood; and therein they found a great difficulty, and much travel, by
reason that the wreathing and wrapping of the Boughs kept them off from the
bodies of the Trees; and the weakness of the Boughs so yielded to the strokes,
that they could not easily be cut asunder.

The Inhabitants of the Country were accustomed to creep amongst the under-wood
like wild Beasts, and by privy Sallies break out upon their Enemies. Alexander
therefore caused his men, after the manner of Hunters, to seek out their
lurking places, and killed many of them. But at length he environed the Wood
with his Soldiers round about, to the intent they might break in at every
place, where they should find an entry: In doing whereof, many wandered and
lost their company in places that they knew not, and were taken prisoners, and
amongst them Bucephalus, Alexanders Horse, whom he did not esteem as other men
do other Beasts; for this Horse would not suffer any other man to back him: and
when the King would ride, he would kneel down upon his knees to receive him; so
that he seemed to have the sense to understand whom he carried. Alexander was
more sorrowful and incensed for (...) lo^s of his Horse, then was expedient for
such a cause: for searching about to get the Horse again, he caused
Proclamation to be made by an Interpreter, that except he were restored, he
would not leave one of the Countrymen alive. When they heard this terrible
threatening, amongst other gifts, they presented unto Alexander his Horse: Yet
he was not therewith pacified, but commanded the Woods to be cut down, and the
ways to be levelled which he cut through the Woods. This work went so well
forward, that the Inhabitants despairing of ability to defend their Country,
yielded themselves to the King, who receiving their Pledges, committed them to
the keeping of Phradates, and from thence, the fifth day, he returned again to
his Camp. There he gave to Artabasus the double honor that Darius did unto
him, and sent him home again into his Country.

After that he came to the City of Hircania, where Darius Chief Seat was;
Nabarzanes: upon assurance, came thither, bringing with him great gifts; and
amongst the rest, presented unto Alexander an Eunuch called Bagoas, of singular
Beauty, being in the first flower of his Youth, whom Darius used, and
afterward Alexander; at whose intercession especially he did pardon
Nabarzanes. The Nation of the Amazons being near unto Hircania (as has been
said before) did inhabit the Plains of Themyscire, about the River of
Thermodoon, and had a Queen reigning over them, called Thalestris, which kept
under her Dominion all the Countries between Mount Caucasus, and the River of
Phasis: She for the great affection she had to see Alexander, traveled out of
her own Country; and being come near where he was, sent certain before, to
declare that a Queen was come of desire to visit him, and to enjoy the private
familiarity of his company. When liberty was given her to come to his presence,
she caused all the rest of her Band to stay, and she came forwards, attended
only by three hundred women. As soon as she perceived Alexander, she leaped
from her Horse, carrying two Javelins in her hand. The Amazons apparel is such,
that it does not cover all their bodies; for their breasts are bare on the left
side, and their garments, which they use to knit up with a knot, come not to
their knees: One Breast they always reserve untouched, wherewith they nourish
their Women-Children; but their right Breasts they use to ^ear, to make them
more apt to draw their Bows^, and cast their Darts. Thalestris looked upon
Alexander with a bold countenance; and observed in her beholding of him, that
his personage answered not to the Fame that she had heard of his Acts; for the
Barbarous Nations gave great Veneration to the Majesty of the Personage,
thinking none to be sufficient for the doing of great Acts, but such as Nature
had endued with great personages: It was demanded of her, if she had any
request to make unto Alexander: Whereat she abashed not to confess, that she
was come thither to have Children by him, thinking her self a personage worthy
of whom he should get Heirs to inherit his Kingdom: wherein she covenanted,
that if it were a Woman, she would keep it still; and if it were a Man-child,
she would restore it to the Father. Alexander enquired of her, if she would go
forwards with him in his Wars: But therein she excused her self, that she had
left no order for the defense of her Kingdom. But she continued still in
declaration of the cause of her coming, and required that her expectation
therein might not be in vain. The Woman's Appetite seemed to be more vehemently
given to Lust then the Kings was; yet she obtained of him to stay for that
cause, and he consumed thirteen days in satisfying her desire.

That done, she departed to her own Kingdom, and Alexander marched into
Parthenia, which was the place where he first showed manifestly the Vices that
were in him. There he turned his Continency and Moderation, being the most
excellent Virtues appearing in any kind of Estate, into Pride and
Voluptuousness; not esteeming his Country-Customs, nor the wholesome temper
that was in the Discipline of the Kings of Macedon: For he judged their civil
usage and manner to be over-base for his greatness; but did counterfeit the
height and pomp of the Kings of Persia, representing the greatness of the gods.
He was content to suffer men there to fall down flat upon the ground, and
worship him; and accustomed the Conquerours of so many Nations, by little and
little, to servile offices, coveting to make them like unto his Captives. He
ware upon his Head a Diadem of Purple, interp^led with white, like as Darius
was accustomed; and fashioned his Apparel after the manner of the Persians,
without scrupulosity of any token that it signi^i^d, for the Conqueror to
change his Habit into the fashion of him whom he had vanquished: And though he
boasted that he wore the spoils of his Enemies, yet with those spoils he put
upon him their evil manners, and the insolency of the mind followed the pride
of the Apparel. Besides, although he sealed such Letters as he sent into Europe
with his accustomed Seal; yet all the Letters he sent abroad into Asia were
sealed with Darius Ring: So it appeared, that one mind could not bear the
greatness that appertained to two. He apparelled also his Friends, his
Captains, and his Horsemen in Persian apparel; whereat though they grudged in
their minds, yet they durst not refuse it for fear of his displeasure. His
Court was replenished with Concubines; for he still maintained three hundred
and sixty that belonged to Darius; and amongst them were Flocks of Eunuchs,
accustomed to perform the natural use of Women.

The old Soldiers of Philip naturally abhorring such things, manifestly
withstood to be infected with such volup^uousness and strange Customs:
Whereupon there rose a general talk and opinion throughout the Camp, that they
had lost more by the Victory, then they had won by the War: For when they saw
themselves overcome with such excess, and Foreign Customs so to prevail
amongst them, they judged it a slender reward of their long being abroad, to
return home in the habit of Prisoners. They began to be ashamed of their King,
that was more like to such as were subdued, then to them that were Victorious;
and that the King of Macedon was become the Prince of Persia, and one of Darius
Courtiers. When he understood that the chief of his friends, and his men of War
were much offended at his doings, he went about to recover favor again with
gifts and liberality; but the rewards of servitude are ungrateful to free men:
And therefore lest it might turn into a sedition, he thought good to break the
maginations increased by idleness, with the exercise of War, whereof an apt
occasion was given: Bessus investing himself as a King, took upon him the name
of Artaxerxes, drawing to his part the Scythians, and others that were the
Inhabitants of the River Thanais; which things were reported to him by
Nabarzanes, whom he had received into his favor, and given the Rule of the
Country he had before. When he had determined this new Expedition, he found his
Army so overcharged and laden with Spoil, and other Furniments of
Voluptuousness, that they could scarcely move: Wherefore he commanded the
Baggage and Stuff of the whole Army to be brought together into one place,
excepting only such things as were very necessary: The place was large and
plain to which the Carts were brought laden; and when every one stood waiting
and musing what he would command them to do, he caused the Beasts to be removed
first out of the way, and then set his own Fardels on fire, and after, all the
rest. Whilst these things were burning, the Owners were on fire themselves to
see them so consumed; for the saving of which, they had often quenched the
flames in the Cities of their Enemies: Yet no man durst lament the price of his
own blood, seeing they saw the fire consume the Kings Riches as well as their
own; and the rather to pacify them, the King did mitigate their dolor with a
brief Oration. Whereupon they that were ever apt for the Wars, and ready to do
all things, began to be joyful, that with the loss of their Baggage, they had
preserved their Discipline accustomed in the Wars. As they were setting forward
toward Bactria, Nicanor, the Son of Parmenio, died suddenly, whom every man
greatly lamented, but chiefly the King, who desired to have stayed to celebrate
his Funeral, but that want of Victuals caused him to haste forward: Philotas
therefore was left behind with two thousand six hundred Soldiers, to perform
the Ceremonies appertaining to his Brothers Funeral, and Alexander himself
marched toward Bessus. In the way, Letters were brought to Alexander from the
Princes thereabout, that Bessus was coming toward him with a great Army;
adding thereunto, that Satribarzanes, whom he had made Prince of the Arrians,
was newly rebelled; for that cause (notwithstanding he was come near unto
Bessus) he thought it best first to oppress Satribarzanes: and for that intent,
he brought forwards his Horsemen and Footmen that were light armed, to invade
him suddenly. His coming was not so privy, but Satribarzanes knew thereof, and
fled into Bactria with two thousand Horsemen: for by reason he was not able to
assemble any more in so short a time, the rest took the next Mountains for
their refuge.

There was a Rock, which toward the West, was high and steep, but toward the
East more low, and easy to be climbed, which part was full of Trees: The same
Rock being in compass two and thirty furlongs, had a Fountain running
continually* and in the top a Green Plain, where they placed the weaker
multitude; but the rest that were apt for defense, being to the number of
thirteen thousand, got themselves to the edges of the Rock, and there threw
down stones and logs upon the Macedons that came to assail them. He left
Craterus to besiege the Rock, and went in person to pursue Satribarzanes; and
because he understood that he was fled far off, he returned back again to the
siege of them that were upon the Rock. First, he caused all things to be taken
away, that might be an impediment to his men in the assault giving: But when
they came to the bare and steep Rock, the labor seemed lost, where Nature
wrought against them. But he, that was of a disposition always to strive
against difficulties, considering how hard a matter it was to go forward, and
how dangerous to return back, did cast in his head all the ways that could be
imagined, and now fancied one thing, and then another, as men are wont when the
ways they have found out first do not please them. As he stood in a doubt what
to do, Fortune did minister unto him a means, which neither wit nor reason
could invent: It chanced that the wind blew vehemently at the South West, at
what time the Soldiers had felled great plenty of wood, whereof they thought
to have made Scaffolds to mount up against the Rock, and the heat of the Sun
had made the same dry. When Alexander perceived the wind to blow so violently,
and the wood lying in that place, he immediately commanded more Trees to be cut
down, and laid upon them, putting all other things to it that were apt to
kindle and nourish fire; so that Trees heaped upon Trees, became as a Mountain
so high as the top of the Rock: The same being set on fire in all parts at
once, the wind carried the flame into the faces of their Enemies, and the
smoke covered the Sky. The noise was then great that the fire made, which
burned not only the Trees that were fired of purpose, but also the rest of the
Wood growing near thereabout.

The Enemies were so tormented with the flame and heat of the fire, that they
were enforced to forsake their place of strength, and attempted to escape away
where the fire did give them least impediment: But where the fire gave place,
the Macedons stood in a readiness to receive them; so that they were consumed
and slain diverse kind of ways: Some threw themselves down the Rocks, some ran
into the midst of the fire, others fell into the hands of their Enemies, and a
few half consumed with fire, were taken prisoners. When Alexander had done
this, he returned to Craterus, who besieged Artacnan; and having prepared all
things in readiness, tarried only for the Kings coming, to give him the honor
of winning the City.

When Alexander was come, he approached the Walls with the Towers of Timber
that he had prepared for the assault; at the sight whereof the Inhabitants were
so afraid, that they held up their hands from the Walls, requiring him to spare
them, and execute his wrath upon Satribarzanes, who was the Author of their
Rebellion. Alexander pardoned them freely; and not only raised the Siege, but
also restored to the Inhabitants all things that pertained to them. As he
removed from this City, there came to him a new supply of Soldiers: Zoilus
brought out of Greece five hundred Horsemen, and three thousand Antipater sent
out of Illyria: There came a hundred and thirty Thessalian Horsemen with
Philip, who also brought Foreigners out of Licia, two thousand five hundred
Footmen, and three hundred Horsemen. Alexander having thus increased his power,
entered into the Country of the Dragans, who were a warlike Nation* under the
Government of Nabarzanes, who was of Counsel with Bessus in the Treason that he
committed against his Prince. When he heard of Alexanders coming, for fear of
the punishment he had deserved, he fled into India. Here had they lain encamped
nine days, when Alexander being without fear of any Enemy, and invincible
against all Foreign Powers, was brought in peril by reason of his own people:
It chanced that one Dimnus, a man of mean behavior and Authority with his
Prince, was greatly inflamed with the love of a young man, called Nichomachus,
with whom he used much familiar conversation. This Dimnus on a time being in a
passion (as it well appeared by his countenance) allured this young man into a
Temple, where remaining together, he declared, that he had certain Secrets to
show him, which in no wise were to be reported again* Thereby he brought
Nichomachus into a great suspicion what the matter should be; for before he
would tell him, he made a Protestation by the love and familiarity betwixt
them, that he would assure him by his Oath to keep the thing secret; who
supposing the matter to be of no such weight, that he ought with Perjury, or
breaking of his Oath, to disclose the same again, did swear by the gods there
present. Then Dimnus opened unto him, how there was a Treason conspired against
the King, which within three days should be put in execution, to which (he
said) he himself was private, with diverse men of Nobility and Estimation. When
Nichomachus did hear it, and found it to be of such moment, he constantly
denied then that this promise extended to conceal Treason, whereunto no Oath
nor Religion could bind a man; which when Dimnus observed, he became on a rage
betwixt love and fear, and clasped the young man by the hand, requiring with
weeping eyes, that he would not stick to be a partaker of this Conspiracy; or
at the least, if his heart would not serve him, that he would keep the counsel
secret, in respect that he had found such a manifestation of love in him, as to
commit his life into his hands, without any further proof of his fidelity. But
in conclusion, when he perceived that Nichomachus would in no wise agree to his
purpose, but manifestly abhorred the act, he used diverse means to draw him to
his intent; one while entreating him with fair words, and another while
threatening to kill him, calling him Coward, and Traitor to his Friend,
commending the Gallantness of the Enterprise, and put him in hope of great
preferment, that he should be partaker of the Kingdom which they went about to
purchase. When he had proved all these ways, and yet he found him averse, one
while he thrust his Sword to Nichomachus throat, and another while to his own;
so that at length, by threatening, and fair speaking, he brought him to promise,
both to keep his counsel secret, and also to be assistant to the deed. Yet
nevertheless, as one of a constant mind (though for the time present he seemed
to be won with the love of his Friend, and agreeable to his requests) he
changed no part of his former purpose. This done, Nichomachus required to know
what the men were that had confederated themselves in so weighty a matter,
because the persons (he said) were much material that should take so great an
Enterprise in hand.

Then Dimnus, though he were in great trouble of mind that he had brought the
matter so far forth; yet when he heard him ask the question, rejoiced, and
thanked him greatly, that he would so freely associate himself with such manner
of men, as Demetrius of the Privy Chamber, Peculaus, Nicanor, Aphabetus,
Loceus, Dioc^nus, Archipolis, and Aminuas. This communication once ended
betwixt them, Nichomachus departed, and disclosed all which he had heard
before, to a Brother of his, called Ceballinus, agreeing betwixt them two, that
Nichomachus should remain still secret in his Tent, lest by his coming to the
Kings lodging, not using to have access to the King, the Conspirators might
perceive themselves betrayed. Ceballinus repaired to the Kings lodging,
tarrying before the gate, waiting for some man near about the King to bring him
to his Presence. It fortuned, that among many which passed by, only Philotas,
the Son of Parmenio, demanded why he waited there? To whom Ceballinus, with a
bashful countenance, (well declaring the unquietness of his mind) reported all
which he had heard of his Brother, requiring that he would declare the same
immediately to the King* Philotas departed from him unto the King, with whom
that day he had much communication on other things, and yet opened no part of
that which was told him by Ceballinus. At night, as Philotas came forth,
Ceballinus met him at the Court-gate, and required whether he had done his
Message to the King or not: He excused the matter, that he could not find him
at leisure. The next day Ceballinus met him again going to the King, and put
him in remembrance of that he had told him before; to whom he answered, that he
remembered it well, yet for all that he disclosed no part of it unto the King.
Ceballinus then began to suspect him, and intended no longer to defer the
thing, but opened the same to Metron, Master of the Kings Armory, who
immediately conveyed Ceballinus into the Armory, and repaired straight to the
King, who was bathing, and informed him of all that he had heard.

Alexander then made no delay* but sent certain of his Guard to take Dimnus,
and after came himself into the Armory. As soon as Ceballinus saw the King, he
ran unto him with great rejoicing, and said; Lo, I have preserved thee from the
hands of thine Enemies. Alexander examined him of all the circumstances, and he
again answered to every point in order. The King was earnest to know how long
it was since Nichomachus had given him this information, and he confessed, that
it was three days. Whereupon the King considering, that in truth he could not
have concealed it so long, commanded that he should be put in Ward. Then cried
he out, and declared, that at the same instant when he knew of the Conspiracy
first, he opened it to Philotas, of whom (he said) he might enquire the truth.
Thereupon it was demanded of him, whether he had required of Philotas to bring
him to the Kings Presence, or not. Which thing when the King by his confession
perceived to be true, and that he did stiffly maintain what he said, he lifted
up his hands to heaven, the tears falling from his eyes, greatly complaining,
that Philotas should requite him with such unfaithfulness, whom he most of all
trusted. Dimnus, in the mean season, knowing for what cause he was sent for,
wounded himself to death: but yet somewhat hindered by them that were sent to
take him, he was brought alive before the King, whom as soon as he beheld, he
said unto him, Dimnus, What have I offended thee, that thou should think
Philotas more worthy to be King of Macedon then I? At which words Dimnus became
speechless; and casting forth a great sigh, turned his face from the Kings
sight, and fell down dead.

The King called Philotas before him, and said: This man, whom thou here see,
should have suffered death, if it could have been proved that he had concealed
two days the Treason intended against me, with which he has charged thee,
Philotas; to whom ( as he says) he gave knowledge immediately thereof: The
more near thou art about me, so much more greater is thy offense; and the fault
had been more tolerable in him, then in thee: Howbeit, thou have a favorable
Judge; for if there be any thing that cannot be excused, yet at the least it
may be pardoned.

To this Philotas nothing abashed (if the heart may be judged by the
countenance) made answer, That Ceballinus indeed brought him a vain Report, the
Reporter whereof was over-light of credit to be believed, and that he feared,
lest by the presenting of such a matter which did rise upon a Brabble betwixt
two persons of evil disposition, he might himself have been laughed at to scorn:
But afterward, when he once knew that Dimnus had slain himself, he was clearly
then resolved no longer to have concealed the thing. And so falling down before
the King, besought him that he would rather have respect to his life past, then
to his fault, which was only a concealment, and no act done. It is hard to say,
whether the King believed him, or grounded his displeasure more deeply in his
heart: Nevertheless, in token of pardon, he gave him his hand, saying, how it
appeared that the Accusation was rather misscredited by him, then concealed of
malice. Notwithstanding he called his Council together, amongst whom Philotas
was not admitted, but Nichomachus was brought in before them, where he declared
all such matters as he before had showed unto the King. There was one Craterus,
at that time in especial favor with Alexander, who for the envy he had to
Philotas advancement, did bear him always a grudge: He knew very well that the
King had often been displeased with Philotas for the overmuch advancing of his
good service, and valiant Acts: But yet for all that he was not suspected of
Treason, but only noted of presumption and arrogance. Craterus thought that he
could not have a better occasion to oppress his Enemy, then by coloring his
private hatred with a pretense of duty toward his Prince.

I would to God ( quoth he) you had taken our counsel in the beginning of this
business; for if you would needs have pardoned him, you should have kept from
him his knowledge how much he was in danger, rather then have brought him in
fear of his life; whereby you shall make him more mindful of his own peril,
then of your goodness; for he may always imagine your death, but you shall not
be always in a condition to pardon him. Let it never sink into your heart, that
he who purposed so heinous a Treason, would change his purpose for the
indulgence of a Pardon. You know well, that such as offend are often in despair
of mercy; and though he perchance, either with repentance of his fault, or
remembrance of your goodness, would change his mind; yet I am sure, that his
Father Parmenio, Captain General of so great an Army, and of so grounded
Authority amongst your Soldiers (and who is with them in manner as your self)
would be ill content to be in your debt for his Sons life. There are certain
benefits hateful to men, and it is a shame to confess to have deserved death:
Therefore I conclude, that he had rather it should be thought you had done him
wrong, then that you had given him his life. I cannot see therefore, but you
shall be enforced to destroy them for your own surety: There are Enemies enough
remaining, yet unconquered, against whom we are going; make your self sure from
your Foes at home, so shall ye have less need to fear your Enemies abroad.

These were Craterus words; and the residue of the Council were of opinion,
that Philotas would never have concealed this Conspiracy, except he had been
either Principal, or privy thereunto: For they thought there was no true man,
of honest heart, though he had been none of the Kings Familiars, hearing so
much as Philotas heard, but would forthwith have opened the Conspiracy* But he
being the Son of Parmenio, Master of the Kings Horse, and of his Privy Council,
did not so much as a Stranger, who straightway made relation of what his
Brother had told him. And whereas he pretended, that the King was not at
leisure, they judged it to be done, to the intent the Accuser should not seek
any other to whom he might divulge it; whereas Nichomachus, albeit he was bound
by his Oath to the contrary, yet would he never rest till he had discharged his
Conscience: But Philotas, when he consumed, in a manner, the whole day in sport
and pastime with the King, could not find in his heart to cast forth a few
words, especially in a matter so much concerning the Kings safeguard. But admit
(quoth they) he had given no credit to the matter through the lightness of the
Reporter, why should he have deferred the Accuser two days, as though he had
believed it? For if he had misliked the report, he might have dismissed the
party. It was also alleged, that every man's mind much misgiveth him, when the
matter concerns his own jeopardy; much more ought men to be credulous, when
it touches the safety of a Kings person, in which case it ought to be
thoroughly examined, though it be of small moment: They all therefore
determined, that Philotas should be enforced to disclose the Partners of this
Conspiracy. The King commanding them to keep the matter secret, departed; and
to the intent no inkling should appear of this new Council, he caused it to be
proclaimed, that the Army should be set forward the next day. The same night
the King called Philotas to a Banquet, with whom he vouchsafed not only to eat,
but also familiarly to discourse, notwithstanding he had before in the Council
determined his death. After the second Watch of the night, Ephestion, Craterus,
and Erigonus, who were of the Kings Council, came privily into the Court
without light; and of the Esquires, there came Perdicas and Leonatus, by whom
Commandment was given, that all such as lay near the Kings lodging should watch
in Arms.

By this time Soldiers were appointed to all the Passage, and Horsemen were
sent to keep the ways, that no man should pass privily to Parmenio, who was
then Governor of Media, and had under him a great power. Then Artaras came
into the Court with three hundred armed men, unto whom there were appointed ten
of those that had the charge of the Kings Person, every one of them accompanied
with ten Esquires, who were forced into diverse companies to take the other
Conspirators: But Artaras, with his three hundred, was sent to Philotas
lodging, where with fifty of the most resolute, he brake up his Chamber Door
that was shut against them; the residue were commanded to beset the house, lest
he might escape by some secret way. Philotas, whether it were through the
surety of his own Conscience, or through weariness of the travel of his mind,
was in so profound a sleep, that Artaras brake in upon him before he waked. But
at length, when he was rouzed, and come to himself, perceiving they went about
to bind him, he cried out, and said; Oh Alexander, the malice of mine Enemies
has prevailed above thy Mercy. Speaking these words, they covered his face,
and brought him into the Court. The next day the King gave Commandment, that
certain of the Men of War should assemble in Arms, to the number of six
thousand: Besides these, there were a Rabble of the Black Guard that filled the
Court, who being assembled together, the armed men compassed in Philotas with
their Band, to the intent he should not be espied of the people, until such
time as the King might speak unto them: for by an old Law of the Macedons,
Kings in their own persons were wont to enquire in matters of Treason; yet
could not the Kings Authority prevail to Condemnation, except it were confirmed
by the consent of the Men of War: Therefore the Body of Dimnus was first
brought into the place, the most part knowing not what he had done, or by what
chance he was flain. Then came the King forth to speak unto the multitude, who
in his countenance declared the dolor of his heart; and the sadness of such as
were near about him, caused unto the rest a great expectation of the event. He
cast his eyes down to the earth, and in a muse, but at length he plucked up his
spirits, and spoke unto them in this wise:

By the Treason of some Assassinates I was almost taken from you; but through
the M^rcy and Providence of the gods, I am yet preserved. Your Honorable
Presence does constrain me more vehemently to be moved against those Traitors,
because the only comfort and fruit of my life is, that I remain to give thanks
unto so many Noble men, unto whom I am so much obliged.

With speaking of these words, the murmr of the multitude did interrupt his
speech, and the tears did fall from their eyes; then the King renewed his
discourse:

How much more will you be moved, when I shall show you the Authors of so
horrible a Treason, which I yet refrain, as one very loath to discover their
names? But I must uncover the memory of my former favors, and utter the
Conspiracy of my unnatural Subjects; for how is it possible for me to hide so
great a Treason? Parmenio, a man of that Age, so deeply in my debt, through the
most ample benefits both of me and my Father, and whom I most esteemed of all
my Friends, is the Captain and Contriver of all this Mischief: His Minister
Philotas, has procured Peucolaus, Demetrius, and this Dimnus, (whose Body you
here see) with other Partners of their wickedness, to my destruction.

As he spoke these words, there arose throughout the multitude a great murmr
and complaint, such as uses to be amongst Men of War, when they are moved with
affection or displeasure. With that, Nichomachus, Metron, and Ceballinus were
brought forth, every one of them giving in Evidence of what they had spoken
before; yet it appeared not by any man's information, that Philotas was privy to
the Conspiracy. But at the last, when the noise was ceased, and the Witnesses
had said what they could, the King proceeded in this manner:

Of what mind think you was this man, who hearing the whole Report, could
find in his heart to conceal the Treason, the truth whereof is well declared
by the death of Dimnus? Ceballinus that reported an uncertain tale, for the
certain trial thereof, was afraid of no torments; and never delayed any moment
of time, until he had discharged himself, in so much that he brake into the
place where I was bathing; but Philotas only feared nothing, believed nothing.
O how great a heart had this man, who having knowledge of the danger of his
King, did never change countenance, nor take so much pains, as to hear out the
information of the Accuser! But in this silence and concealment there is
Treason hidden, and the greedy desire he had to Reign, did drive him headlong
to attempt this wickedness. His Father is Governor of Media, and bears such
a Command amongst the Captains and Men of War, through my Authority, that he
hops after a great deal more then he has; and because I am without Children,
he esteems me not: But Philotas is deceived, I have Children, Friends, and
Kinsfolk amongst you: So long as you are in safety, I shall not reckon my self
without Heirs.

Then did he receive a Letter that was intercepted, which Parmenio had written
to his Sons, Nicanor and Philotas; wherein there appeared no great proof of any
great Treason intended. The Letter was this: First take good heed to your
selves, and then to those that belong to you; so shall we bring to pass what we
have purposed. Which Letter the King enforced; saying, It was written after
such a manner, that if it came unto his Sons hands it might be understood by
them that knew the design; but if it were taken by the way, it should deceive
them that knew it not. Then proceeded he.

Now will Philotas perhaps say, that when Dimnus named all that were partakers
of his Conspiracy, he named not him. As for that, it is no proof of his
Innocence, but a token of his Power and Authority, because he was feared even
of them that might bewray him, who betraying themselves, durst not speak of
him: But what manner of man he has been, his life does show: He was Fellow and
Companion to Amyntas my Kinsman, who conspired High Treason against my Person
in Macedon: He gave ^is Sister in Marriage to Attalus, then whom I had never
greater Enemy. When by reason of old friendship and familiarity, I wrote unto
him of the Title given to me by the Oracle of Jupiter Hammon, he did not stick
to answer, that he was very glad that I was admitted into the number of the
gods, howbeit very sorry for those that should live under such a one as would
exceed the condition of man. These were plain tokens that his heart was turned
from me, and that he despised my glory: This I kept close in my heart so long
as I might; for I thought my Bowels pulled from me, if I should render them
contemptible for whom I had done so much: But now it is not words that must be
punished, for the rashness of their Tongues is turned to Swords, which (believe
me) Philotas has whetted to my destruction; whom if I should suffer to escape,
alas, my Soldiers, whither should I go? To whom should I commit my person? He
was the man that I made General of my Cavalry, of the greatest part of mine
Army, and the Chief of the most Noble of the Youth thereof: To his truth and
fidelity have I committed my Safeguard, my Hope, and Victory: His Father did I
prefer unto the same Estate whereunto you have advanced me: Media, then which
there is not a richer Country, with many thousands of your Friends and
Companions, I have put under his Governance and Authority. Where I trusted of
most Surety, there I have found most danger: How much more happy had I been to
have died in Battle, and to have been slain by mine Enemies, then to be thus
betrayed by my Subjects? For now being saved from the dangers which I most
feared, I have fallen into those which I ought to have least doubted. You have
been wont oftentimes to warn me, that I should regard my safety; it is you that
now may do that for me which you have counseled me unto: To your hands, and to
your succor do I fly: I would not live, though I might, against your wills;
and though you would, yet can I not, except I be delivered from mine Enemies.

Hereupon Philotas was brought forth in an old garment, his hands bound behind
him: It well appeared how much this miserable sight moved them who late before
envied him. The day before they saw him General of the Horse, they knew that he
was at Supper with the King, and suddenly they saw him, both a prisoner bound
like a Theif, and also condemned to die: It caused pity in their hearts, to
consider how Parmenio, so Noble a man, so great a Captain, who late having lost
two Sons, Hector and Nicanor, should be put to answer for the third, whom
calamity had left alive. The multitude being thus inclined to pity, Amyntas,
one of the Kings Officers, with a bitter invective, set them all against the
Prisoner.

We are all ( quoth he) betrayed to the Barbarous Nations; not one of us shall
return home unto his Country, Wife, or Friends, but we shall be a maimed body
without a Head, without Honor, without Fame, and in a strange Country shall be
made a Mocking-stock to our Enemies.

His words were nothing pleasing to the King, because he put the Soldiers in
remembrance of their Wives and Country, whereby he thought they would be the
less willing to go forwards in his wars. There was one Cenus, who though he had
married the Sister of Philotas, yet did he more extremely inveigh against him,
then any other, calling him Traitor to his King, his Country, and to the whole
Army: And thereupon took up a stone, that by chance lay at his feet, to have
cast at Philotas; which he did (as some thought) to the end he might rid him
from further torments: But the King kept back his hand, and said, that the
Prisoner should have liberty to speak for himself, and would not suffer him to
be condemned otherwise. Then Philotas being admitted to speak, were it through
the conscience of his offense, or through the greatness of his peril, as a man
astonished, and besides himself, durst neither look up, nor speak, but burst out
into tears; whereupon his heart fainted, and he swooned down upon those that
led him: But afterward, when he had wiped his eyes, and by little and little
recovered his heart and tongue, he prepared to speak for himself. Then the King
beheld him in the face, and said; The Macedons shall be thy Judges; I would
know therefore whether thou will speak to them in thy Country Language, or not?
To whom Philotas answered, There are diverse Nations here besides the Macedons,
who I trust shall perceive my words the better, if I speak in the same tongue
that you have done, to the intent that it may be better understood by the
generality of the people here present. Then said the King, Mark how this man
has his Native Language in hatred; for there is none but he that will disdain
to speak it: But let him say what he will, do you remember, that he not only
disdaineth our Customs, but also our Language. And with that word the King
departed from the Assembly: Then said Philotas:

It is easy for an Innocent to find words to speak; but it is very hard for a
man in misery to keep a temper in his discourse. Thus standing betwixt a clear
Conscience, and most unhappy Fortune, I know not which way I shall satisfy my
self, and the time, both together: For he that might best have judged my Cause
is gone: What the cause is he would not hear me, I cannot well imagine; since
upon the matter heard, it lies only in ^his hands, either to discharge me, or
condemn me: For the matter not heard, he cannot acquit me being absent, since
he condemned me when he was here present. Howsoever, the defense of a Prisoner
is not only superfluous, but also hateful, which seems not to inform, but to
reprove his Judge: Yet will I not forsake my self, nor so demean me, that I may
seem condemned by mine own default: I see not of what Treason I should be
guilty: Amongst the Conspirators no man named me; Nichomachus said nothing of
me; Ceballinus could not tell more of me then he heard: And yet does the King
believe, that I should be the Head of this Conspiracy. Was it possible that
Dimnus should forget to name him that was the Principal? Or is it likely that
he would have over-slipped me, when the Names of the Conspirators were demanded
of him? He would rather have named me falsely, to allure the young man the
sooner to his Opinion: Yet when he told the matter privily to Nichomachus, whom
he verily believed would have kept it secret, naming himself, and all the rest,
of me only he made no mention: It cannot be gathered, that he omitted me,
because he would have spared me. I pray you (my Fellows) if no man had come to
me, nor given me knowledge of the matter, should I this day have been put to
answer, when no man could have accused me? But be it that Dimnus were alive,
and would spare me, what think you by the other? Would they detect themselves,
and forbear me? Adversity is malicious and spiteful; an Offender, when he is
punished himself, uses not to keep silence to spare another man: Commonly he
that goes to Death will spare no man; nor will any spare him that is ready to
die: Will not so many guilty persons, as are put to torments, confess the truth?

But now I must answer to the Crime of which I stand accused, if indeed, there
can be found any Crime at all? Why did I conceal Treason? Why did I hear it
with a small regard? This fault, if it were a fault, thou have pardoned me (O
Alexander^) whatsoever thou art, by giving me thy hand, and bidding me to
Supper with thee: If thou did believe me, I am clear; if thou did forgive
me, I am acquitted: Stand at the least to thy own judgment. Alas, what have I
done, since this last night I went from your Table? What new report has
changed your mind? I was in a sound sleep, when my Enemies, by their binding,
waked me, who was sleeping in mine own misfortune: Offenders cannot sleep
through their inquiet Conscience, and are stung with secret torments, not only
when their mischief is intended, but also when it is performed. But this
quietness came unto me first through mine own Innocence, and then by the Kings
Pardon: I feared not that others Cruelty should take more place then his Mercy.
But that it may not repent them to have believed me, you shall understand, that
this Conspiracy was first showed me by a light Fellow, who could not bring any
Witnesses or Warrant of his words; which if I had disclosed, it would have put
many men to trouble. O unhappy that I am! I thought mine ears had been seduced
with the falling out of two Buggerers; and I suspected the truth of the party,
because he did not utter the matter himself, but procured his Brother to do it;
I was in fear, that the one should have denied whatever the other affirmed; and
withal, should have seemed to procure much trouble to many of the Kings
Friends: So that because I would have offended none, I have found some more
desirous to procure my death, then to save my life: What hatred, suppose ye,
should I have gotten, if I had accused Innocents? But Dimnus slew himself;
could I therefore divine before, that he would so do? No surely, this his death
being that which only tried the Accusation true, could not move me to utter it,
being prevented by another.

And if I had been a Conspirator with Dimnus of so great a Treason, is it
likely that I would have dissembled it, by the space of two days, after it was
discovered? As for Ceballinus, it had been an easy matter to have dispatched
him out of the way after the thing disclosed; wherefore should I have delayed
the matter? I entered into the Kings Chamber alone, having my weapons about me;
why deferred I my purpose? Durst I not attempt it without Dimnus? But perchance
ye will say, Because he was the chief Conspirator: How then stands it
together, that I should be his Underling, who did covet to be King of Macedon?
Which of you all have I corrupted with Bribes? What Captain, what Officer have
I inclined to more then another? It is laid to my charge, that I abhor the
speaking of my Country Language, and that I disdain the manners of the
Macedons. What? Do I despise the Kingdom that I covet? Ye know that our Natural
Tongue, through our Conversation with other Nations, is gone out of use; as
well those that be Conquerours, as they that be subdued, must learn a new
Language. But surely these things make no more against me, then did the Treason
that Amyntas, the Son of Perdicas, intended against the King; with him I had
friendship; I will not die, except ye will make it a thing unlawful to love the
Kings Brother: But it was our duty to honor a man called to that degree of
Fortune; I beseech you, am I guilty because I could not guess before that he
would offend? Is the Law such, that the Friends of Offenders must suffer being
Innocents? if that be the reason, why live I so long? If it be no reason, why
am I condemned to die? But I am charged, that I had pity of them that should
live under such a one as believed himself to be the Son of Jupiter. O faith of
friendship, and dangerous liberty of true counsel! it was you that deceived me,
it was you that compelled me to hide that I thought: I confess I wrote so to
the King, but not of the King. I did it not for spite, but for my duty sake: I
thought it more expedient for Alexander to have acknowledged the Kindred of
Jupiter with silence, then to have made a report thereof with Ostentation. But
because the truth of gods Oracle is certain, let god he witness in my cause.
Retain me in Prison, till ye may know Jupiters answer concerning this
Conspiracy; and in the mean season, be that has vouchsafed our King to be his
Son, will suffer none of them that have conspired against his Offspring, to be
unknown: If you suppose torments more then Oracles, I will not desire to be
saved from them in trial of truth. There is an old use, that such as be put to
answer upon Life and Death, are accustomed to bring their Parents and Kinsmen
before you: Two Brothers of late have I lost; my Father I neither can bring
forth, nor dare I call for, because he is accused of this Treason with me. It
is a small thing for him that is the Father of many Children, and having but
one Son left in whom to take pleasure, not only to lose him, but also to lose
his own life with him: Therefore my most dear Father, shall thou die for me,
and with me: It is I that do take thy life from thee^ It is I that put a period
to thy old days: Why did thou beget me, unhappy Wretch, in hatred of the
gods? Was it to receive such fruit from me as is prepared for thee? I am in
doubt, whether my Youth be more unhappy, or thine Age: For I in the flower of
my years am plucked away, and the Executioner shall bereave thee of thy life;
which if Fortune would have suffered to continue, yet Nature would have asked
it e're it had been long. The remembrance of my Father does put me in mind how
loath and timorous I ought to have been to the report of Informations: For when
my Father was advertised that Philip the Physician had prepared poison for
Alexander, he wrote a Letter, to warn the King, that he should not receive the
Medicine which his Physician had prepared: Was my Father believed? Was his
Letter of any Authority? I my self, when I have reported such things as I
heard, how often have I been shaken off with a check for my light belief? So
that when we tell things, we are hated; and when we hold our peace, we are
suspected? What would you have us to do?

Then one of the Company that stood by, cried out; That none ought to be
Traitors to them by whom they are entrusted.

Thou say well ( quoth Philotas) whosoever thou art: And therefore, if I
have committed Treason, I require no respite of my pain. And here will I make
an end of speaking, because my last words seem tedious unto your ears.

As he was speaking these words, his Keepers led him away. There was amongst
the Captains one Belon, a hardy man, but one very rude, and void of all
civility; who being an old Soldier, was promoted from a low estate, to the
degree of Captain: This Belon, presuming upon a foolish audacity, (when all
others had done) began to tell them, that when diverse had taken up their
lodgings in the Camp, how they were thrust out by the servants of Philotas, who
would take his quarters where other men were placed before; and how all the
Streets were full of his Wagons, laden with Gold and Silver. He added further,
that Philotas would suffer none to lodge near unto him, but always appointed
certain to wait whiles he slept, to the intent he should not be disquieted with
any noise; not so much for wakening of him, as for disturbing his rest; and
that he was so haughty, that he despised the plain men of Phrygia and
Paphlagonia, and being a Macedon born, would not be ashamed to hear men of his
own Nation by an Interpreter: And whereas he had heretofore moved to have the
Oracle of Jupiter enquired after, he said, it was meant thereby to make Jupiter
a liar, for acknowledging Alexander to be his Son* as if any man should envy
the King for that Title which the gods had given him: But why (said he) did he
not ask counsel at Jupiter before he did offend? For now he would have sent to
the Oracle, that in the mean season his Father, who rules in Media, might
raise a power; and with the money that he has in custody, assemble desperate
persons to the fellowship of his mischief. Nevertheless, we shall (said he)
send to Jupiter, not to inquire of any thing touching the matter, but to give
him thanks, and to sacrifice unto him for the preservation of so good a King.
Then all the Company was moved, and among them there began a cry, That the
Traitor should be rent in pieces; which thing Philotas (who feared more
grievous punishment) was content to hear.

The King returning, deferred the Council till the next day, either to commit
Philotas to prison, to be there racked, or else, in the mean season, to get
further knowledge of the Treason: yet albeit it drew toward night, he
commanded his Council to be called together.

Some of them thought it best, that Philotas should be stoned to death, after
the Macedons Laws: Ephestion, Craterus, and Cenus, determined to have him tried
by torment; and then they who persuaded the contrary, turned also to their
Opinion: Therefore when the Council was broken up, Ephestion, with Craterus and
Cenus arose, to haste Philotas to the examination. The King called Craterus
unto him; and commanding the rest to avoid, had secret communication with him
in the innermost part of his lodging, the effect whereof came not to any man's
knowledge. He tarried there till the night was far past, to hear the end of the
determination: The Executioners set forth all sorts of cruel torments in the
sight of Philotas, who of his own mind said unto them:

Why defer you to kill such a man as has confessed himself the Kings Enemy,
and a Traitor? What needs more Examination? It was my intent, it was my will.

Craterus mind was, that whatsoever was confessed before, should be confessed
by Philotas again upon the Rack. Whiles he was taken upon the Rack, his Body
naked, his Eyes bound, he cried out upon the Law of Nature, and the gods of the
Country; but all was in vain to their deaf ears. Finally, as a condemned man,
he was torn with most extreme torments by his Enemies, for the Kings pleasure:
And notwithstanding both Fire and Scourges were ministered unto him, more to
afflict him, then to examine him; yet he had power of himself, both to refrain
from speaking and groaning. But...after that his Body began to be (...) with
stripes, and that he could not abide the Scourges, which pierced to the bare
bones; he promised, if they would torment him no more, he would confess
whatsoever they should require of him: But first he would have them to swear by
the life of Alexander, that they should cease their torments, and set the Rack
aside. The which being obtained, he said to Craterus, Tell me what ye will have
me to confess: Thereat Craterus was displeased, thinking by those words that he
had mocked him; and caused his torments to be renewed. Then Philotas besought
him to have a time of respite, whiles he might take his breath, and then he
would utter all that ever he knew. In the mean season, the chief of the men at
Arms, and especially such as were near to Parmenio in any degree of Kindred,
after that the Fame was spread that Philotas was tormented, fearing the
Macedons Law, (wherein it was ordained, that the Kinsfolk of* such as had
committed Treason against the King, should be put to death with the Traitors)
some slew themselves, some fled into wild Mountains, and waste Wildernesses;
and great dread and fear fell through all the Host, until such time as the King
having knowledge of it, made Proclamation, that he would pardon the rigor of
the Law to the Kinsfolk of the Traitors.

In conclusion Philotas made his Confession; but whether it were to deliver
himself out of pain, by accusing himself falsely, or not, it is to be doubted;
seeing that it is commonly seen, that both those that truly confess, and falsely
deny, come all to one end: You are not ignorant (quoth he) how familiar my
Father was with Egi^ocus, I mean the same that was slain in the Field; he was
the cause of our mischief: For when the King took upon him the Title of
Jupiters Son, he disdained thereat: Shall we acknowledge him (quoth he) to be
our King, who takes scorn that Philip was his Father? We are all undone, if we
can suffer this: He does not only despise men, but the gods also, who will be
reputed a god. We have lost Alexander; we have lost our King; he is fallen to
Presumption, neither tolerable to the gods with whom he compares, neither to
men whom he despises: Have we with our Blood made him a god who now despises
us? who disdaineth to be in the number of men? Trust me* that we also, if we be
men, shall be adopted of the gods. Who has revenged the deaths of Alexander
his Grandfather, or of Archelaus, or Perdicas? But this man has forgiven them
that slew his Father. These were the words that Egilocus spoke about
supper-time, and on the morrow early my Father sent for me: He himself was
heavy, and saw me also sad, for we both had heard that which made us out of
quiet: Therefore to prove whether he uttered these words through excess of
Wine, or premeditation, we thought good to send for him; and seeking occasion
of the same communication, he of his own mind said further; That if we durst
undertake the Adventure; he would not shrink from us; or if our hearts served
not* he would keep our counsel: Yet so long as Darius was living, my Father
thought all the matter out of season, because the death of Alexander should be
to the advantage of our Enemies, and not of our selves: But Darius once rid out
of the way, then he that could destroy the King, should obtain the Empire of
Asia, and all the Orient for his reward: Which counsel being approved, Faith
and Troth was given; but concerning Dimnus, I know nothing.

When he had confessed all this; I perceive (quoth he) that it does not avail
me, that I am utterly guiltless of this Treason. Then they renewed his
torments, and did beat his Face and his Eyes with the Truncheons of their
Spears, until they enforced him, not only to betray himself, but also to show
the circumstance of the whole Treason pretended: Because (quoth he) it seemed
that the King would continue long among the Bactrians, I was afraid, lest my
Father, that had so great a power in his hands, and the keeping of so much
Treasure (being fourscore years of age) should happen to die in the mean
season; and then being disarmed of so great a strength, I should not get
opportunity to slay the King; wherefore I hasted the matter, whilst the prey
was in hand. Thus discovered he the Conspiracy, whereof if they believed not
his Father to be Author (he said) that for his trial he not refused to be
tormented again, though it were too grievous for him to endure. The Officers
then whispering together, thought the examination sufficient, and returned
therewithal unto the King, who on the morrow caused all the Confession to be
openly recited before Philotas, whom he caused to be led into the place,
because he was not able to go; and there he confessed all the Treason again:
Then Demetrius was brought forth, who was counted the greatest Actor in this
Conspiracy, next to Philotas: But he with great protestation, and incredible
stoutness, both of heart and countenance, denied that he ever intended any evil
against the King; and for his trial, desired to be tormented.

Then Philotas casting his eyes about, espied one Calis standing by, and made a
sign to him to draw near; who being abashed, and refusing to come forwards;
Will thou (quoth he) suffer Demetrius to lie, and me to be racked again? With
those words Calis became speechless, and changed color. Then the Macedons
began to suspect that he would accuse Innocents, because the same Calis was
neither named by Nichomachus, nor by Philotas himself in his torments. But
finally, Philotas, before the Kings Officers standing thereabout, confessed,
that the Treason was conspired by himself, and Demetrius; wherefore as many as
(...) impeached by Nichomachus, upon a token given, were stoned to death
according to the Macedons Law.

Thus was Alexander delivered from great peril, not only of his safety, but
also of his life: For Parmenio and Philotas being of such power, if they had
not openly been found culpable, could not have been condemned without the
grudge of the Army. So long therefore as Philotas denied the thing, the matter
seemed doubtful, and many men thought him cruelly handled: But after he had
confessed the circumstances, no man, not so much as the nearest Friends, took
any pity of him.

THE SEVENTH BOOK OF QVINTVS CVRTIVS.
Of the Acts of Alexander the Great, King of Macedon.
AS the Men of War thought Philotas justly put to death, his offense being
fresh in memory; even so, after he was gone, their envy was turned into pity:
The Nobleness of the Young Man moved them much; so did the number of the Old
Years and Desolation of his Father. He was the first that made the way open for
Alexander into Asia, always partaker of his perils, the Captain of his Vaward,
and chief in Council with the King his Father; and so trusty to Alexander
himself, that in oppressing of Attalus, his Enemy, he would use no other man's
service. The remembrance of these things was fresh among all the Soldiers, and
seditious words came to the Kings ears, who being moved therewith, did wisely
with travel avoid the evil occasions coming of idleness: wherefore he caused it
to be proclaimed, that all men should be in a readiness before the Court-gate,
where they being once assembled, he came forth to speak unto them: And as it
was before contrived, he required the Band of the Agrians to bring forth one
Alexander Lynstes, which long before Philotas had conspired the Kings Death.
This man being accused of two Witnesses (as before said) had remained in prison
three years together; against whom it was proved, that he was of counsel with
Pausanias in the killing of King Philip: But because he saluted first Alexander
by the Name of King, his punishment was deferred, rather then his offense
forgiven: For at the intercession of Antipater, his Father-in-law, the King had
respited his just indignation for that time. But the old festered sore brake
out again, and the consideration of his peril present, renewed the remembrance
of his danger passed: Therefore when he was brought forth of prison, and
commanded to say for himself, albeit he had three years leisure to devise his
answer, yet stammering and trembling, could bring forth but little of that
which he purposed to say; and finally, both his heart and his memory failed
him: wherefore there was none that doubted, but that his fearfulness was a
token of a guilty Conscience, and no default of memory: So that whilst he was
staggering and hacking in his tale, they that stood next thrust him through
with their Pikes; whose body conveyed out of the place, the King commanded
Amyntas and Simmannas to be brought forth; for Palemon, their youngest Brother,
after he had knowledge of Philotas torment, fled away. Of all Philotas friends,
these two were most dear to him, and through his commendation, advanced to high
and honorable Offices: The King remembering with what earnestness and labor
Philotas had brought them into his favor, doubted not but they were privy to
his last Conspiracy. Whereupon he declared unto the multitude, that he had
occasion of suspicion against those men long ago by his Mothers Letters,
whereby he had warning to beware of them; and that now fearing the sequel of
worser inconveniences, had made them sure, enforced thereunto by apparent
presumptions. First, he said, the day before Philotas Treason came to light, it
was well known, that they had much conference with him in secret: And also
their Brother, who fled away when Philotas was on the Rack, he had declared, by
the absenting of himself, the cause of his flying. He showed also, that of
late, contrary to their accustomed manner of waiting, without any cause moving
them thereunto, but only by pretense of diligence, they pressed next about the
King of all other; whereat marvelling that they would furnish a Room whereunto
they were not appointed, became so in doubt of their clustring together, that
he returned into the Train of the Gentlemen that followed him: He declared
beside, that when Antiphanes, Clerk of the Stable, the day before Philotas
Treason came to light, according to his accustomed manner, gave knowledge to
Amyntas, that he should deliver of his Horse to such as had lost their own; he
proudly answered again, that except he would content himself, he should know
shortly what manner of man he was: Which violence of tongue, and rashness of
words bulked out (quoth he) was nothing else, but a declaration and token of
his traiterous heart. These things being true (he said) they had no less
deserved then Philotas; and if they were otherwise, he desired they might
answer unto the points: Thereupon Antiphanes was brought in to give Evidence of
the Horse not delivered, and of his proud answer given with threatening. When
Amyntas had gotten liberty to speak, he desired of the King, that whiles they
answered for themselves, their Bands might be loosed: which thing obtained, he
made (...) to have his garment to be cast upon him; which Alexander not only
granted, but will^d a weapon to be delivered unto his hands, as other (...)
used. When he had received the same, (...) a little the place where the Corpse
of Lincestes l^y, and said in this wise:

Whatsoever shall become of us (Sir King) we must think if our chance be good,
the same to proceed of your favor; and if it be evil, we must judge the fault
to be in our Fortune, seeing you suffer us to plead our cause without
prejudice, setting our minds free, and our bodies at large, with the some
apparel restoring us, wherein we were wont to follow you: Our Cause is such,
that we cannot doubt of it, and we are passed the fear of Fortune; therefore,
with your favor, I will answer first those points wherewith you charged us
last. We know most assuredly, that we be innocent of any kind of words spoken
to the derogation of your Majesty; and durst affirm, that you had overcome all
envy of men, but that perad^enture you would think that I went about with fair
words to excuse things that have been maliciously spoken: Though it were so,
that words sometime did escape us, either when we were faint, or wearied in
marching, hazarding our selves in fighting; or else when we were sick, or
dressing of our Wounds: Our honest doings otherwise do deserve, that ye should
rather impute the same to the time, then to evil disposition in us: For it is
commonly seen, where any thing chances amiss, all men in manner become guilty
of the fault: We do violence sometime to our own bodies, which we hate not:
Yea, the coming of the Fathers unto the Children, sometime is both ungrateful,
and also hateful. But on the other side, when we receive rewards or gifts, or
when we come laden home with Spoil, Who can then stay us? Who can restrain our
cheerfulness? or, Who can resist our courage in fighting? The Nature of Man, is
neither to keep measure in displeasure, nor in gladness. Thus are we driven by
the violence of affection, sometimes with pity, and sometimes with fury, as our
present desire does govern us. One while we are in mind to pass through India,
as far as the Ocean Sea; and by and by, the memory of our Wives, and Children,
and Country, alters our purpose: But as soon as the Trumpet sounds,
straight all these imaginations do pass away, and every man then runs in his
Array, revenging upon their Enemies the displeasures conceived within their own
Tents. I would Philotas had offended but only in words; I would pass over that,
and return to the other point whereof we are accused: The friendship that was
betwixt Philotas and us, I will not only not deny, but also confess, that we
did covet the same, and received thereby great commodities. Do you marvel that
we did honor and esteem the Son of Parmenio, whom you did choose to be next
about your Person, and did advance above all other your Friends? You your self
(if you please to hear the truth) are the cause of this your peril. What other
thing moved us to covet Philotas Friendship, then that we desired to please
you? By this preferment we are advanced unto your favor: He stood in such
height with you, that it behoved us as well to sue for his benevolence, as to
fear his displeasure: Have not we sworn that we would repute your Enemies our
Enemies, and honor your Friends as our own? Should we have been found
disobedient in this Bond of our Duty; and especially toward him, whom ye did
prefer above all men? If this be a fault, ye have few Innocents, or surely none
at all: All men desired to be Philotas friends, but all that did covet it could
not be accepted. So if ye will make no difference between the Partners of his
Treason, and such as were his Friends; then so many are Offenders, as would
have been his Friends. What presumption have you now that we should offend? I
think, because yesterday Philotas talked with us familiarly alone: Thereof I
cannot excuse my self, if yesterday I changed any thing of mine accustomed
manner and living; but if so be we used every day to do the like, then Custom
must needs make it to be no Offense. But it may be said, The Horses were not
delivered to Antiphanes; and the day before Philotas was detected, this
difference was betwixt Antiphanes and me: If that be a just cause of suspicion,
that I would not then deliver my Horses, there shall arise a doubtful Plea
between the Denyer and the Demander, saving that his Cause is better that
keeps still his own, then his that requires another man's. I had ten Horses,
of the which Antiphanes had distributed eight to such as had lost their own; so
there only remained two, which when he would proudly and wrongfully have taken
away, I was enforced to keep them still, except I would have served on foot. I
cannot deny but that this communication was had between a man of a free
stomach, and a person of a vile nature, which could do no manner of service,
but take away men's Horses, and give them to others. What mischief is this, that
at one time I must purge my self both to the King, and to Antiphanes? But to
the other point, that your Mother did write to you of us, as of your Enemies; I
would to God she had more wisely been careful of her Sons safeguard, then
doubtfully imagined such inventions: Why does she not also express the cause of
her fear? Besides, she shows not her Author, nor yet signifies one word
whereby she was moved to write to you such Letters of fear. O wretched estate
of mine, which stands in no less hazard to hold my peace, then to speak! Yet
howsoever the event shall be, I had rather my discourse should displease you,
then my Cause. If you remember when you sent me to fetch new Soldiers out of
Macedon, even when you showed me, that in your Mothers house there lurked many
lusty young Gentlemen; you commanded me, that in executing your Commission, I
should spare none, but bring with me perforce all such as refused the Wars:
which thing I did, and fulfilled your will therein, more largely then was
expedient for me; for I brought unto you Gorgeus, Heccateus, and Gorgata, which
now minister unto you, and do very acceptable service. What Creature therefore
is more wretched then I, who if I had not fulfilled your will, should
rightfully have suffered; and now I perish, because I obeyed you? For truly
there was no cause that moved your Mother to persecute us, then that we
preferred your Command before a Woman's favor: I brought unto you of Macedons
six thousand and eight hundred Horsemen, of the which the greatest part would
not have followed me: It is reason therefore, that in as much as your Mother is
displeased with us for your Cause, that ye mitigate her in whose displeasure
you have put us.

Whiles Amyntas was thus pleading his Cause, they that had pursued his Brother
Palemon (of whom we spoke) came leading him bound into the place. Then the rage
of the people could scarcely be pacified* but as the manner was in such cases,
they would have stoned Palemon to death; yet he boldly spoke to them, and said:

I desire no favor for my self, so that my flying be not hurtful to the
Innocence of my Brethren, whom if you cannot think clear, let the fault be laid
to me: For their Cause appeared the better, because I which fled away am
suspected.

As soon as he had spoken these words, the whole Assembly were inclined to his
favor, and dissolved to tears; being so suddenly and so contrary turned, that
now they we re^all on his part, who a little before were against him: He was in
the prime flower of his Youth, and through other men's fear fled away amongst
those Horsemen, who were amazed at Philotas torments: His company had left him
behind; and whiles he was in doubt whether he might turn again, or fly further
forwards, he was taken by them which pursued after him. He then began to weep,
and beat himself about the face, not so much lamenting his own chance, as the
condition of his Brethren, being in danger for his cause with which behavior
of his, he moved the King and all the company there present; only his Brother
Amyntas could not be pacified, but beheld him with a fierce countenance, and
said:

O mad Creature! Then ought thou to have wep^ when thou did put thy Spurs
to thy Horse as a Traitor to thy Brethren, and a Companion to Traitors. Thou
Wretch! whither, and from whence did thou flee? Thou have now brought to
pass, that both I am thought worthy of Death, and also must become an^ Accuser
of others.

Palemon thereupon confessed himself to have offended in that point, but more
grievously against his Brethren, then toward himself. Then the multitude could
not abstain from weeping and shouting, being Tokens whereby men in Assembly are
wont to declare their affections, and with one consent they cried to the King,
That he should spare Innocents, and men of service. His friends, upon that
occasion, did rise, and with weeping eyes required mercy of the King. Then he
commanded silence, and said:

By mine own judgment, I do pardon both you, Amyntas, and your Brethren,
desirous that ye should be more mindful of my benefit, then of your own
jeopardy: Come in favor again with me, with that fidelity by which I am
reconciled unto you. Except these things which were brought in Evidence had
been tried to the uttermost, my dissimulation might have been suspected in this
matter: Better it is therefore to be cleared, then to remain in jealousy, and
thin that no man can be acquitted, except he be first detected: Thou Amyntas,
pardon thy Brother, and let that be a token of thy hearts being reconciled unto
me.

This done, the King dismissed the Assembly, and sent for Polidamus, whom of
all men Parmenio loved best, accustomed always to stand next him in Battle: And
though the clearness of his conscience did assure him to come boldly; yet after
he was commanded to bring forth his Brethren, being but young, and unknown to
the King, his confidence was turned into fear, and he began to doubt, imagining
in his mind rather such things as might hurt him, then by what means he was
thus circumvented. In the mean season, the Guard which had commandment
thereunto, brought forth his Brethren. When the King saw Polidamus pale for
fear, he called him near unto him, and commanding all men ^part, he said unto
him:

Through Parmenio his Treason, we were all in danger, but chiefly I and thou,
whom under color of Friendship he deceived most: In the pursuing and
punishment of whom, see how much I trust thy fidelity, for I am determined to
use thee as a Minister therein; and whilst thou go about it, thy Brethren
shall be thy pledges. Thou shall go into Media, and ^ear my Letters to my
Officers, written with mine own hand: It is necessary haste be made, that the
^wiftness of the Fame be prevented: I will, that ye ^ome thither in the night,
and that the tenor of my writing be executed the day after. Ye shall carry
Letters likewise unto Parmenio, one from me, and another written ^t the name of
Philotas: I have his Signet in my custody: So that when Parmenio shall see both
you, and the Letter sealed with his Sons Ring, he will be without any suspicion.

Polidamus being thus delivered of fear, promised his diligence a great deal
more earnestly then was required. When Alexander saw his promptness in the
matter, he both commended his good will, and rewarded him accordingly: And
Polidamus changed his own apparel, and took other, after the fashion of the
Arabians, with two of the same Country to be his Guides; for whose truth, their
Wives and Children were pledges in the mean season: And so they passed on
Camels through such places as were desert for lack of moisture, and within
eleven days came unto their journeys end, before any knew of their coming.
Polidamus then took again his Macedons apparel, and in the dead time of the
night came unto Cleanders lodging, who had the chief Authority there, next unto
Parmenio. When Cleander, by his Letters, understood the Kings pleasure,
Polidamus having more Letters to deliver likewise to others, agreed by the
break of day to go together to Parmenio.

As they were going, tidings came to Parmenio of Polidamus arrival, who
rejoicing, both for the coming of his Friend, and for the desire he had to know
of the Kings Estate (the rather, because he had received no Letter from him a
long space) commanded Polidamus to come to him. The houses of that Country have
large Back-sides, and pleasant Orchards full of Trees, being the chief delight
of the Princes and great Lords there. The Captains which had received
Commandment by the Kings Letters* to kill him, came to Parmenio, walking under
the shadow of the Trees, being agreed among themselves to execute the
slaughter, when he should begin to read his Letters.

So soon as Parmenio had espied Polidamus coming afar off, with a semblance of
joy (as appeared by his countenance) he ran to embrace him, and after
salutation given to each other, he delivered the Kings Letter: As he was
unclosing it, he demanded of Polidamus what the King intended to do? You shall
know that, said he, by the Contents of our Letters: Which when he had read, I
perceive (quoth Parmenio) that the King purposes a Voyage against the
Arachosians; Surely he is a painful Prince, and never in rest: But now, after
so much glory won, it were time for him to take his ease, and have
consideration of his health and safeguard. And then he read the other Letter,
written in the Name of Philotas; whereat he was joyful, as appeared by his
countenance: With that Cleander stabbed him with his Sword in his side, and
after striking him over the throat, the residue thrust him in, as he lay a
dying.

But Parmenio's men, who stood near at hand, and saw the murder, whereof they
knew not the cause, ran into the Camp, and with their troublous tidings set all
the Soldiers in an uproar: They ran straight to Arms, and clustring together
about the place where the murder was done, they made an exclamation, that
except Polidamus, and the other Actors in that deed, were delivered to their
hands, they would overthrow the Wall, and make sacrifice to their dead Captain
with the blood of the Offenders. Cleander willed the chief of them to be let
in, and recited the Kings Letters, wherein was contained the Treason of
Parmenio intended against him, with a request to them to sit in revenge: Then
immediately, upon the Kings pleasure known, the Sedition was appeased, but the
grudge was not rid out of their hearts: The most part departed, saving a few,
who instantly required, that at the least they might be suffered to bury the
body. It was denied them long, by reason of Cleander, who dreaded the Kings
displeasure: but because they began to wax more earnest, intending to avoid
matter of Sedition, he cut off the Head, which he sent to the King, and left
them the Body to bury.

This was the end of Parmenio, a Nobleman both in War and Peace: many things
had he done without the King, but the King without him did never any thing
worthy of praise: He served and pleased, in all affairs, a King most happy and
fortunate; and being threescore and ten years of age, executed the Office of a
Captain as lively, as though he had been young in years, and pretermitted not
oftentimes the parts of a common Soldier: He was quick in counsel, doughty of
deed, well beloved of all Princes, but most dear to the common sort of
Soldiers: Yet whether those things moved him to be King, or else caused him to
be suspected thereof, it is yet to be doubted. For whether the words that
Philotas spoke, when he was overcome with the pains of his last torments, were
true or false, or else that he sought an end of his pain by accusing himself
falsely* it was much doubtful, seeing there was no such thing proved at such
time as the matter was most fresh in memory.

Such as Alexander perceived to grudge at the death of Philotas, were separated
from the rest of the Army, and put into one Cohort under Leonidas their
Captain, who in times past was of near familiarity with Parmenio: The King did
bear privy displeasure against them; and therefore willing to prove the
disposition of every man, he gave warning throughout the Army, that all such as
would write into Macedonia, and have their Letters surely conveyed, should
bring them to be carried with such as he would send: Whereupon, every man did
write frankly to their Friends such things as were in their hearts: Some showed
themselves to be offended with the long Wars, and some seemed to be well
pleased; but all their Letters were intercepted, as well of such as commended
the King, as of those that grudged at his doings. Wherefore he willed such, as
by their Letters disclosed themselves to be weary of the travel of the Wars,
for their reproach, to be put in a Regiment apart from the rest; whereby he
both gave them occasion to show their hardness, and besides, removed the
liberty of their tongues from the credulous ears of the rest. Which rash
device, as all other things, turned to the setting forth of the Kings felicity;
for in all extremities, they showed themselves the r^adiest, and the most
forward; and whilst they coveted to redeem their reproach, their valiant
doings could not be hidden in so small a number, being separated by themselves.

These things being ordered after this manner, he appointed a Ruler over the
Arians, and proclaimed his journey against the Araspians, who by changing of
their names, were called Evergitans, since the time that they relieved Cyrus
Army with Lodging and Victuals, being afflicted with cold and penury. It was
the fifth day before he entered into their Country, where he understood, that
Satribarzanes, who took Bessus part, was with a power of Horsemen entered again
amongst the Arrians: He sent against him Caranas and Erigius, and in their aid
Artabasus and Andromachus, with six thousand Greek Footmen, and six hundred
Horsemen. Alexander continued threescore days in setting order amongst the
Evergitans, upon whom he bestowed a great sum of money, for the notable
^^delity they showed toward Cyrus: and leaving Amenides to be their Governor
(who was Darius Secretary) he went to subdue the Arachosians, who border upon
the Sea of Pontus.

The Men of War, who were under Parmenio his Rule, came then to Alexander,
being six thousand Macedons, with two hundred of the Nobility, five thousand
Greek Footmen, and two hundred Horsemen, which were the chief force of their
power. To these Arachosians, Memnon was appointed Lieutenant, with four
thousand Footmen, and six hundred Horsemen.

Alexander from thence entered with his Army into a Country not known unto such
as bordered upon it, for the Inhabitants would not have conversation with any
other people: They were called Paramisadans, being a very rustical kind of
men, and most rude amongst all the Barbarous Nations, the hardness of the
Country had so indurated their dispositions: They lie most toward the cold
North Pole, joining with the Bactrians upon the West, and bending toward the
Indian Sea upon the South. They used to build their houses of Brick; and
because the Land is full of barren Mountains, and void of Timber, they make
their whole houses of the same, which beginning broad beneath, grows ever
more narrow toward the top; and like the Keel of a Ship, where the holes are
made above to receive light: Such of their Pines and Trees that bring forth
fruit, which they will preserve from the violence of the cold, they cover with
earth during the Winter-seasons; and when the Snow is vanished away, they
restore them again to the Air, and to the Sun: The earth was there covered with
Snow, and frozen so hard, that there remained no sign of any Bird or Beast
within the Country: The Air besides was so dark, that little light appeared;
but the earth being covered as it were with a (...) ihadow, men could scarcely
discern things very near at hand.

The Army being brought into this Country destitute of T^llag^, suffered all
the discommodities and miseries that might be end (...), both of hunger, cold,
weariness and despair: There were many of them that died for cold, and the Snow
destroyed their feet, but especially it took away the sight of many. When they
were wearied, and not able to travel any further, they laid themselves down
upon the frozen Snow, and having once left the motion of their bodies, which
stirred in them their natural heat, they were straightways so benumbed with
cold, that they could not rise again, till they were lifted up by their
Companions; and there was no remedy for it, but to compel them to go forwards;
for then by stirring of themselves, their natural heat was revived, and they
recovered again some strength. Such as recovered the Cottages wherein the
Countrymen dwelled, were very well refreshed; but the darkness was so great,
that the houses could not be otherwise discerned, then by the smoke.

The Inhabitants that had never seen Strangers before amongst them, when they
beheld the armed men coming suddenly upon them, were amazed for fear, and
brought forth whatsoever they had, to save their bodies from violence.
Alexander marched on foot amongst his men, rasing such as were down, and
relieving such as he saw afflicted with the cold with his own clothes: He was
seen one while in the Van, another while in the midst, and sometime in the
Rereward, to the great travel of his body. At length they came to places better
manured, where he refreshed his Army with plenty of victuals, and there
remained in Camp till such time as the Soldiers that were left behind did
overtake their Fellows. Then he went forwards with his Army to the Mount
Caucasus, which divide^^ all Asia into two parts: For on the one side (...)
stretches toward the Sea of Cilicia, and on the other side to the Caspian
Sea, to the River of Araxes, and the Deserts of Scythia.

To this Mount Caucasus there joyneth another Mountain, called Taurus, next
unto it in bignes^; which rises from Cappadocia, and passing by Ci^^cia,
closes with the Mountains of Armenia. Out of these Mountains joining thus
together, as it were in one continual ridge, all the Rivers in Asia do descend,
some of them running into the Red Sea, some into the Caspian and Hircanian Sea,
and other unto the Sea of Pontus. In seventeen days, Alexander, with his
Armies, passed Mount Caucasus; where, in a Rock that is ten furlongs in
compass, Antiquity fained that Prometheus lay bound. At the foot of this
Mountain Alexander chose out a place to build a City, wherein he placed seven
thousand of the most Ancient Macedons, and such others whose service he would
not use any more in the Wars, and called the same Alexandria.

But Bessus, that was put in fear with Alexanders celerity, made sacrifice unto
the gods of his Country; and according to the custom of those, in the midst of
his Banquets, he consulted with his friends and his Captains, for the
maintenance of the Wars: And when they were well charged with Wine, they
extolled greatly their own power, despising the rashness of their Enemies, and
their small number: But chiefly Bessus was most arrogant in his words; who
puffed up with pride, by reason of the Kingdom he had newly got by Treason,
began to declare, How that Darius by his folly had increased his Enemies Fame,
who would needs fight with them in the Streights of Cilicia, when by retiring
back* he might have drawn them (before they had been aware) into Desert places,
and there have put Rivers and Mountains between his Enemies and him, and
amongst the same so enclosed them, that they could by no possibility have fled
away, and much less make any resistance: Wherefore ( he said) he was resolved
to retire back amongst the Sogdi^^^, where the River of Oxus should be as a
Wall betwixt him and his Enemies, till such time as he might assemble a strong
power of the Nations thereabout; knowing very well, that the Chorismians, the
Dahans and Sacans, the Indians and Scythians, inhabiting beyond the River of
Tanais, would come to his assistance; of whom there was none so low, that any
Macedon, with the top of his head, could reach to his shoulders. They all in
their drunkenness assented to him, affirming that only to be the wisest way:
whereupon Bessus caused the Wine to be carried about plentifully, as if by a
Sea of Drink he intended to arrive to Victory.

There was at that Feast one Cobares a Median, who in the Art Magic (if it be
an Art, and not rather a deceit of some vain man) was more notable by his
profession then by his knowledge, but otherwise a moderate and an honest man;
he making a preamble before his discourse, said: He was not ignorant how much
better it were to be obedient to others counsel, then to be a counsel-giver:
For such as are followers of other men's judgments, are sure to have no worse
fortune then the rest: but such as are Authors and perswaders of any matter,
commonly prepare their own peril; and therewith delivered the Cup he had in his
hand, and proceeded thus:

The Nature of Man, in this respect, may be called perverse, because every one
can see better into other men's affairs then into his own: Their counsels must
needs be always full of perturbations, who take their own advice; for fear is
an impediment to some, desire unto other, and to many, a self-love of the thing
that they have devised. I will not speak of pride, nor impute it unto any man;
ye have seen by experience how every one does esteem that thing only to be
best, which he himself has invented: The Diadem of a King that you wear upon
your head, is a great burden, which though it be born moderately, the weight
thereof will oppress the bearer. It is not fury can avail in this case, but
wise and prudent counsel.

When he had spoken those words, he rehearsed a Proverb commonly used amongst
the Bactrians, which is, That a fearful Dog does bark more then bite; and that
the deepest Rivers do run with least noise; which things I have rehearsed,
because such prudence may appear as remained amongst the Barbarous. As he
talked after this manner, such as heard him wondered to what end his discourse
would tend: Then he began to show his advice, which was more profitable to
Bessus then grateful.

Alexanders celerity ( quoth he) is such, that he is come in a manner to the
entry of your Court; he can remove his Army before you can remove this Table:
You say that you will draw your assistance from his River of Tanais, and that
you will put Rivers betwixt you and your Enemies; I would know, if he be not
able to follow wheresoever you shall fly. If the way be indifferent, it must
needs be m^st easy and assured to the Conqueror: And though you think fear
does make much speed, yet hope is more swift. It were therefore methinks
expedient, to procure the favor of him that is the Mightiest, and yield your
self to the Stronger: Howsoever he shall accept it, your Fortune is more like
to be better that way, then to remain still an Enemy. Consider, that you
possess another man's Kingdom, and therefore you may the better depart
therewith: For ye cannot be a just King, till ye receive the Kingdom of him
that is able to give it, and take it away. This is faithful counsel, wherefore
it is not necessary to delay the execution thereof: The Horse that is of Noble
courage, will be governed by the shadow of a Rod; but the dull beast is not
pricked forwards with the Spur.

Bessus, that was fierce of nature, and well set forwards with drink, became in
such a fury at his words, that he could scarcely be withheld by his Friend from
slaying Cobares, for he pulled out his Sword to have done the deed, and
departed out of the Feast in a great rage: But Cobares in the tumult escaped
away, and came unto Alexander. Bessus had eight thousand Bactrians armed
attending upon him, who so long as they judged by the intemperateness of the
Air in these parts, the Macedons would rather have gone into India then into
Bactria, were very obedient to his Commandment: But when they understood that
Alexander was coming toward them, every one shrunk away, and forsook Bessus.
Then he with a Band of his own Family, who were yet faithful unto him, passed
the River of Oxus, burning such Boats as carried him over, because the same
should not serve his Enemy in following him, and assembled a new power amongst
the Sogdians. Alexander, as it has been said before, passed Mount Caucasus;
but for want of Corn, his Army was brought to the extremity of hunger: Instead
of Oil, they were fain to anoint themselves with a juice, which they wrung out
of Seseman, every measure whereof was called Amphora, and sold for 240 Deniers;
every like measure of honey for 390, and of wine for 300, and yet of the same
very little to be had. They have in that Country certain Vessels called Siry,
which the Inhabitants do use to hide so privily, that they cannot be found
except they be dug for within the earth. The Countrymen bury there their
Corn after that manner, for want whereof the Soldiers were fain to live with
Herbs, and such Fish as they caught in the Rivers: But that kind of food
failing also, they were enforced to kill their Carriage-Beasts, and lived with
the flesh of them until they came into Bactria; the nature of the soil of which
Country, is of sundry kinds. Some places are plentiful of Wood and Vines, and
abundant of pleasant fruit; the ground is fat, well watered, and full of
Springs, and some as barren.

Those parts which be most temperate, are sowed with Corn, and the rest are
reserved for feeding of Beasts: But the greater part of that Country is covered
over with barren Sands, and withered up for want of moisture, nourishing
neither man, nor bringing forth fruit, but with certain winds that come from
the Sea of Pontus: The Sand in the plains is blown together in heaps, which
seem afar off like great Hills; whereby the accustomed ways be so shut up, that
no sign of them can appear: Therefore such as do possess those plains, use to
observe the stars in the night, as they do who sail on the Seas, by the course
of them directing their journey: The nights, for the most part, be brighter
then the days; wherefore in the daytime the Country is wild and unpassable,
when they can neither find any tract, nor any way to go in, nor mark nor sign
whereby to pass, the Stars being hidden by the Mist: If the same wind chance
to come, during the time that men be passing, it overwhelmeth them with Sand.

Where the Country is temperate, it brings forth great plenty both of men and
horse; so that the Bactrians may make thirty thousand Horsemen. Bactria, which
is the Head-City of that Region, stands under a Mountain called Parapanisus:
The River called Bactria runs by the Walls, whereof both the City and the
Country take their names.

Alexander being there in Camp, received Letters out of Greece, how the
Lacedaemonians, and the whole Country of Peloponnesus, had rebelled against him:
For they had not lost the Battle at such time as the Messengers were
dispatched, that brought the news of their revolt. In the neck of these evil
tidings, there came another present terror, which was, that the Scythians
inhabiting beyond the River of Tanais, were coming to aid Bessus. At the same
time also, tidings came unto him of the Battle that Caranus and Erigius had
fought with the Arians, where Satribarzanes, that was newly revolted, being
Chief of the Country, seeing the Battle to remain equal on both sides, rid into
the forefront, and plucked off his Helmet, forbidding any of his side, either
to cast dart, or strike a stroke; and there made a challenge to fight hand to
hand, if any man durst come forth and prove his strength.

Erigius, Captain to the Macedons, was a man stricken in years, but yet not
inferior to any young man in stoutness of stomach, or strength of body; who
could not bear the proud arrogance of Satribarzanes, but stepping forwards, and
plucking off his Helmet, showed his hoary hair: The day is come (quoth he) that
I will either by the victory, or by my honest death, make trial what kind of
men Alexander has to his Friends and Soldiers; and without more words he made
toward his Enemy. It could not be judged, but that both Armies had stayed
their hands by appointment, for they gave back immediately on both sides, to
let them have free scope, each party standing in expectation what should become
of the Challenger; for they could not but think themselves partakers of their
adventure. Satribarzanes first charged his Staff, which Erigius avoided by
bending his head aside; but he in the midst of his Race, struck the other with
his Spear through the throat, so that it came forth again at his neck.
Satribarzanes, upon that stroke, fell down from his Horse; but yet made
resistance, till such time as Erigius plucked the Spear out of the wound, and
thrust it again into his mouth; who to rid himself out of pain, furthered his
Enemies stroke: Then the Arians seeing their Captain slain, whom they had
followed rather of necessity, then of their own free wills, called to
remembrance Alexanders benefits, and yielded themselves unto Erigius.

Alexander rejoiced much at the good success of this Enterprise, doubting
greatly the Lacedaemonians; but he did bear out their Rebellion stoutly, saying,
That they durst never disclose their meaning, until they knew he was come to
the Confines of India. Alexander having removed his Camp, and going forwards in
the pursuit of Bessus, Erigius met him, presenting the spoil of his Enemy, as a
memorial of his Victory. Thereupon, he committed the Rule of Bactria to
Artabasus, where with a Garrison he left his Carriage; and with a power that
was light, and fit for travel, he entered into the Deserts of the Susitans,
conveying his Army by night.

In the want of water (that has been declared before) desperation moved them
to thirst, before they had desire to drink: For by the space of four hundred
furlongs, they found no water at all. The vapors of the Sun, in the
Summer-season, did so burn the Land, that when it began to wax hot, it scorched
all things, as it had been with a continual fire: And then the light being
somewhat obscured by the Mist that rose out of the earth by the immoderate
heat, caused the Plains to have an appearance of the Main Sea.

Their journey in the night seemed tolerable, because their bodies were
somewhat refreshed with the Dew, and the cold of the morning: But when the day
came, and the heat rose, then the drought drying up all their natural humors,
both their mouths and their bowels were inflamed with heat: Then their hearts
failed, and their bodies fainted, being in such a condition, that they could
neither stand still, nor pass forwards. A few that were taught by such as knew
the Country, had gotten water, which refreshed them somewhat; but as the heat
increased, so their desire grew again to drink: There was no remedy, but to
give amongst the Soldiers all the Wine and Oil that remained in store; for
drink was so sweet unto them, that it took away the fear of any thirst to come:
But such as had greedily gulped in the water that they got, became so heavy,
that they were neither able to bear their Armor, nor go forwards: so that they
seemed most happy who had gotten no water at all; for such as had taken of it
inordinately, were enforced by vomit to put up the same again.

As Alexander carefully in this calamity stood with his Friends that were
persuading him to have respect to himself, for that he only, and the greatness
of his heart, should be some relief unto them in his adversity; there came two
Soldiers, who going before with such as had taken up the Camp, had found
water, and were carrying of it in Bottles unto their Sons, which were sore
afflicted for want of drink behind in the Army: When they saw the King, one of
them opened his Bottle, and filling a Cup, presented the water to the King, who
receiving it at his hand, demanded to whom they carried that water; they said,
to their Sons: Then he restored the Cup again full, as it was given him, and
said: I will not drink alone; for so little cannot be divided amongst us all:
Make you haste therefore to carry to your Sons that you have gotten with your
travel.

But Alexander traveled so long, that before night he came to the River of
Oxus: The more part of the Army, not able to follow for feebleness, were left
far behind; to the intent therefore that such as followed after, might know
where the Camp was, he caused a fire to be made on the top of an hill, and gave
order, that when the Vaward had refreshed themselves with meat and drink, they
should fill their Bottles with water, and go back with the same to relieve
their fellows. The breath of such as drank intemperately closed up, and they
died immediately: The number of these men was greater, then ever Alexander lost
in any Battle; but he would neither put off his Arms, refresh himself with meat
or drink, nor ease his body, but stood in the way where his Army passed, not
departing till the last man was come into the Camp. He watched all that night,
and passed it over in great trouble of mind; and the day that ensued brought
no release of his care; for there were neither Boats to pass the River withal,
nor could he make any Bridge, seeing there was no Wood growing nigh at hand.
But at length he found out a device, whereunto only necessity did enforce him:
They took Beasts skins, and stuffed them full of Straw, whereupon they laid
themselves, and so swimmed over the River. Such as first recovered the further
side, stood in order of Battle till the rest were passed over; by which means,
in six days, he conveyed over his whole Army.

Having passed the River of Oxus, his purpose was to go forwards in the pursuit
of Bessus, till he understood such things as had chanced among the Susitans.
There was one Spitamenes, whom Bessus chiefly honored of all his friends: But
there are no benefits that can stay a man given up to perjury, which in him was
the more tolerable, because he judged no mischief too great for him who had
slain his Prince; for the revenge of Darius was a fair color to his offense:
But it is to be thought, that his present fortune was more envied, then his
past actions were hated.

When it was known that Alexander had advanced over the River of Oxus,
Spitamenes did associate with him in counsel for his enterprise Dataphernes and
Catenes, whom Bessus specially trusted: They agreed to the Design more readily
then he would desire them; and taking to them eight young men that were strong
of personage, used this kind of policy. Spitamines repaired to Bessus, and
getting him alone, informed him, that he had found out how Dataphernes and
Catanes had conspired to deliver him into Alexanders hands; whereas (he said)
he had prevented them, while they were about their purpose, having taken them
both, and put them fast in prison.

Bessus then thinking himself much bound unto him for so great a good turn,
gave him many thanks; and for the desire he had to be revenged of his Enemies,
willed Spitamenes to bring them to his presence: He caused their hands to be
bound behind their backs, and to be brought by such as were privy to their
Confederacy. When they came in Bessus presence, he beheld them with a full
countenance, and rose up to have struck at them: But then they left their
counterfeiting, and straightways enclosing Bessus about, bound him; he
struggling in vain; and pulled the Diadem from his Head, tearing the Garments
from his Back, which sometimes belonged to his Prince whom he had slain.

When he saw himself in this condition, he confessed, that the gods had
righteously revenged his Treason; and perceived by the Plague they sent him,
that they both favored Darius, and were friends to Alexander, whose Enemies
evermore preferred his Victory. It is uncertain whether the multitude would
have assisted Bessus or not, but that Spitamenes had given forth, that it was
done by Alexanders appointment; whereby he put them into a fear, being yet
doubtful of mind, and set Bessus upon an horse, on the which he brought him
unto Alexander, who in the mean season had chosen out 900, such as by reason of
their Age were not meet for the Wars, and gave to every Horseman two Talents,
and to every Footman three thousand Deniers. That done, he dispatched them
home, and gave thanks unto the rest, because they promised to tarry with him
until he had brought his Wars to an end.

Bessus was presented unto him at a little Town, whereof the Inhabitants are
called Branchidans, who in times past, by the Commandment of Xerxes, when he
came out of Greece, were brought from Miletum, and placed there, because that
in his favor they had violated a Temple called Didyma. They had not altogether
forgotten their Country Customs, but had mixed their tongue, which by little
and little degenerated from their own Language, and had not yet attained fully
that Country-speech. They received the King with great joy, yiedling themselves
and their City unto his will: Whereupon he called to him the Milesians that
served him in his Wars (who bare an ancient hatred against this Generation of
the Branchidans) and left it to them to determine, whether they would save them
for the Country sake, or else destroy them for the injury they had done them in
times past. But when the Milesians could not agree in Opinion, he said he would
order the matter himself.

The next day, when the Brandichans came to meet him, he returned them all
again into the City, and commanded the Footmen to enclose the City round, and
entered with such as he had appointed for that purpose; and by a token given, he
put all to the Sword, and razed the City as a Receptacle of Traitors, they
being without Armor in every place: Neither the Affinity of their Tongue, nor
any prayer or intercession could mitigate their Enemies cruelty, who after the
destruction of the Town, did cast down the Walls to the ground, so that no
memory of them does remain. That done, they did not only cut down the Woods,
wherein they used their Sacrifice, but also plucked up the Trees by the Roots,
that the ground might be left bar^en and desolate. If the same things had been
done against the very Offenders, the revenge might have been thought righteous:
But to lay the fault of the Predecessors upon their Posterity, it is judged as
a cruel act, being there were not any of them then present, that had ever seen
Miletum, or done to Xerxes any kind of pleasure. As Alexander removed from
thence, toward the River of Tanais, Bessus was brought before him, spoiled of
all his Garments, whom Spitamenes led in a Chain put about his Neck; a pleasant
sight to behold, as well to the Barbarous, as to the Macedons. When Spitamenes
was come with him into Alexanders presence, he said:

I have brought here unto you the Killer of his own Master, after the same
manner that he himself (...) the example; wherein I have both revenged (...)
that was my King, and you also that now have gained the Sovereignty. Let Darius
open his eyes, and rise from Death, to behold this sight, who was unworthy of
such an end, and worthy to behold and receive such a Spectacle as this.

After Alexander had given Spitamenes thanks, he turned himself unto Bessus,
and said:

What beastly fury moved thee to take thine own Prince Prisoner, and afterward
to kill him, having so well deserved of thee? Of which thy doings, thou shall
receive a sufficient reward, by usurping the counterfeit Name of a King.

He had no heart to make answer, or to excuse his offense, saving that he said:
He took upon him to be a King, because he might deliver him the possession of
the Country; which thing if he had omitted, some other, he said, would have
taken it in hand. Then Alexander called for Oxatres, Darius Brother, whom he
had placed about his person, and committed Bessus to his keeping, to the intent
he should cut off his Ears and Nose, and hang him upon a Cross, causing his own
men to shoot him through with Arrows, and so preserve his body that Birds
should not touch him. Oxatres promised to perform all the rest, saving the
keeping away the Birds; which for the desire he had to set forth Catenes
cunning, he affirmed that none could so well keep them away as he, who did
shoot so assuredly, that he could strike the Birds flying in the Air: And
though it was a cunning not so much to be marvelled at in a Nation so expert in
shooting, yet it was greatly admired by such as did behold him, and it was
great honor unto the doer. He gave rewards unto such as were the Apprehenders
of Bessus; but he deferred his punishment, because he minded to put him to
death in the same place where he slew Darius.

In the mean season, the Macedons going a forraging without order, were
overthrown by the Enemies that came running down the next Mountains: They took
more then they did kill; and driving their prisoners before them, retired again
unto the Mountains. There were of them to the number of twenty thousand, who
accustomed to live by Theft, using Slings and Bows in their Fight, whom while
Alexander did besiege, and in a Skirmish pressed upon the foremost, he was
stricken with an Arrow in the midst of his Leg, where the Head did stick fast.
The Macedons that were sorrowful and amazed for their Kings hurt, carried him
into his Tent; of whose departure out of the Field his Enemies were not
ignorant, for they might behold all things from the Mountains. The next day
they sent Ambassadors to Alexander, whom he admitted to his presence, and
unfolding his wounds (whereby he thought to dissemble the greatness thereof) he
showed his Leg unto them: When they were commanded to sit down, they said, That
hearing of his hurt, they were as sorrowful for it as his own Subjects, which
should well be known; for if they could find out the person that did the deed,
he should be delivered into his hands: They could not (they said) but judge
them sacrilegious persons, who would fight with gods, of whose number they
supposed him to be; and therefore were determined to yield themselves.
Thereupon he gave them assurance, and receiving again his men that were taken
prisoners, he admitted them to be his Subjects.

That done, he removed his Camp, and was carried in a Litter, for the bearing
whereof, the Horsemen and Footmen contended together; the Horsemen alleged it
to be their Office, because the King used to fight amongst them; and the
Footmen alleged, that in as much as they used to carry the wounded Soldiers,
they thought no reason their Office should be taken from them, chiefly when the
King should be carried. Alexander therefore in so great contention of both
parties, thought it a difficult matter for him to give sentence, because the
judgment should be grievous to them that should be put by their Office; and
therefore ordered that they should carry him by course.

From thence, the fourth day, he came unto a City called Maracanda, the Walls
whereof were threescore and ten furlongs about, but the Castle was without any
Wall: He set a Garrison in the City, and then burned and destroyed the Country
thereabouts. Ambassadors came unto him thither from those Scythians which are
called Avians, who had been free since the time that Cyrus was among them, but
yet they showed themselves then ready to be at his Commandment: They were known
to be the most righteous people of all the barbarous Nations, as men that never
used to make War, but when they were provoked; whose moderation and temperance
in using of their liberty, made the Inferiors equal unto the Superiors,

Alexander received them gently, and sent Penidas, a Friend of his, to those
Scythians that inhabited within Europe, to forbid them to pass the River of
Tanais without his appointment: He had also a secret Commission to view the
situation of that Country, and to visit those Scythians that inhabited about
Bosphorus. He willed him besides, to choose out a place upon the brink of
Tanais, where he might build a City, to remain as a Fortress, for the subduing
of the people that he intended to visit.

But this design was delayed by the Rebellion of the Sogdians, who had also
drawn the Bactrians to their part. There were of them seven thousand Horsemen,
whose Authority the rest followed: For the subduing of whom, Alexander caused
Spitamenes and Catones (the Betrayers of Bessus) to be sent for, thinking by
their means to bring the Country again to his obedience, and to suppress those
who had made this stir: But they who were judged meet to stay the Rebellion,
and were sent for to that intent, were the chief Authors of that Rebellion; for
they caused it to be noised abroad, that Alexander had sent for the Bactrian
Horsemen of purpose to destroy them all; which Commission (they said) being
appointed to them, they would not execute, because they thought it too foul an
act to commit against their Countrymen; and for that cause they could as ill
bear Alexanders cruelty then, as in times past Bessus Treason.

By this means, when the fear of death was put into their heads, they were
easily stirred to Arms, to which before they were sufficiently inclined of
their own minds. When Alexander was advertised of their doings, he willed
Craterus to besiege Cyropolis, and he himself won another City of that Country,
by an assault that he gave to it on all parts at once; and by a sign given,
caused all the Children to be put to death, making the rest a prey for the
Soldiers: This done, the City was razed to the ground, to the intent, that
others by their example might be kept in obedience. There were a valiant
people, called Memacenans, who were determined to abide the Siege, not only for
their honesties sake, but also for that they thought it most for their Surety:
For the mitigating of their wilfulness, the King sent unto them fifty Horsemen,
to declare his Clemency toward such as submitted themselves, and how
inexorable he was unto such as he overcome by force: Their answer was, That
they neither doubted the Kings Promise, nor his Power: But after their answer
given, they lodged them without the walls; where entertaining them with great
Cheer until it was midnight, they set upon them, and slew them all.

Alexander was no less moved with this Act, then the cause required: He
therefore made an assault upon the City on all parts at once; which he found
furnished in such wise, that he could not take it at the first attempt:
Wherefore he appointed Meleager and Perdicas unto the Siege thereof, who then
were besieging of Cyropolis, minding to spare the same, because it was builded
by Cyrus; for he had not so great admiration of any King that had Reigned in
those parts, as of him and Semiramis, whose magnanimity of mind, and great
achievements, seemed to him to exceed the rest: But the obstinate wilfulness
of the Inhabitants stirred up his wrath; for when he had taken the City, he
willed the Macedons to spoil it, who had enough cause to be moved against them;
and so returned to Meleager and Perdicas. There was not one City that did more
valiantly abide the Siege, then the same did; for both the hardiest of the
Soldiers that were slain, and the King was brought in great danger, being
struck in the Neck with a stone, so that his sight failed him; and he was
felled to the Earth, and for the present lost his sense. The Army lamented,
thinking he had been dead: But he was invincible against those things which put
other men in most fear; for without tarrying, he dressed his wound, returning
to the Fight: and after anger had stirred up the eagerness he had of Nature, he
renewed the assault more fiercely then before. At length a great piece of the
Wall was overthrown by a Mine, at which he brake in, and put the whole City to
Sack and Ruin. He sent from thence Menedemus with 3000 Footmen, and 800
Horsemen, to the City of Maracanda, which Spitamenes had newly taken, and put
out from thence the Garrison of the Macedons, the Citizens not consenting to
it: But when they saw they could not withstand him, it was of necessity for
them to agree to his will.

Alexander, in the mean season, came to the River of Tanais, where he enclosed
about with a wall so much ground as his Camp did contain, extending in compass
60 furlongs, and named the same City Alexandria. This was done with such
expedition, that within seventeen days after the walls were raised, the houses
also were builded, and the whole work was performed in a very small season,
through the contention amongst the Soldiers, who should perform his work
first, when the same was divided into portions amongst them. The prisoners
(whose Ransoms Alexander paid to their Takes) were appointed to inhabit this
City; the descent of whom, after so long time, are not worn out, such favor
has been showed them in the memory of Alexander. The King of Scythia, whose
Empire was then beyond the River of Tanais, judging that the fortifying upon
the Rivers side should be as a Yoke to his Neck, did send his Brother Carcasis
with a great power of Horsemen to beat down the Fortification, and to remove
away the Macedons from the waters side: That River divides the Bactrians from
the Scythians of Europe, and is the limit which parts Asia and Europe
asunder: But the Countries that the Scythians do inhabit, do stretch as far as
Thracia, and lie betwixt the North and the East, joining with Sarmatia, and
possessing part of it. The Country also that lies beyond the River of Isther,
is inhabited by them; their utmost bounds stretching to Bactria, and to the
furthest bounds of Asia Northwards, where are wonderful great Woods, and wild
Deserts: But such of them as bounded near unto Tanais and Bactria, wanted not
much of the civility of other Nations.

This being the first time that Alexander had to do with these people, when he
saw that he had to enter into a War for the which he was not provided, his
Enemies riding up and down in his sight, and he diseased of his wound,
especially not having the use of his speech, which failed much by reason of his
long abstinence, and the pain in his Neck, he called his friends to counsel,
and declared unto them, that he was not troubled with any fear of his enemies,
but with the iniquity of the time; the Bactrians rebelling, and the Scythians
provoking him, when he was neither able to stand upon the ground, nor strong
enough to ride on Horseback, nor yet in case to give advice or exhortation to
his men: In consideration therefore of the doubtful danger in which he saw
himself involved, he accused the gods; complaining, that he was then enforced
to lie still, whose swiftness before-time none was able to escape.

The danger grew so great, that his own men believed he had counterfeited his
sickness for fear: And therefore he, who since the overthrow of Darius had left
Consultation with the Diviners and Prophets, turned himself again to the vanity
and superstition of men, willing Aristander (unto whom he was addicted most)
that he should try out by Sacrifice what his success should be: The Custom of
them who were called Aruspices, was to consider the Entrails of the Beasts
without the King, and to make report of the signification. In the mean season,
while they were searching secrets that way, he willed Ephestion, Craterus,
Erigius, and others of his Friends, to draw near about him, lest by straining
his voice, he might break out his wound again, and said thus unto them:

The danger I am in, has caused the time to serve better for mine Enemies,
then for me: Necessity, I see, chiefly in the Wars, does go before Reason; for
it is seldom given to men to choose their own time: The Bactrians are revolted,
upon whose Shoulders yet we stand, purposing to try what courage we are of by
our behavior toward the Scythians. If we leave off with doubtful fortune, and
not meddle with them, who of their own mind have provoked us, we shall, at our
return, be had in contempt of them whom we intend to visit: But if we shall
pass the River of Tanais, and by the destruction of the Scythians, show our
selves invincible every where, who will then doubt but Europe will lie open,
and give Obedience to us being Victors? He is deceived, that does measure by
any distance the bounds of glory we intend to pass: There is but one River that
lets us now, for bringing of our Power over into Europe; which if we shall
effect, what an estimation shall it be for us, whiles we be subduing of Asia,
to set up the Monuments of our Victories, as it were, in a new World, joining
so soon together with one Victory, that which Nature seems to have divided
with so great a distance? But if we shall stay never so little, and give
ground, the Scythians will then come after us, and pursue us in the Rear. Are
there no more but we who have passed Rivers? There are many Inventions yet
remaining amongst our selves, whereby we have gotten many Victories: But
fortune of the War does teach policy to such as are overcome; we have showed a
President of late, to swim over Rivers upon Bottles; which thing if the
Scythians cannot do, the Bactrians shall teach them: It is but the Power of one
Nation that now comes against you; all the others stand yet in a stay, to
understand of our doings: So that by eschewing a Battle, we shall nourish War,
and be compelled to receive those blows, which lie in us to give to others. The
reason of my advice is manifest: But whether the Macedons will suffer me to use
my own disposition, I much doubt; because since I received this Wound, I have
not ridden on Horseback, nor gone on Foot. If you will follow me, my Friends, I
am recovered, I have strength enough to endure these things; and if the end of
my life be at hand, wherein can I spend it better?

These words that he spoke, were uttered with a broken and weak voice, so that
they could scarcely be heard of such as were next him: But when his meaning was
perceived, all that were present went about to divert him from so rash an
Enterprise: But Erigius wrought chiefly in the matter, who perceiving that his
Authority could not prevail against the Kings obstinate mind, attempted to
work him by Religion, which he judged of greater force: For he declared, that
the gods were against his determination, who had signified great peril to
ensue, if he passed the River: He said he had understood that thing by
Aristander, who told him at his coming into the Pavilion, what he had perceived
in the Entrails of the Beasts. Alexander at these words was wonderfully
troubled with anger and shame, when he saw the secrets of that Religion brought
to light, which he thought to have kept secret to himself; and therefore caused
Erigius to go aside, and Aristander to be called in unto him, whom he beheld in
the face, and said:

I seem to thee rather a private man then a King; I commanded thee to
sacrifice, and thou have declared the signification thereof to others, and not
to me: For Erigius, by thy report, knows the secrecy appertaining to me: But
surely, I believe that through his own fear he devised an interpretation of
himself: Therefore let me hear from thy own mouth what thou have found in the
Entrails, to the intent that thou shall not deny what thou have spoken.

Aristander thereupon was amazed, and looked pale, not able to answer one word
for fear: But at length, the same fear that made him hold his peace, invited
him to speak; and lest the prolonging of the Kings expectation, might provoke
him unto further wrath, he answered:

I said ( quoth he) that there was in the Enterprise great danger and
difficulty; bu(...) (...) your attempt should not be in vain: there is nothing
that I have perceived by my Science, that troubles me so much as the love I
bear to you; for I both consider your infirmity, and what a moment consists
in your person, fearing you should not be able to endure the things that
fortune is disposed to give unto you.

When Alexander heard him speak after that manner, he willed him to have
confidence in his fidelity, to whom Fortune had granted glory in greater
things; and thereupon dismissed him. Afterward, as the King was debating with
such as he consulted with before, by what means he should pass the River,
Aristander came amongst them, affirming, that he had found the Entrails
contrary to what he did before, with as likely signs of good success as any
that ever he saw; showing them then as great causes to rejoice, as he did
before to fear. But immediately hereupon Alexander received news that much
impaired that felicity he was wont to have in all his proceedings: Menedemus
being sent (as it has been said before) to besiege Spitamenes, the Author of
the Bactrian Rebellion, when he understood of his Enemies coming, both in
avoiding to be enclosed within the Walls, and trusting besides to take some
advantage of the Macedons, he laid an ambuscado to entrap them. There was a
Wood through the which they should pass, very apt for the purpose, where he
laid the Dahans, who were accustomed to carry two armed men upon one Horse,
from whence they used to leap down by course; and because the swiftness of the
Footmen was little inferior to the Horsemen, they troubled greatly the order
of the Horsemens fight. Spitamenes gave order to them, that when they should
enter into the Wood, they should environ them on all sides; which they
performed according to his appointment.

Menedemus seeing himself enclosed on all parts, and not equal in number unto
his Enemies, resisted a great while, crying out to the Soldiers, that there
remained no hope to them, being intrapped after that manner, but, by making
slaughter upon their Enemies, to receive the comfort of an honest death.
Menedemus rode upon a strong Horse, charging oft-times upon his Enemies,
whereby he brake their order, and made great slaughter, till such time as he
being laid at on all parts, received many wounds, and fainted for want of
blood. Then he exhorted Hispides, that was one of his Friends, to leap upon his
Horse, and escape away; and with that word he swounded, and fell from his Horse
to the ground. Hispalis might have got away, but after he had lost his friend,
he determined there to die, taking no other care but how to lose his life with
the ruin of his Enemies. Wherefore he put his Spurs to his Horse, and ran in
amongst them, where he fought notably, and at length was slain.

When the rest saw his overthrow, and the loss of their Captains, they
recovered an Hill, where Spitamenes did besiege them, thinking to subdue them
for want of Victuals. There were slain in the Battle two Thousand Footmen, and
three Hundred Horsemen; which misadventure Alexander with great policy kept
secret, commanding them that departed from the Field, upon pain of death not to
publish this Defeat. But when he could not bear out any longer a countenance
contrary to his heart, he went alone to his Pavilion which he had set of
purpose upon the Rivers side. There he walked all night, devising with himself
what was best to do; and diverse times he lifted up his Tent to behold the Fires
in his Enemies Camp, thereby to conjecture their number.

When the day appeared, he put on a Corslet, and came forth among the
Soldiers, being the first time they had seen him since he received his hurt.
They bore such a veneration unto their King, that with his presence only they
put away the remembrance of the fear which caused them before to shrink; and
rejoiced so heartily, that when they saluted him, the tears distilled from
their eyes, and earnestly desired the Fight which they had before ^^used. He
took order there amongst them, that the Horsemen, and such as were of the
square Battle of Footmen should be carried over in Boats, and that the light
armed should swim upon Bottles. The business required not much more to be
spoken, neither could the King say much more by reason of his infirmity; for
the Soldiers went about it with such cheerfulness of mind, that within three
days they had finished twelve Thousand Boats. When all things were prepared in
readiness for their Passage, there came twenty Ambassadors of the Scythians
riding by the Camp, who required that it might be reported to the King, that
they had something in Commission to declare unto him.

When they were received into his Pavilion, and commanded to sit down, they
fixed their eyes continually upon the Kings countenance; whereby it was
thought, that weighing the greatness of his courage by his personage which they
saw present, it appeared unto them but small in respect of the Fame they heard
of him. The wits of the Scythians are not rude, and without knowledge, as other
barbarous Nations are. For it is said, that many of them attain to such
Learning, as it is possible for a Nation being always in exercise of the Wars.
Their words spoken unto Alexander are left in memory; who though they differ
from the manner of us, who live in more civil times, and frame our selves to
more humanity, yet the fidelity of the matter is not to be despised, though the
phrase of their Speech is rough. And therefore I shall declare uncorruptly the
words which the Eldest of these Ambassadors did speak after this manner.

If the gods had given thee a Body according to the unsatiable desire of the
mind, the world should not be able to receive thee, but thou should touch
the Orient with one hand, and the Occident with the other; which thing once
obtained, thy care should be to become equal to the gods. Thus thou do covet
the thing thou art not able to compass. From Europe thou go into Asia, and
from Asia to Europe. It must come to pass, that if thou do overcome all
mankind, thou must make war with Woods and Snows, with Rivers and wild
Beasts. What? art thou ignorant that Trees do grow till they are great, and
then are plucked up from the root in a moment? He is a fool that coveteth
fruit, and considers not the height of the Tree whereon it grows. Take heed
lest whiles thou do labor to attain to the top* thou fallest with the Bough
which thou do embrace. The ^ion has been sometime the food of small Birds,
and the Rust does consume the Iron. There is nothing so sure, that is not in
danger of its inferior. What have we to do with thee? we never touched thy
Country. Is it not desired by us that live in the waste. Woods to be ignorant
what thou art, and from whence thou come? for we can neither be subject to
any man, nor do desire to rule over any creature. And because you shall not be
ignorant of the state of our Nation, we have certain gifts in proper to us: as
the yoke of Oxen, the Plough, the Spear, the Bow, and the Boal, which are the
things that we use both with our Friends, and against our Enemies. We give unto
Friends of the fruits got with our labors. With the Boal we sacrifice wine
unto the gods; with the Bow we strike our Enemies afar off, and with the Spear
near at hand. After that sort in times past we overcame the King of Scythia,
and afterward the King of Persia and Media, making the way open to us into
Egypt. But thou who do glory, that thou art come to be a perse^uter of
Thieves, art a ^obber of all Nations that thou come amongst. Thou have taken
Lydia, possessed Syria, enjoyed Persia, and have the Bactrians under thy power.
Thou have visited the Indians, and now stretchest forth thy ravenous hands unto
our cattle. Why do thou covet that wealth which causes thee to be poor? Thou
art the first of all men who with abundance have prepared ^unger for thy self,
and the more thou have, the more greedily do thou covet the things thou have
not. Do thou not remember how long thou did stay about Bactria? And whiles
thou did go about to subdue them the Sogdians began to rebel. Thus War does
grow unto thee out of Victory; for be thou never so great and puissant above
any other, yet there are none that can endure to be governed by a stranger.
Pass now Tanais, thou shall perceive what breadth it hears, and yet thou
shall never overtake the Scythians, whose poverty is swifter than thy Army
carrying the spoil of so many Nations. For when thou shall think us to be afar
off, thou shall see us within thy Camp: with like swiftness we follow and fly
away. I hear that our deserts are scorned by the Greek Proverbs, we covet
rather deserts and places unhabited then Cities and plentiful Countries
Therefore hold thou thy fortune fast, for she is fickle, and cannot be kept
against her will. Fallow the counsel that is good, especially when the time
does serve. But a bridle to thy felicity, and thou shall govern it the better
We say that fortune is without feet and that she has only hands and wings: but
when she puts f^rth her hand, she will not suffer her wings to be touched.
If thou art a god, give benefits to mortal men, and tak^ not away the
commodities they have already. If thou art a man consider thine own estate, it
is foolishness to remember those things which cause thee to forget thy self.
Such as by War thou make thine enemies, by peace thou may make thy
friends. The most firm friendship is amongst them that be equal; and they seem
equal, who have not yet made any trial of their Force. Take heed thou take
them not for thy friends, whom thou did subdue and bring to subjection. There
is no friendship between the Lord and the Slave: and in peace the law of Arms
is observed. Think not that the Scythians do confirm their friendship with any
oath; for they think they swear in keeping of their faith The custom of the
Greeks is to justify their doings by calling their gods to witness: but we
acknowledge Religion to consist in faith. They that do not their due reverence
unto men, deceive the gods* Think not those Friends to be necessary unto thee,
of whose good will thou shall need to doubt. Thou may use us as Keepers both
of Europe and Asia; for we should join with Bactria, but that Tanais does
devide us: and beyond Tanais our Dominion stretches so far as Thracia; and the
Fame is, that Thracia confineth with Macedon. Consider therefore, whether it be
necessary for thee or no, to receive us as Friends, or to visit us as Enemies
to thy Empires.

These were the Scythians words; to whom the King made Answer:

That he would both use his own Fortune, and their Counsel that advised him
well. He would follow his Fortune (he said,) because he had great confidence in
it; and other men's Counsel because he would do nothing unadvisedly, nor upon
the sudden.

Thereupon he dismissed the Ambassadors, and embarked his Army in the Boats he
had prepared. In the foreparts of the Boats he set such as had Targets, willing
them to kneel upon their knees for their more safeguard against the shot of the
Arrows. And those were placed behind them who had the charge of the Engines,
being both before and on both sides enclosed with armed m^n. The rest that
stood beyond the Engines, being armed themselves, defended with Targets such as
rowed. The same order was also observed in those Boats that carried over the
Horsemen. The greater part drew their Horses after them by the reins, swimming
at the stern of the Boats; and such as were carried upon trusses filled with
straw, were defended by the Boats that rowed betwixt them and their Enemies.

Alexander with such men as he had chosen to be about his Person, first lanched
from the Land, and directed his course to the further side. The Scythians came
against them with their Horsemen in order of Battle, standing upon the brink of
the further shore to oppose their landing: whose show being a terror to the
Macedons, they had also another cause of fear in their passing over: For the
Boat-masters were not able to keep their course against the force of the
stream. And the Soldiers swaying to and fro, for the doubt they had to fall in
the water, troubled the Mariners in the doing of their office. By reason
whereof the Macedons could not have scope to cast their Darts with any force;
taking more care how to place themselves out of peril, then to annoy their
enemies. Their Engines stood them in great stead, which seldom did shoot in
vain against their Enemies that stood thick before them, attempting to resist
their landing. When the Scythians saw them near the shore, they did shoot an
infinite number of Arrows into the Boats, so that there was not almost any
Target that had not many heads sticking in it. At length the Boats arrived at
the land, then the Target-men did rise upon their feet, and having more scope
and surer footing, threw their Darts more certainly and with greater force:
whereby perceiving their Enemies to shrink and rein back their Horses, they
leaped cheerfully unto the land, one exhorting and encouraging another, and
vigorously pursued them, when they saw them to fall out of array. By that time
Alexanders Horsemen who had assembled themselves in Troops, brake upon their
Enemies, and put them to great disorder. In the mean season, the rest being
defended by them that were fighting, landed, and prepared themselves to the
Battle. Alexander with the stoutness of his courage supplied the impotency of
his body. His voice could not be heard when he spoke and exhorted his men (the
scar of his wound not yet closed) but all men might see him fighting; wherefore
every one used the office of a Captain in giving exhortation unto his fellows,
and ran upon their Enemies without respect of their own lives. Then the
Scythians could not endure any longer the countenance, the force, nor the cry
of their Enemies; but being all on Horseback fled away upon the Spur, whom the
King pursued eighty Furlongs, notwithstanding that with great pain he endured
his infirmity. When his heart fainted, he commanded his men that they should
follow still in the chase as long as the day lasted, and having not strength to
sustain any further travel, he returned into his Camp to rest himself.

The Macedons in their pursuit passed the bounds of Bacchus, in monument of
whom there were great stones set up of equal distance, and high trees whose
stocks were covered over with Ivy. But no bounds could be a stay to the
Macedons, being carried forwards in their fury; for it was midnight before they
returned again to their Camp, who having killed many, and taken a great number
of prisoners, did drive before them a thousand eight hundred Horses. There were
slain of the Macedons, threescore Horsemen, of the Footmen one hundred, and
about one thousand hurt. This enterprise with the fame of the Victory falling
in so good a season, kept the greatest part of Asia in obedience, which were at
the point to have rebelled. For they believed the Scythians to be invincible;
who being vanquished, they judged no Nation able to withstand the power of the
Macedons.

The Sacans after this Victory sent their Ambassadors unto Alexander, offering
themselves to come under his obedience; to the doing whereof, they were not so
greatly moved with fear of his Force, as they were with report of his clemency
used toward the Scythians, after he had discomfited them: For he delivered
home all the prisoners without ransom, to witness unto the world, that he made
War with those fierce Nations to show his power and his virtue, and not for any
malice, or to show his wrath upon them. That was the cause that he so gently
received the Ambassadors of the Sacans, causing Excipinus to accompany them,
who being in the first flower of his youth, was for that respect in great
favor and samiliarity with Alexander. In personage he resembled Ephestion, but
inferior to him in pleasantness of speech.

After this, Alexander giving order to Craterus to follow him by small journeys
with the greater part of his Army, he himself came to the City of Maracanda,
from whence Spitamenes who heard of his coming was fled into Bactria. The King
therefore making great journeys four days continually, came into the place
where, under the conduct of Menedemus, he had lost two thousand Footmen, and
three hundred Horsemen. He caused their bones to be gathered together,
celebrating their Funerals after their Country manner. By that time Craterus
with the Phalanx was come to the King; and to the intent he might punish with
the Sword all such as had rebelled, he divided his power into diverse parts,
commanding them to burn in every place where they marched, and to kill all the
children.

The Country of the Sogdians for the most part is waste, by reason of the
great deserts that stretch overthwart the Country. The River called
Politimetum passes almost through the length of it, and runs a space
violently in a narrow channel, and then is received into a hole of the Earth;
from whence it passes underneath the ground, the course of it being manifest
by the noise of the water that may be hear; and yet on all the ground under
which so great a River does run, there does not appear any moisture put forth.

Of the Captives that were taken among the Sogdians, there were thirty of the
most Noble brought to Alexander; who, understanding by an Interpreter, that by
the Kings commandment they should be put to Execution, began as men in mirth to
sing and dance; and by a certain wanton motion of their bodies, expressed a
great joyfulness of the mind. Alexander marvelling that they took their death
with such stoutness and magnanimity of heart, called them unto him, enquiring
why they expressed so great a joy when they had death before their face? They
answered, That if they had been put to death by any, except by such a one as he
was, they should have taken their death sorrowfully: But now seeing they should
be restored to their Predecessors by a King that was Conqueror of all
Nations, they rejoiced in their honest death, as the thing all men should wish
and desire. The King then marvelling at their magnanimity; I enquire of you (
quoth he) if you can be content to live, and become Friends to him, by whose
benefit you shall receive life? They said, That as they never were his Enemies,
but as they were provoked by occasion of the Wars, even so if he would make an
experiment of them rather by a benefit then an injury, they would labor not to
be overcome in good will, nor in doing any thing that pertained to their duty.
He asked what pledge they would give of their promise? They answered, Their
Lives they had received should be their Pledges, ready to be yielded again when
it was required. Therein they brake no promise; for such as returned home into
their Countries, kept the people in good obedience: And four of them that were
appointed to be of the Kings Guard, gave place to none of the Macedons in love
or affection toward their Prince.

When he had ordered all things among the Sogdians, he left Peucolaus there
with three thousand men of War, and removed into Bactria; from whence he
commanded Bessus to be carried to Ecbatana, there to suffer death for the
killing of Darius. About the same time Ptolomeus and Menidas brought three
thousand Footmen, and a thousand Horsemen of mercenary Soldiers; and one
Alexander came to him out of Lycia with three thousand Footmen, and five
hundred Horsemen. Asclepiodorus had levied the like number out of Syria.
Antipater sent eight thousand Greeks; amongst whom there were five hundred
Horsemen. When he had thus recruited his Army, he went about in every place to
quiet those stirs that had been raised up by the Rebellion; and having slain
them that were the Authors and Beginners thereof, the fourth day he came to the
River of Oxus, which being a water unwholesome to be drunk (because it is
troubled and full of mud) the Macedons fell to digging of Wells; and when by
digging deep they could find no water, a Spring suddenly appeared in the Kings
Tent; which, because it was not found at the first, they feigned it to come by
miracle. Therewith the King was well pleased, and contented men should believe
that the same was sent by the gift of God.

When he had passed the Rivers of Ochus and Oxus, they came unto a City called
Marginia, near unto the which he chose out places for the building of six
Towns; whereof he planted two toward the South, and four toward the East;
every one distant not far from another; to the intent, that their mutual
assistance in time of need should not be far to seek. They were all situate
upon high hills, as bridles to keep under those wild Nations: But now they
have forgotten their original, and are subject to those they were wont to rule.

The King having subdued all the Country, one Rock only remained, which
Arimazes a Sogdian had taken with thirty thousand armed men, and furnished the
same with Victuals for two years. The same Rock was thirty furlongs in height,
and an hundred and fifty in compass, being in all parts steep and broken,
having one straight path only to pass up unto it. In the mid way to the top, it
had a cave, which was narrow and dark in the entry, but by little and little it
waxed wider, and had more lodgings within for a great multitude, and was
besides so full of Springs, that when they met together, they ran down the Rock
like a great River.

Alexander beholding the strength of this place, and the difficulty to win it,
determined to depart from thence: But there entered suddenly into his heart a
desire to weary Nature, and to work against her power. Yet before he would
attempt the fortune of any Siege, he sent Cophes the Son of Artabasus, to
persuade them to surrender it. Arimazes, upon trust of the strength of the
place, answered in all things arrogantly, but especially in that he asked if
Alexander could fly? Which words being reported to the King, did put him in
such a fury, that straightways he called for such as he used to consult withal,
declaring the pride and presumption of Arimazeus, and after what manner he had
scorned him. But shortly (he said) he would devise such a Policy, that he would
make him think that the Macedons had wings: He commanded therefore that out of
the whole Army they should choose out and bring to him three hundred of the most
light young men had been accustomed to drive beasts amongst the Rocks, and
straight paths of the Mountains: whereupon they brought such to the King, as
both for lightness of body, and hardiness of heart were most meet for that
purpose; unto whom he said:

My Fellows of mine own Age, with you have I won Cities that were counted
inexpugnable, and have passed the tops of Mountains covered continually with
Snow. With you I have gone through the streights of Cilicia, and have without
weariness sustained the violence of the cold, whereby I have experience of you,
and you of me. The Rock you see has but one entry, which our Enemies do
observe, the rest they neglect. They keep no Watch but toward our Camp. If you
diligently search, you shall find some way to bring you to the top. Nature has
made nothing so high, but that it may be attained to by the industry of man. In
putting things in proof, whereof others have despaired, we have gotten Asia
into our possession: contrive you the means to get up unto the top, which when
you have taken, you shall give a token to me by setting up some white Cloth.
You shall see me then come forwards with my power, and turn the Enemies from
you toward me. He shall have ten Talents for a reward, who does recover the
top first; and he that gets up next shall have one less; and the like order
shall be observed with Ten of the first. I am assured you regard not so much my
liberality as my favor.

When they had heard the King speak after that manner, they imagined the thing
done; and departing out of his presence, they prepared strong Ropes and iron
Hooks, which they fastened to the Rocks, and so climbed up. The King brought
them about the Rock, whereas it seemed least steep and most plain to mount
upon, and in the second Watch willed them to pass forwards with good speed.
They being furnished with two days Victuals, and armed only with Swords and
Spears, at first went forwards without any great difficulty; but when they came
to the steepness of the Rock, some took hold of the broken crags to lift up
themselves, and some fastening their Hooks on the Rocks, climbed up by the
Ropes: They were compelled to rest and stay diverse times, and so consumed that
day in travel and fear.

When they had passed many difficult places, further labors appeared, the
height of the Rock seeming to grow more and more. When they failed either of
their hold or of their footing, it was a miserable thing to see how they fell
down headlong, showing by their misfortune, an example to others what was
likely to come of them. Notwithstanding at length, through all these
difficulties they got up unto the top, where wearied with the travel of their
continual labor, and some with the hurts and maims they had received, they
slept all that night amongst the wild and rough Rocks, unmindful of the peril
they were in.

When it was day, they awaked out of their deep sleep, and beholding the
valleys underneath them, they were ignorant in what part of the Rock so great a
multitude of their Enemies should lie. But at length, when they perceived by
the smoke in what place they were, they upon the points of two spears set up
the sign that was appointed them, and found that in their coming up they had
lost two and thirty. The King being careful not so much for the desire he had
to win the Rocks, as to save those whom he had exposed to so manifest a danger,
stood all day beholding the top of the Mountain; and when the darkness of the
night took away the prospect of the eyes, he departed to refresh his body. The
next day before it was full light, he perceived the white Cloth set up on the
top of the Rock; but the variety of the Air, the Sun beginning to arise, and
yet clouded, caused him to doubt a while whether his sight had failed him or
not. But when it was full and open day, it was manifestly apparent, and all
doubt was removed. Then he called Cophes, by whom he had attempted their minds
before, willing him once again to exhort them to be better advised; and if so
be that in the trust of their strength, they would not submit themselves, that
then he should show to them those Soldiers that had taken the Rock over their
heads. When Cophes came thither, he began to persuade Arimazes to give up his
strength, thereby to win the Kings favor; and not enforce Alexander to stay in
the Siege of a Rock, having so many weighty affairs in hand: But he found him
more obstinate and proud then he did before, and willed Cophes to depart, and
move him no more on that subject. Then he took Arimazes by the hand, and
required him to go with him out of the Cave: When they were come where they
might look about, he showed him those that were gotten to the top of the Rock;
and scorning then his pride, he asked of him, whether Alexanders Soldiers had
gotten wings or no?

By that time the Trumpets were blown in the Macedons Camp, they might hear the
Alarm that was made in the Army, which, as many vain and trifling things are
wont in the Wars to grow to great effect, so it was the cause that they yielded
themselves; for fear so troubled them, that they could not consider the small
number that were over their heads, but called Cophes again in great haste, who
was departed away, and sent with him unto Alexander thirty of the chief men,
authorized to yield up the Rock, with composition to depart in safety.

But Alexander, notwithstanding that he doubted lest his Enemies discovering
the fewness of his men, might put them to distress; yet trusting in the
felicity of his own Fortune, and offended with the pride of Arimazes, would
agree to no condition, but that they should yield simply. Arimazes thereupon
despairing more of his state, then he had cause, descended down to the Camp
with the chiefest of the Nation that were of Kin to him: All whom Alexander
caused to be scourged with Rods, and then to be crucified at the foot of the
Rock. The multitude that yielded, with the money that there was taken, were
given in gift to the Inhabitants of the new Cities; and the Rule of the said
Rock was committed unto Artabasus, with the Charge of the Country thereabouts.

THE EIGHTH BOOK OF QVINTVS CVRTIVS.
Of the Acts of Alexander the Great, King of Macedon.
ALexander having won this Rock with greater Fame then Glory, because his
Enemies remained in no place certain, it was necessary for him to separate his
Power; and so he divided his Army into three parts: He gave the Charge of the
one part to Ephestion, to Cenon the other, and took the third part unto
himself. His Enemies were not all of one Opinion; for some of them seeing their
opposition could not avail, yielded themselves before the Fight; to whom he
gave the Cities and the Lands of those that continued still his Enemies.

But the Outlawries of Bactria, with eight hundred Horsemen, wasted the
Villages of the Massagetes: For the redress whereof, Attinas, Governor of that
Country, went against them with three hundred Horsemen, not knowing that his
Enemies lay in wait for him; who planting their Ambushment in a Wood joining to
a great Plain, had appointed some men to drive Cattle, thereby to draw their
Enemies, with the greediness of the prey, within danger of the Ambush. When the
Soldiers of Attinas saw the Drivers of the Cattle, they pursued them without
order; so that when they were passed the Wood, where the Ambushment lay, their
Enemies brake out upon them (not fearing any such danger) and slew them every
one.

The fame of this Overthrow came immediately to Craterus, who drew thither with
the Horsemen: But the Massagetes being fled before his coming, he flew a
thousand of the Dahans that took their part, whereby the Rebellion of all the
Country ceased. Thus Alexander having subdued the Sogdians, returned to
Maracanda, whither Berdes (whom he had sent to the Scythians inhabiting about
Bosphorus) came to him with Ambassadors of that Country. Phratarus also, who
had the chief Rule of the Massagetes and Dahans (which Nations were joined by
Affinity together) sent certain Messengers to Alexander, offering to be at his
Commandment. The Scythian Ambassadors made request, that Alexander would marry
their Kings Daughter; and if the Affinity pleased him, that he would suffer the
Princes of the Macedons to enter into Marriage likewise with the Noble-mens
Daughters of their Country, promising that the King should come in person to
visit him. He heard gently both the Embassages, and still continued in that
place, till Ephestion and Artabasus came unto him; and then joining his Power
again together, he advanced into the Country that is called Baxaria.

There is nothing more esteemed in that Nation, then to have great Droves of
wild Beasts enclosed in Parks, which are very pleasant, and full of Springs:
Those Parks are enclosed in Walls, and Towers builded within them, to be Lodges
for the Hunters. There was one Park in that Country, that had remained
unhunted, during the time of four men's Ages, into which Alexander entered with
his whole Army, chasing the wild Beasts in every quarter. Amongst the rest,
there was a Lion of a vast bulk that came running toward Alexander, which when
Lysimachus (who afterward was King, standing next to Alexander) perceived, he
stepped before him, to receive the Lion with his Hunting Spear: But Alexander
plucked him back, and willed him to withdraw, saying, That he was able to kill
a Lion as well as Lysimachus. For you are to understand, that this Lysimachus,
on a time hunting in Syria, killed by himself alone an huge Lion; but yet he
was torn to the very bones under the left shoulder, and put in great danger of
his life; which being that which Alexander meant, he performed with his Sword
no less then he promised; for he did not only receive the Lion, but killed him
with one stroke: Thereupon the Fable did rise, how Alexander should have cast
Lysimachus to a Lion.

But though Alexander his chance was good herein, yet the Macedons knew, that
by the Custom of his Country, he should not have hunted on Foot without the
chiefest of his Nobility and Friends about him. He killed within that Park four
thousand wild Beasts, and there did feast his Army, returning afterward to
Maracanda.

Artabasus there excusing himself by his Age, that he was unapt for the Rule of
that Country, Alexander committed the same to Clitus, being the man that
defended him with his Target, when he was fighting bare-headed at the River of
Granike, and there cut off Rhosaceris hand, that was in a readiness to strike
the King: He was an old Soldier to Philip his Father, and notable by many
feats of War that he had done: Hellanice, his Sister, was Alexanders Nurse,
whom he loved no less then his own Mother: For these causes, he committed the
strongest part of his Empire to his fidelity. The King that purposed to set
forward his journey the next day, made the same night a Solemn Banquet, wherein
(being too great a Boaster of himself) when he was hot with Wine, he began to
set forth the Acts that he had done, in such sort, that his words offended the
ears of such as knew them to be true.

The Ancient Men kept silence, until such time as he began to deface the Acts
of Philip his Father, vaunting the notable Victory of Cheronese to be his own
deed, the glory whereof (he said) was taken from him by the malice and envy of
his Father: For he alleged, how in the Mutiny which rose between the Macedons
and the Greek Soldiers, when Philip lay hurt of a wound which he received at a
Fray, and thought he could be no otherwise secure, then to counterfeit himself
to be dead, he defended his body with his Buckler, and slew them with his own
hand, who ran upon his Father to have killed him; which act (he said) his
Father never gladly would confess, nor ever could abide to acknowledge his
safeguard to come by his Son. He also declared, how after the journey he made
by himself into Illyria, in writing unto his Father, he did ascribe the Victory
unto himself, having overthrown his Enemies when he was away. He said, that in
his Opinion it deserved but small commendations to make a journey into
Samothracia, when Asia ought to have been spoiled and burnt* Nor he thought no
man worthy of praise indeed, but such as do so great Acts, as may exceed all
men's credit.

The young men that were present, were glad to hear these words, and such other
like; but they were ungrateful to the Ancient, especially for Philip's sake,
under whom they had long served. Then Clitus, who likewise was not very sober,
turned to such as were beneath him, rehearsing some verses of Eu^ipides,
whereof the King might rather hear the found then the words: The effect of them
was; That the Greeks did evil, who in the Monuments of their Victories, did
subscribe only the Names of their Kings, who usurped that Glory unto
themselves, which other men did win by shedding of their own blood. Alexander
therefore judging his words to have been worse then they were, inquired of such
as were next him, what Clitus said: But when they kept silence, Clitus with a
louder voice, rehearsed in order Philip's Acts, and the Wars he made in Greece,
preferring them before any Acts done since that time: Whereupon there did rise
a confusion between the young men and the old. But the King enforcing a
patience himself, when he heard Clitus deface his praise, conceived a wonderful
wrath in his mind: Yet it seemed that he would have bridled his passion, if
Clitus would have made an end of his presumptuous talk. But when he would not
cease, he gave occasion to Alexander to be further moved.

Clitus then did proceed so far forth, that he durst defend Parmenio his case,
and preferred the Victory that Philip won of the Athenians, before the
destruction of Thebes: And going further and further, not only through
drunkenness, but even by a frowardness of a contentious mind, at length he
said:

If we must die for thee, Clitus is not the first; for they receive greater
rewards of thy Victory, that can most shamefully deface thy Fathers memory. The
Country of the Sogdians is given unto me, that has so often rebelled; and now
is not only unsubdued, but such a one as by no means can be brought to
subjection: I am placed among those wild Beasts that be of so uncivil a
disposition. But I could pass over things pertaining unto my self, if the
Soldiers of Philip were not despised; forgetting, that if the old Atharias had
not turned again the young men, when they gave over the fight, we had yet
sticked about Alicarnazus: How is it then that Asia is conquered with these
young men? But I see it is true what your Uncle said in Italy; He chanced upon
Men, and you upon Women.

There was nothing that Clitus spoke or did in his rashness, that moved more
the King, then the Honorable mention made of Parmenio: Yet for all that he
concealed his grief, and did no more but command him to avoid out of the place,
and spoke no other words, saving that he said: If thou talkest a little longer,
I think thou will upbraid me with the saving of his life, whereof in very deed
he would often advance himself. But notwithstanding that the King had willed
him to depart, yet tarried he still, and would not rise: and therefore such as
sat next him, took him by the arms, and led him away, blaming him, and giving
him exhortation to use better words. When Clitus saw himself drawn forth
against his will, anger was added to his drunkenness, and he then declared
aloud, That it was he who with his Breast defended the Kings Back; but now when
the good service was past, the very memory of the Benefit was hated: And
therewith he laid to his Charge the death of Attalus, and how he mocked the
Oracle of Jupiter, whom Alexander claimed to be his Father, and said, that he
told him better truth then his Father did.

At those words the King was stirred unto so much passion, as he could scarcely
have born being sober: But having his senses overcome with drink, he rose
suddenly from the Table. His Friends were amazed, and throwing down the Cups
for haste, rose to expect the end of what they saw him go about in so much
fury: He took a Spear out of the hand of one of his Guard, and would have
stricken Clitus, as yet raging with the intemperance of his tongue; but he was
stopped by Ptolomeus and Perdicas, who took him in their arms, and stayed him
for all his striving; and Lysimachus and Leonatus took away the Spear. Then he
called out to his Guard for aid, crying out, that he was taken by his next
Friends, as Darius was of late; and willed the Trumpet to be blown, that the
armed men might assemble unto the Court: Then Perdicas and Ptolomeus fell down
upon their knees, requiring him that he would not persevere in his wrath, which
he so suddenly had conceived, but rather respite his displeasure, seeing that
he might the next day much better order the business. But his wrath prevailed
so much, that his ears were shut up from all counsel, and he ran in a fury
amongst his Guard, plucking a Spear out of one of their hands; which once got,
he stood in the Entry through the which they must needs pass that supped with
him.

When all the rest were come forth, Clitus came forth without light; and
because Alexander could not discern him, he asked who he was? But that was done
so terribly, that the cruelty of the act he went about, appeared in his voice.
But Clitus seeing the King in a fury, had no respect how much he had offended
him before, but made answer, that he was Clitus, who was coming from the Kings
Banquet: With that word he struck him through the body, so that he fell down
stark dead, and Alexander was all besprinkled with his blood: Go now (quoth he)
to Philip, Parmenio, and Attalus. Herein it may be seen, that Nature provided
evil in the disposition of man, who, for the most part, cannot consider so well
the things to come, as those that be past: For after that Alexanders ire was
assuaged, and his drunkenness past, weighing advisedly the foulness of the act
he had done; he considered then, that though Clitus had used overmuch liberty
in his talk, yet he ought not to have slain so Noble a Man of War; yea, and the
saver of his own life, though he was ashamed to confess it: He saw that he,
being a King, had used the detestable Office of an Executioner, in revenging
with wicked slaughter the liberty of words, which might have been imputed unto
Wine. When he beheld the blood of him, whom a little before he had bidden to
his Banquet, to run over all the Entry; and that the Guard were so astonished and
amazed, that they stood afar off, and durst not come near; his Solitariness
caused his Repentance to be the greater: Then he plucked the Spear out of the
dead Corpse, and would have thrust it into his own body, if the Guard had not
come, and with great striving, wrung the same out of his hands. That done, they
took him up, and carried him into his Lodging, where he fell down flat upon the
ground, filling all the Court full of the terrible noise of his lamentation: He
tare his Face with his Nails, and required such as were about him, that they
would not suffer him to live in such a shame and dishonor. In these requests
he consumed the whole night, and caused a diligent search to be made, whether
it were the anger of the gods or no, that had caused him to commit so heinous
an act. At length it was found, that the yearly Sacrifice, due unto Bacchus,
was not celebrated in the fit time: and therefore it appeared manifestly, that
it should be the wrath of the gods that had moved him to commit Murder upon
eating and drinking. But the greatest thing that increased his sorrow, was the
amazement of his friends, when he saw them shrink from him, and that none of
them, after that deed, would gladly use such familiar communication as they did
before. Then he perceived that he should live as a wild Beast in a Desert,
both frighting others, being also afraid himself. The next morning he commanded
the Body, bloody as it was, to be brought into his Chamber; which when he saw
lying before him, he fell on weeping, and said:

Shall I thus requite my Nurse, whose two Sons were slain for my sake at
Miletum, by the killing of her Brother (that was her only Joy) at mine own
Board? What refuge shall that wretched Woman have? I was all the comfort that
did remain to her, and now she shall never with joy behold me. Shall I, the
wicked Killer of my Preservers, return into my Country, when I shall not be
able to present my hand unto my Nurse, without the remembrance of her misery
and shame?

When he could put no end to these complaints, the Body was taken away, by the
appointment of his Friends. After he had stayed three days shut up in his
Chamber, sorrowing after this manner, the Squires, and such as had the keeping
of his person, seeing him given obstinately to death, brake into his Lodging,
and with great pain brought him (though he long withstood their prayers) to
take at length some relief and sustenance: and to the intent he should be the
less shamed of Clitus death, the Macedons decreed, that he was lawfully killed;
and would not suffer him to be buried, but that the King commanded it.

Having consumed ten days at Maracanda, specially to confirm the grief he had
conceived at Clitus death, he sent Ephestion, with part of his Army, into
Bactria, to provide Victuals against Winter; and committed the same Province
unto Amyntas, which before he had given to Clitus. From thence he marched into
a Country called Zenippa, that confineth on the Scythians; which being well
inhabited, and full of Villages, does with the plentifulness thereof, not only
detain the Inhabitants to dwell there still, but also inviteth strangers to
come amongst them. The same was a refuge to the Outlaws of Bactria, that still
rebelled* But after Alexanders coming was known, they were driven forth by the
Countrymen, and two thousand and two hundred of their Horsemen (which were
accustomed to live by Theft and Spoil in time of Peace, made worse not only by
the War, but also by despair of forgiveness, and their wild dispositions) did
give an Onset suddenly upon Amyntas, who was Darius Lieutenant. The Battle was
long doubtful betwixt them; but finally, they lost seven hundred of their
number, whereof three hundred were taken prisoners, and turned their backs to
the Victors, not without revenge* for they flew of them fourscore, besides
three hundred and fifty that they wounded; and yet notwithstanding, after this
second Rebellion, they obtained pardon. When Alexander had brought them to his
obedience, he came with his whole Army into a Country called Naura, the Lord
whereof was called Sisimethres, who had two Sons by his own Mother, it being
lawful there for the Parents to have the Carnal Knowledge of their Children.

The same Sisimethres, with 2000 armed men, fortified and kept the Straight at
the entry of the Country, where it was most narrow. The passage was defended
both with a River and a Rock, through the which Rock the way was made by force
of hands: The light is received in at the Entry, but further inward there is
none, but only such as men bring with them. From this Rock there goes a Vault
underneath the ground, that has issue into the Fields, which is not known but
to such as are of the same Country. Though this straight was naturally strong,
and defended besides by a strong Power, it withheld not Alexander to attempt
it, who brought Engines, which they call Arietes, to beat down their
Fortification; and with Slings, and shot of Arrows, did force his Enemies from
the places of their defense.

When he had driven them away, he passed through the Works he had won, and made
approach to the Rock; but the Stream that grew out of the force of united
waters, falling from the Mountain, was an impediment to him therein: It seemed
a wonderful work to fill the Chanel of the River, yet he caused Trees and
Stones to be brought to the place. When his Enemies, that never had seen any
such thing before, beheld the Work suddenly to rise like a Mountain, they were
put into a mavelous fear; by which the King supposing they might have been
brought to render it up, sent one Oxiartes, of the same Nation, to persuade
Sisimethres to render the Rock; and in the mean season, to put them in more
terror, he caused Towers of Wood to be brought forwards, and did shoot from
the Engines with such violence out of the same, that the Enemies forsaking all
other strengths, retired into the top of the Rock. Oxiartes finding Sisimethres
in this fear, persuaded him rather to prove Alexanders Benevolence then his
Power; and seeing that all Creatures submitted to him, that he alone should not
be his hinderance, marching now with his Victorious Army into India, whereby he
should turn other men's plagues upon his own neck. Sisimethres would have been
contented to follow his advice, but that she who was both his Mother and his
Wife affirmed, how she would rather die, then commit her self into any man's
hand: and therefore he being ashamed that the love of Liberty should remain
more in a Woman, then in him being a Man, he altered his purpose, taking that
way which was more honest then sure; and dismissing him that was the Mediator
for Peace, he determined utterly to abide the extremity of the Siege. Yet when
he had well weighed his Enemies Power, and his own together, he began again to
repent him of his Wives Counsel, it being more rash then profitable; and made
suit, that Oxiartes would return, proffering then to commit himself to the
Kings Will, only requiring of Oxiartes, that he would not utter his Wives
Opinion, for fear lest that he should not obtain her pardon. He sent therefore
Oxiartes before, and he came after, with his Wife, his Children, and all his
Kinsfolk, without tarrying for any assurance promised to him by Oxiartes.
Alexander hearing of their approach, sent his Horsemen before to cause them to
stay, and to tarry for his coming: And when he was come to the place where they
did abide, he offered Sacrifice to Minerva and Victoria, restoring unto
Sisimethres his former Rule and Authority; putting him in hope of a greater
Country, if he would faithfully continue in his Friendship; and took his two
Sons, presented to him by the Father, to serve him in his Wars.

Alexander left his Footmen to subdue such as had not yet yielded, and went
forwards with his Horsemen into other parts. The way was craggy and difficult,
which at at first they endured indifferently, but afterward, when their
Horse-hoofs were torn, and they utterly soundred, many were not able to follow,
but rode dispersed, and out of order, the weariness of their travel so much
overcame shame: The King notwithstanding changed often his Horse, and pursued,
without intermission, his Enemies that fled before him; by reason whereof, all
the Noble young men that were wont to accompany him, were left behind, saving
only Philip, Lysimachus Brother, who then being in the flower of his youth, and
of great likelihood to become an excellent man, followed on Foot the King that
did ride on Horseback, by the space of fifty furlongs. Lysimachus diverse times,
for all that, proffered him his Horse, but in no wise he would depart from the
King, notwithstanding that he had his Corslet on, and all his Armor.

When the King passed through the Wood where his Enemies lay in Ambushment, he
sought notably, and protected the Kings person, fighting with his Enemies: But
after they were put to flight, and driven out of the Woods, the greatness of
his courage, which had sustained him in the heat of the Fight, fainted with his
body* and being all on a sweat, he leaned himself to a Tree, which could not so
much stay him, but that he fell to the earth, and being taken up again by the
Kings hands, he immediately after did shrink down, and died. The King being
sorrowful for his death, received some other intelligence, no less to be
lamented; for before he came to his Camp, he was advertised of the death of
Erigius, one of the most Noble of his Captains, whose Funerals were celebrated
with great Pomp and Ceremonies of Honor.

From thence he determined to go unto the Dahans, where he understood that
Spitamenes was: But Fortune, that never ceased to favor him, did unexpectedly
finish that journey of his, as she did many others. Spitamenes was inflamed
with an excessive love to his Wife, whom he carried with him in all his hazards
and adventures: But she that could not well endure flying, nor to change place
like an Outlaw, became so weary of travel, that by flattery, and fair means,
she enticed her Husband to leave his flight, and go about (seeing he saw no
ways to escape) to procure Alexanders favor, of whose Clemency (she said) he
had seen so great experience. And to move him the more thereto, she brought
before him the Children begot betwixt them, making request, that at the least
he would take pity on them; wherein she thought her prayer would be the more
effectual, because Alexander was so near at hand. But Spitamenes conceiving
that she did not do this by way of counsel, but of purpose to betray him; and
that she desired to submit her self to Alexander, in confidence of her Beauty,
drew forth his Sword with an intent to have killed her, if he had not been
withheld by his Brethren. When they would (...) suffer him to hurt her, he
commanded her to avoid his sight, threatening to kill her if she came again into
his presence; and to mitigate his love toward her, he consumed that night
amongst his Concubi^es: but his love that was so deeply grounded ceased not,
but thereby rather kindled the more toward his Wife: Wherefore he reconciled
himself again unto her, making his continual request, that she would not
counsel or move him any more on that subject, but be content with such chances
as fortune would send him; for he esteemed Death lighter, then to yield
himself. She purged her self of the former persuasion, which appeared to her
(she said) to have been good; and though it were out of a woman's frailty, yet
it proceeded of a faithful meaning; and from thenceforth, she said, she was
contented to do as it should please him.

Spitamenes overcome with her counterfeit affection, made a great Feast, and
after much eating and drinking, became drowsy, and was carried into his
Chamber. When his Wife perceived him to be in a deep sleep, she pulled out a
Sword, which she had kept secretly for that purpose, and cut off his head,
delivering the same, being sprinkled with blood, unto her servant that was
privy to the fact; and with him only, as she was imbrued with the blood, she
came unto the Macedons Camp, willing it to be signified to Alexander, that
there was one come, who had something of importance to communicate unto him: He
by and by gave Commandment she should enter; but when he perceived her defiled
with blood (thinking that she had come to lament some injury done unto her) he
willed her to declare what she would have: She desired that her servant might
come in, from underneath whose garment she took Spitamenes head, and presented
it unto Alexander.

The paleness of the face wanting blood, had taken away the knowledge whose
face it was; but when the King perceived it to be a man's head, he departed
forth of the Tent, and by inquiry understood the matter. This brought him into
great perplexity, and he was driven by diverse imaginations into sundry
opinions; he judged the killing of such a one (being a Fugitive and a Rebel) to
be a great benefit unto him, who living might have been a great impediment to
his proceedings: But on the other side, considering the horribleness of the
deed, that she should kill him by Treason who loved her so entirely, and by
whom she had many Children, the violence of the act overcame the thanks of
benefit, and she was commanded to depart the Camp, lest the example of such
licentiousness might corrupt the manners and civil dispositions of the Greeks.

When the Dahans understood of Spitamenes death, they brought Dataphernes
bound, (this was he who was Partner with him in his Conspiracy) and yielded
themselves unto Alexander. He being delivered from the greatest part of his
present fear, determined to revenge the injuries of them who had been misused
by the pride and covetousness of his Deputies and Officers: Therefore he
committed Hircania, with the Cardons and Tapirions, to Prataphernes, to whom he
gave in Commission, to send Phradates, his Predeces^or, to him as a prisoner.
Tamsonor was substituted Ruler of Caria in the place of Arsamus: Arsaces was
sent into Media, to the intent that Oxidates should remove from thence: And
Babylon, upon the death of Mazeus, was committed to Deditamenes.

When he had ordained these things; the third month he drew his Army out of
their Winter-lodging, to go to a Country that was called Gabaza. The first days
journey was quiet, and the next not very tempestuous, yet darker then had been
accustomed, but not without some signification of their calamities that were
coming: The third day, the Element was full of Lightning; and when the
Lightning ceased, it was very dark; the beholding thereof did much amaze the
Soldiers, and did put them into a great fear: It thundered, in a manner,
continually, and the Lightning fell in strange similitudes, so that the Army
stood astonished, and durst neither go forwards, nor remain still in one place.
Then there came suddenly a shower of Hail driving like a Tempest, which at the
first they defended by the coverture of their Armor; but shortly after their
hands were so cold and wet, that they could not hold their Weapons, nor yet
devise which way to turn themselves, finding always, where they turned their
faces, more violence of the Tempest then before: Every man therefore broke his
array, wandering about the Woods; and many that were wearied by fear, rather
then by travel, lay down upon the ground, notwithstanding that the force of the
Cold had converted the shower into a Frost. The Trees, against which they
leaned, were a great safety and help to many: And yet they were not ignorant,
when they rested, that they chose themselves a place of death; for when they
left to move their bodies, the natural heat left them: but case was so pleasant
to such as were wearied, that they refused not to die in resting themselves.
Their affliction was not only vehement for the time, but also continued very
long; to the increase whereof, the light, which is a natural comfort unto men
(through the darkness of the shower, and the shadow of the Wood) was so taken
away, that it appeared as if it had been night.

The King only was able to endure this mischief, who ceased not to go about the
Army, drawing the Soldiers together when they were dispersed, sitting them up
that lay upon the ground; and to encourage them, he showed them the Smoke that
arose afar off from the Cottages, whither he exhorted them to draw for succor.
There was not any thing more effectual to their safety, then that whiles they
were ashamed to leave their Prince, whom they saw to endure this mischief, they
chafed themselves with their utmost labor: But necessity (which in adverse
fortune is of more force then any reason) found out a remedy for this cold:
They fell to cutting down the Wood, making every where piles and stacks
thereof, and set them on fire: Then a man would have judged that the whole Wood
had been on a flame, for there was scarcely space ^eft betwixt the fires for
men to stand: Then their nummed joints began to be moved with the heat, and
their spirits, which were oppressed by the force of the cold, began to have
their free recourse; some recovered the Cottages, which necessity caused them
to seek out in the uttermost part of the Wood, and the rest recovered the Camp,
which was planted in a moist ground: but by that time the Shower was ceased,
the Tempest had consumed one thousand Soldiers, with Varlets and Slaves. It is
said, that diverse were frozen to death, leaning against Trees, and yet seemed
as though they had been living, and speaking together.

It chanced that a common Soldier of the Macedons, who had much pain to go and
carry his Armor, came at last into the Camp where the King was; who
notwithstanding that he was cha^ing of his own body against the fire, yet he
did rise out of his Chair, and pulling off the nummed Soldiers Armor, who was
almost past his remembrance, he set him down in his Seat: He a great while knew
not where he sat, or who had received him; but at length, when his natural
heat came to him, and he perceived it to be his Kings Seat, and the King to be
there present, he was afraid, and did start up again: But Alexander beheld him
in the face, and said:

Perceivest thou not now, my Soldier, with how much better condition thou
live, then the Persians do under their Kings? for it is death to them to sit
in the Kings Seat, and the same has been the safeguard of thy life

The next day he called his friends, and the Captains of his Army together,
promising to restore to them whatsoever they had lost: wherein he performed his
promise; for Sisimethres bringing unto him many Beasts of burden, with 2000
(...) and a great number of Sheep and Oxen, he distributed all amongst the
Soldiers; where in he both restored to them their loss, and also delivered them
from their hunger. The King gave great thanks unto Sisimethres; and commanding
his Soldiers to carry six days Victuals ready dressed, he marched against the
Sacans, where he destroyed all their Country; and of the Booty there taken, he
gave thirty thousand sheep in gift to Sisimethres. From thence he came unto a
Country belonging to a Noble Prince called Cohortanus, who subjected himself
unto the King, and he again restored his Country to him, exacting nothing of
his, but that of his three Sons, he should send two of them to serve him in his
Wars: But Cohortanus offer^d to him all three, and made a feast unto Alexander,
with such sumptuousness as belong^d to the manner of their Country, therein all
the pleasures being showed that could be devised: Thirty Virgins of the
Noble-mens children were brought in (...) Alexander, amongst whom there was
Cohortanus Daughter, called Roxane, who in beauty and excellency of personage,
and comelin^ss of apparel (...) amongst those Nations) excelled all the rest:
And notwithstanding that they were all of excellent Beauty with whom she was
accompanied, yet she drew all men's eyes toward her, and especially the Kings,
who could not well now govern his affections in such prosperity of fortune, it
being an infirmity which the frailty of man seldom can avoid.

Thus he who beheld the Wife of Darius and her two Daughters (to whom Roxane
was not comparable) with no other desires then he might have beheld his Mother,
was so overcome with the love of a young Virgin, being but of mean Parentage,
if she should be compared to the Blood of Kings, that he affirmed it to be a
thing necessary for the Establishment of the Empire, for the Persians and
Macedons to marry together, by which only means shame might be taken from the
vanquished, and pride from the Conquerours. He also showed a president, how
Achilles (from whom he was descended) joined himself with a Captive: And lest
his doings should be counted lasciviousness, he resolved to take her to him by
the way of marriage. The Father joyful of this which he looked not for, gladly
confirmed the Kings words; who in the heat of his desire, caused Bread to be
brought forth, according to the custom of his Country, the same being the most
Religious Ceremony of Marriage amongst the Macedons: This Bread was cut asunder
with a Sword, and each of them made of it a Sacrifice. It is to be thought,
that such as established the Customs of that Nation, coveted, by a moderate
Diet, to show to them that were the gatherers of great Riches, with how small a
thing they ought to content themselves.

Thus he who was both King of Asia and Europe, joined himself in Marriage with
a Maid brought in at a Masque, to beget upon a Captive one that should Reign
over the Victorious Macedons. His friends were ashamed that he should choose,
upon drink, a Father-in-law among them whom he had lately subdued. But after
Clitus death, all the liberty and freedom of speech being taken away, they
seemed to agree with their countenances, as with the most apt instrument to
declare the consent of their minds.

After this was done, he prepared his journey toward India, purposing to visit
the Ocean Sea: And because he would leave nothing behind him that might be an
impediment to his expedition, he took order for thirty thousand young men to be
levied out of all the Provinces, and to be brought to him armed, minding to use
them both as Pledges, and as Soldiers. He sent Craterus to pursue Haustanes
and Gateues, of whom the one was taken, and the other slain. Polipercon also
subdued the Country that was called Bubacen; and having set all things in
order, he set his whole imagination upon the War of India, which was counted to
be a very rich Country, and to abound both with Gold, Pearls, and Precious
Stones, things appertaining as much to Voluptuousness as Magnificence; and it
was said, that the Soldiers there had their Targets made of Ivory, and of
Gold: And therefore lest he who thought himself to excel the rest, should be
surpassed in any point, he caused his Soldiers to garnish their Targets with
Plates of Silver, and the Horsemen to beautify their Bridles with Gold and
Silver. There were one hundred and twenty thousand armed men that followed
Alexander in the War.

When all things were ripe for what he long before conceived in his
evil-disposed mind, he thought it time to compass how he might usurp the name
and honor of a god, and so willed himself not only to be called, but also to
be believed to be the Son of Jupiter; as though his power had been as well to
restrain men's thoughts, as their tongues: His intent was, that the Macedons
should fall prostrate on the ground, and worship him after the same manner that
the Persians did their Kings; and to such his desire, there wanted not
pernicious flattery, the perpetual poison of Princes, whose Estates have more
often been overcome by flattery, then by any force of Enemies. The Macedons
were not in blame of this, for none of them suffered gladly their Country
Customs to be subverted; but it was the fault of the Greeks, who with their
fordid conditions, corrupted the profession of honest Sciences.

There was one Hagis of Argos, as evil a Poet as was since Cherillus days, and
another called Cleo, a Sicilian, given to flattery, both by his nature, and by
the Custom of his Country: These, with some other of the dregs and refuse of
their Countries (whom Alexander reputed more then any of his Captains and
Kinsmen) would make it appear to the world, that Heaven lay open for Alexander;
and sticked not openly to pronounce, that both Hercules and Bacchus, Castor and
Pollux, should all give place to his new godhead. For the bringing of those
things to pass, the King commanded, upon a solemn day, a Feast to be prepared
with great pomp, inviting thereunto all the great Lords and Gentlemen, both of
the Macedons and the Greeks, with whom when he had sat and eaten a while, he
departed out of the Feast.

Then Cleo, as was before-determined, made a Speech in the praise and
admiration of the Kings Virtues, rehearsing his exceeding benefits toward them
all; which to (...) he said, there was but one way, and that was, (...) they
would acknowledge him a god whom they knew to be one: For is it a small thing
(quoth he) to recompense such great benefits toward you, with the expense of a
little Frankincense? He showed the Persians Custom to be both Religious and
Wise, in worshipping their Kings as gods, thinking their defense and safeguard,
to consist in the Majesty of their Prince. He said, that Hercules and Bacchus
were Deified, when they had once overcome the envy of such as lived in their
time; and men that come after, do easily believe such things as have been
confirmed by their Predecessors. If any of you (quoth he) will stick at this
matter, ye shall see me the first, that at the Kings coming in, shall fall down
upon the earth, and worship him, which president other men ought to follow, and
especially the men of most wisdom, that should always be examples to others in
doing their duties toward their Prince.

His Speech tended directly against Calistenes, whose gravity and prompt
liberty of speech was hateful to the King; for he thought him the man who only
had stayed the Macedons, that else would readily have done him that honor.
Hereupon, every man's eyes were fastened on Calistenes, who, after silence made,
spoke in this manner:

If the King were present (O Cleo) to hear these thy words, it should not be
needful n^w to answer thee; for he himself would make request, that he might
not thus swerve into the custom of Strangers; nor would he suffer that thou
should deface, and bring into the obloquy and envy of men, with such thy
pernicious flattery, his Noble Acts, brought to pass with such courage and good
fortunes: But because he is absent, I for him will thus answer thee; There is
no fruit soon ripe, that will continue long; this I mean by thy divine humors,
which whilst thou go about to give unto the King, thou take his Honor
from him: There is a time required, that men should believe him to be a god;
for that gift has always been given to great men, when they are once dead, by
such as came after them: I wish unto the King Immortality after his death, and
that his life may be long, and his Estate continual: But Deifying is a thing
that sometimes does follow a man, but it never does accompany him. Thou did
rehearse examples of the Deifying of Hercules and Bacchus; think thou that
they were made gods upon drink, and by the degrees of one dinner? The nature of
Alexanders Mortality must be removed from our eyes, before the same can bring
him into Heaven. Are not they goodly gods (Cleo) that thou and I can make?
Would the King (think thou) he content to receive of us the authority of his
godhead? I have a great desire to prove thy power: If thou can make a god,
first make a King; it is much more easy to give an earthly Kingdom, then the
possession of heaven. Think thou (Cleo) that the Immortal gods will hear
thee without disdain, or suffer those thy wicked counsels to take any effect?
They would that we should hold us content with the customs of our Forefathers;
and for my part I am not ashamed of my Country, and desire not to learn after
what manner I should honor my Prince; for, in my Opinion, we acknowledge him
sufficiently to be both King and Conqueror, of whom we receive Laws to live
under.

Calisthenes was favorably heard of all men, as the person whom they accounted
the recoverer of their Universal Liberty. He did not only in this Speech paint
out such flatteries, but also lively expressed the Opinion of the Macedons,
especially of such as were ancient men, to whom the exchange of old customs
were grievous. The King was nothing ignorant of the words that had passed
between them; for he stood behind a partition of the Hall, and heard all the
discourse: He sent word therefore to Hagis and Cleo, that at his coming in they
should move the Strangers only to fall down, and worship him after their
Country custom: And after a while, the King, as though he had been about some
business of importance, returned again unto the Feast; and then the Persians
fell down, and worshipped him, after such sort as was appointed: but Polipercon
that sat above the King at the Board, asked one in scorn, who prostrate
touched the ground with his Chin, wherefore he kissed no harder; with which
words he moved Alexander to so much anger, being always impatient of it, that
he said to Polipercon, Is it thou that disdainest to honor me? Shall I be
mocked of thee alone? Polipercon answered, That as it was not seemly that a
King should be scorned, so it was not that a Subject should be despised. At
which words the King plucked him from the Table, and throwing him down, he said
unto him, falling upon the earth; Lo, have thou not done that thy self, which
before thou did scorn in another man? And thereupon he commanded him to
custody, and so brake up the Feast. Polipercon being thus punished, was
afterward pardoned; but Calistenes, whose contempt and stubbornness the King
had long grudged at, found that the King had more deeply grounded his
displeasure, on whom there chanced shortly after an apt occasion for revenge:
It was a Custom (as it has been said before) amongst the Noblemen of Macedon,
to put their Sons, when they were past their Childhood, in service to the King,
as Pages, to do necessary business about his person: Their usage was to watch
nightly by course, at the Chamber Door, where the King lay: The Concubines were
by them brought in at another door, where the Guard watched: They likewise
received the Horses of the Grooms of the Stable, and brought them to the King
when he mounted: They always were about the King, both in Hunting, and in
Battle; and were brought up in the Studies of Liberal Sciences: The chiefest
honor was given unto them, because they did sit and eat with the King: None
had power to correct them with stripes, but only the King himself. This company
was like a store or Seminary, from whence all the Captains and Governors of
the Macedons did proceed. From thence came their latter Kings, whose Lineage
the power of the Romans long after did extinguish.

Hermolaus, one of that number, because he had struck a Bore, (which the King
had thought to have struck himself) was by his Commandment beaten and scourged
with Rods: which rebuke he took most grievously, and complained to Sostratus
his friend, who was one of the same company: he seeing the body torn whereunto
he had so great affection, and peradventure for some other causes offended also
with the King before, so excited Hermolaus (who was provoked sufficiently
already) that each gave Faith to other to find a way to destroy the King:
Which they undertook not with any Childish proceeding, but wisely agreed to
bring Nicostratus, Antipater, Asclepiodorus, and Philotas, into the fellowship
of their Conspiracy: And afterward they joined them unto Anticles, Elaptonius,
and Ephimanes. But the way how to perform this purpose seemed very difficult,
because it behoved that all of them should watch together: And it was the
custom, that according to their courses, some watched one night, and some
another; for if any other should happen amongst them, who were not privy to the
Conspiracy, the same might be a let to the whole Enterprise: Therefore about
changing the course of their Watch, and in other preparation for the execution
of their Conspiracy, there passed two and thirty days.

At length the night came, when the whole number of the Conspirators should
watch together, who rejoiced greatly among themselves, that each had kept Faith
to other, whereof so many days silence had given good proof: during which time,
neither fear nor hope had altered any of their minds, so great was the
displeasure they had conceived against the King, or else the fidelity they bore
to one another. They were standing at the door where the King did sup, to the
intent, that at his rising from the Banquet, they might bring him to his
Chamber: But Alexanders fortune, and the pleasantness of such as were in his
company, moved him to drink largely; whereby, and by reason of other pastimes
and devices, the time was so prolonged, that the Conspirators stood in a
mavelous perplexity: For one while they were glad, because they trusted to
find him drunk when they should go about their Enterprise; and another while
they were in a great agony, lest he should sit till daylight, for then the
custom was to relieve the Watch, and others to succeed in their places; and
because their course should not come about again till the seventh night after,
they could not be assured that every one of them would keep the thing secret
till that time. But when the day began to appear, and Alexander was risen from
the Banquet, they were so glad to execute their design, that they were joyful
to receive the King: There was a Woman accustomed to haunt the Court, who being
distracted in her mind, and seeming by some inspiration to show things to
come, met Alexander, and would in no wise suffer him to pass, but persuaded him
by all the means she could devise, to return and sit down again: He said to her
in sport, that the gods gave him good advice; and thereupon called back his
friends, and sat drinking till it was two hours within day; by which time
another company had relieved the Watch, and were standing before the Kings
Chamber Door; yet for all that, the Conspirators remained there still, after
the time of their Watch expired; so ve^ement is the hope which men's minds
conceive, when they be drowned in the desire of great Achievements.

The King spoke more gently to them then he was accustomed, and willed them to
go to rest, because they had watched all the night before: and moreover he gave
unto every one of them for a reward 50 Sestercies, with commendation that they
continued their watch longer than their time. Being thus deceived of the great
hope they were in, they departed to their Lodgings, in expectation of the night
when their course should come again. But Epimanes, who either by the gentleness
of the King showed him amongst the rest, or else that he thought the providence
of God had withstood their purpose, suddenly changed his mind, and opened the
conspiracy to his brother Eurilochus, who was not privy to it before.

The punishment of Philotas was so fresh in every man's memory, that Eurilochus
laid immediately hands upon his brother, and brought him into the Court. He
called to the Watch, and told them, he brought news pertaining to the Kings
Safeguard; which thing well appeared, as well by their coming at such a time,
as also by their sadness, which was a testimony of their troubled minds. The
Watchmen called up Ptolomeus and Leonatus, that lay within the Kings Chamber;
who straightway brought them to the King, and wakened him, who by reason of his
much drinking lay in a dead sleep. It was long ^re he awoke, but by little he
came to himself, and asked what the matter was. Then said Eurilochus, Thanked
be the gods, that have not utterly determined the ruin of our Family. For
though my Brother intended an heinous Act, yet he is come to repentance, by him
the matter is brought to light. The very same night Treason was conspired
against you; The Authors are such as you would scarcely think. And thereupon
Epimanes declared all things in order, with the names of the Conspirators.

It is certain that Calisthenes was not named as one privy to that Treason; but
it was confessed that he gladly gave ear to the discourse of others, when they
blamed and spoke evil of the Kings proceedings. Some do add thereunto, that
when Hermolaus did complain to Calisthenes how the King had beaten him, he bad
him remember that he was a man. But whether he spoke it to take the punishment
in patience, or else to stir him to further malice, it remains in doubt. When
the King was fully awaked, and called to his memory the peril he was in, he
gave Eurilochus fifty Talents, with the forfeit of a rich man's goods called
Tiridates, and pardoned his Brother before his pardon was required. He
commanded the principals of this Treason to be kept bound, and among them
Calisthenes; who being taken and brought into the Court, the King slept all the
day and the night ensuing, he was so heavy with drinking and watching. The next
day he called a great Council, whereat the Father and Kinsfolk of the
Conspirators were present, not very well assured of their own safeguard,
because that by the law of the Macedons all ought to die that were of kin to
Traitors. All the Conspirators except Calisthenes, by the Kings commandment
were brought forth; who immediately confessed the whole Treason they had
devised. Then every man present reviled them; and the King demanded what he had
done to them, that they should conspire his death. When all the other stood
still and held their peace, Hermolaus answered thus:

Ye demand this thing of us as though you knew not the matter. We began to kill
you, because you began to reign over us as if we were slaves, and not free born.

As he was speaking these words, his Father Persepolis called him Traitor and
Murderer of his Parents, stopping his mouth with his hand, because he should
speak no further. Then the King plucked his Father back, and willed Hermolaus
to speak such things as he had learned of his Master Calisthenes. Then
Hermolaus proceeded.

I will use your benefit, and declare those things which I have learned to the
great mischief of us all. How small is the number of the Macedons remaining,
that have escaped your cruelty? Attalus, Philotas, Parmenio, Lincestes,
Alexander, and Clitus, are now dead: but to our Enemies behoof they be alive.
They stood in the Fight and defended you with their Swords, receiving wounds
for your glory and victory, which now are very well rewarded. The one
besprinkled your Table with his blood, and the other could not be suffered to
die an ordinary death. Thus the Captains of your people are tormented and put
to death; a pleasant spectacle to the Persians, of whom they were Conquerours.
Parmenio, by whom you slew your Enemy Attalus, was put to death without
judgment. Thus use you the hands of us wretches, as instruments to kill one
another; and such as even now were to be your Tormentors, straightways you
command to be tormented by others.

At those words, the multitude began to shout against Hermolaus, and his father
drew his sword to have slain him, if he had not been hindered by the King, who
commanded Hermolaus to speak, requiring the rest to hear him plead for himself,
who (he said) enforced the cause of his own punishment. At length with great
labor they held their peace, and then Hermolaus began again.

How liberal is he to suffer boys to speak, when the voice of Calisthenes is
shut up in prison, because he alone is able to declare himself? and why?
because he fears the free speech of an innocent, and cannot endure to behold
his face, and yet I will justify he is not privy to this matter. But others
that are here present, who contrived with me a noble Enterprise, of whom there
is not any that can accuse Calisthenes of consent; and yet our so patient and
so righteous a King, has determined here his death. These be the rewards of
the Macedons, whose blood is disesteemed as of no value. He has 30000 Mules
carrying spoil and treasure, and yet the poor Soldiers carry nothing with them
but unrewarded skars and wounds; all which things we did easily suffer before
he did betray us to the Barbarians, and by a new trade of conquest made us his
own Soldiers Slaves. He allows the apparel and discipline of the Persians,
and despises the manners of his own Country: and therefore we determined to
kill him, not as King of Macedon, but as King of Persia, and as a turn-coat to
be persecuted by the law of arms. He would have the Macedons kneel to him, and
worship him as a god. He refused Philip for his Father; and if any god had been
before Jupiter, he would have refused him likewise. Do you marvel if freemen
cannot bear this his pride? What can we hope for at his hands, seeing we must
either die as innocents, or else (what is worse than death) live and remain in
bondage as slaves? He is greatly in my debt, if by this proof he could amend,
for he may learn of me the thing that free hearts cannot endure. Spare them
whose age shall be sufficiently tormented with the loss of their children: but
upon as cause execution to be done, to the intent we may obtain by our own
death the liberty which we sought for by thine.

When Hermolaus had spoken these words, the King answered after this manner:

How false these things are, which he has learned of his Instructor, my
patience does declare. For notwithstanding he before confessed this Treason,
yet my mind was that you should hear what he could say, knowing very well,
that when I give liberty to this Villain to speak, that he would use the same
rage and fury in his discourse, which before moved him to have killed me whom
he ought to have loved as his father. Of late when he used a great presumption,
I commanded him to be chastised after the custom of our Country used by the
Kings of Macedon; which chastisement we must grant needful to be done, as the
pupils are chastised by their tutors, and wives by their husbands, and servants
by their masters. This was all the cruelty I used toward him, which he would
have revenged with murder and Treason. But how gentle I am to all that suffer
me to use mine own disposition, since you your selves do know it, it were
superfluous for me to rehearse. I cannot marvel at all, though punishment of
traitors be displeasant to Hermolaus, who is himself so great a traitor: when
he commends Parmenio and Philotas, it makes for his own purpose. I pardoned
Lyncestes: Alexander being accused by two witnesses, that he twice conspired
Treason against me; and being again convicted, yet deferred I his punishment
two years, till you your selves required he might have his desert. Touching
Attalus, you remember very well how he wrought Treason against me before I was
King: And for Clitus, I would he had not moved me to wrath, whose rash tongue
speaking the rebuke and shame both of me and you, I suffered longer than he
would have done me, speaking the like. The clemency of Kings and Princes
consists not only in their own disposition, but in theirs also who are under
their subjection; for the rigor of such as are Rulers is mitigated with
humility: But when men's minds are void of reverence, and high and low are
confounded all alike, then it is necessary with violence to expel violence. But
why do I marvel that he laid cruelty to my charge, that durst object against me
covetousness? I will not call you to witness one by one, lest I should upbraid
you with my liberality, by making declaration what I have bestowed upon you.
Behold the whole Army, who a little while ago had nothing else but this bare
Armor, do they not lie in silver Beds? are not their Tables charged with
Plate? and possess they not whole flocks of Slaves? They are not able to
sustain the spoils of their Enemies.

But it is said the Persians are honored of me, whom we have conquered. Truly
they are so, and yet what greater proof can there be of my moderation, than
that I do not reign proudly over such whom I have subdued? I came into Asia,
not utterly to subvert the Nations, nor make the one half of the world desert,
but to give the conquered cause not to repine at my Victory. This is the
occasion they gladly fight for you and for your Kingdom spend their blood; who,
if they were proudly used, would straight rebel against you. That possession is
durable which is kept by violence, but the thanks of a benefit received
endures everlastingly. If we purpose to enjoy Asia, and not to make a progress
only through it, we must make them partakers of our clemency, and then their
fidelity shall make our Empire stable and perpetual; and truly we have ^ow
more then we can well wish or desire. Covetousness is an unsatiable Disease,
especially when men desire to fill the vessel that runs over.

But you will say that I mingle their customs with ours. It is so; And why?
Because I see in many Nations many things which we need not be ashamed to
follow; and so great an Empire as we have got cannot otherwise be aptly
governed, except we deliver some things to them, and receive likewise some
things back from them again. One thing is to be laughed at, that I should
refuse Jupiter for my Father, being so acknowledged by his Oracle, as who
says, the answer of the gods were in my power. He proffered the name of his
son unto me, which was not a thing unseasonable for the Achievements I
intended. I would wish that the Indians could believe me to be a god; for the
success in War stands much by Fame; and that which is falsely believed,
sometime works the effect of things that are true. Do you note me given to
excess and prodigality, because I garnished your Armor with Gold and Silver? My
purpose was to show to men accustomed to such things, nothing to be more vile
then such kind of metal, and to declare that the Macedons (invincible in other
things) could not be overcome with Gold it self. After this manner I shall
blind the eyes of the barbarous, who are always wont at the first sight to
wonder at things, be they never so base and vile. And in that we show to make
no estimation of it, we shall declare to all men that we are not come for
desire of Gold nor Silver, but to subdue the whole world; from which glory thou
Traitor would have bereaved me, and betrayed the Macedons (I being slain) to
the barbarous Nations. I am exhorted to spare their Parents; Although it was
not expedient that they should know what I have determined of them, and to the
intent they might die with the greater grief, if they have any care or memory
of them; yet long ago I have forborne the custom of putting the innocent
Parents and kinsfolks of traitors to death with the offenders; and I now
profess to pardon them, and have them all in the same estimation I had before.
I know thou would have thy Master Calisthenes brought forth, who only
esteemed thee, being of his complexion, because thou desire to hear
pronounced from his mouth those railing words which even now thou did vomit
out against me: If he had been a Macedon born, I had brought him into the place
with thee, a worthy Master of such a Disciple; but being born in another
Country, he is subject to another law.

When he had spoken these words, he dismissed the Council, and commanded all
such as were condemned to be delivered to the Soldiers of their own Regiments;
who, because they would declare by some cruelty the love they bare toward
their Prince, slew them by all torments. Calisthenes also died upon the Rack,
innocent of the conspiracy against the Kings person, but a man not pliable to
the custom of the Court, and abhorring from the disposition of Flatterers.
There was never any thing that brought the Greeks into a greater indignation
against Alexander, then that he not only killed, but caused to be tormented to
death, and that without judgment, a man endued with godly Manners, and good
Sciences, and one by whom he was persuaded to live, when he purposed to have
died for sorrow that he had slain Clitus, for which his cruelty repentance
followed that came too late. But lest he might nourish idleness, apt for the
sowing of seditious rumors, he advanced toward India, always more glorious in
War than after his Victory.

The whole Country of India lies chiefly toward the East, containing more in
length than it does in breadth. The North parts are full of Mountains and Hills,
but all the rest of the land is plain, having many fair Rivers, which running
out of the Mount Caucasus, do pass pleasantly through the Country. Indus is
more cold than any other of the Rivers, whose water is not unlike the color of
the Sea. But of all the Rivers in the Orient, Ganges is most excellent, which
running from the South, passes directly through many great Mountains, until
that by the encountering with Rocks, his course is turned toward the East,
where it is received into the red Sea: The violence of the stream breaks down
his banks, swallowing trees, and much of the ground. In many places the stream
is kept in with the rocks on which it beats; but where the ground is more
soft, there the River becomes more large, and makes many Islands. The
greatness of Ganges is much increased by the River of Ac^sines, which both meet
before they enter into the Sea: at their meeting the water is violently
troubled, and whiles the one resists the others entry, neither of them seem
to give place to other. Diardnes is a River of the less Fame, because is
runs in the uttermost bounds of India: but yet it brings forth Crocodiles
as the Nile does; and also Dolphins, with Monsters unknown to other Nations.
Crooked Erimanthus, with his many turnings and reflections, is consumed by the
Inhabitants with watering their ground; which is the cause that when it draws
near the Sea* it becomes very little, and bears no name. There are many
other Rivers that divide the Country; but none of them are so famous as these,
because they do not run so far. The North-winde does blast and annoy those
parts most that are next unto the Sea: but those Winds are so broken with the
tops of the Mountains, that they cannot endamage the inward parts of the
Country; wherefore Fruits are very plentiful there, and perfect. But that
Region does so much differ from the ordinary course of time in other parts of
the world, that, when other Countries are burned most with the Sun, India is
covered over with Snow: And when other places are Frozen, the Heat is there
most intolerable; and yet there appears not any natural cause why it should
be so.

The color of the Indian Sea not differing much from the water of other Seas,
did take his name of King Erithrus, by reason whereof the ignorant Greeks took
opinion that the water of those Seas was red. The Land is very abundant of
Flax; whereof the greater part of their Garments are made. The twigs of the
Trees are so tender, that they receive the Prints of Letters like wax. The
Birds by teaching, counterfeit the voices of men. There are many Beasts which
are not bred among other Nations. Rhinocerots are there bred, but not brought
forth. The Elephants of that Country are stronger than those that are made
tame in Africa, and their highness does answer to their strength. The water of
the Rivers does carry down Gold, and run mildely without any great fall. The
Sea does cast upon the Shore both Pearls and precious Stones, whereof proceeded
the cause of their great Riches; for after their Merchandise was once known to
other Nations, the purgings of the Seas were highly esteemed, as the fancy of
man would make the price.

The dispositions of the men (as in all other places) are according to the
situation of the Countries they dwell in. They make their Garments of Linen
Cloth, which cover their bodies down to their feet. They bind Sandals under
their feet, and wear Rolls of Linen about their Heads. Such as are in any
Degree, either of Nobility or Riches, have precious Stones hanging at their
Ears, and they cover all their Arms with Bracelets and Ornaments of Gold. They
use great curiosity in Combing of their Heads, which they cut very seldom.
They shave without any form of gravity all parts of their Face, saving their
Chin. But the excess of voluptuoasness (which they call magnificence) used by
them, does exceed the vices of all Nations. When their will is to be seen
abroad, their servants carry about them Perfuming Pans of Silver, and fill all
the ways where they go with sweet Savors: they themselves are born in Litters
of Gold hanging with pearls, and the Garments they wear are of gold and purple
empaled together. The armed men follow their Litter, and such as are of their
Guard; among whom are Birds born upon boughs, which they teach always to sing,
when they are conversant in earnest matters.

In the Kings Palace are pillars of gold carved about with vines of gold,
wherein the Images of those Birds they delight in most are artificially
wrought. The Court is open to all comers. When the Kings do comb and dress
their heads, they use to give answer to the Ambassadors, and execute justice
upon their people. When their Sandals are taken off, their feet are anointed
with sweet odours. The greatest travel they take, is when they hunt wild
Beasts enclosed in Parks, which they strike whiles their Concubines are singing
and dallying with them: the Arrows they shoot are of two cubits long, which do
not the effect of the force they are shot withal, by reason of their weight,
which is an impediment to their swiftness, wherein the property of the Arrow
chiefly consists. In small journeys they use to ride on horseback: but when
they are to travel further, they are carried upon Elephants, whose huge bodies
are covered all over with gold. And because no vice should be wanting in their
corrupt manners, great numbers of Concubines do follow them in golden Litters.
The Queens have their companies separate by themselves, who in all excess of
voluptuousness are nothing inferior to the Kings. It belongs to the women
there to dress meat, and they also serve men with wine, whereof there is great
plenty among the Indians. When the King has largely drunk, and is fallen into
a sleep, his Concubines use to carry him into his Chamber, calling upon their
gods in a Hyn^^ after their Country manner.

Who would think that amongst all these vices there were any regard of virtue?
there are amongst them a rough kind of people, whom they call wise men, who
count it the most glorious thing to prevent their own death: and they use to
burn themselves while they are alive. It is imputed for a great shame to such
as either cannot well stir for age, or have not their perfect health, if they
prolong their life till their natural death approach: nor is there any honor
given to those bodies that die for age. They think the Fires to be defiled, if
the bodies be not alive that are burned in them. Such as live in Cities after a
civil manner, attain to the most knowledge of the motion of the Stars, and of
the prophecy of things to come; nor can they think that any man does shorten
his life, that looks for death without fear. They esteem those for gods whom
they begin once to worship, and especially trees; the violating of which, they
forbid upon pain of death. They number fifty days to the month, and
notwithstanding limit their years as they do in other places. They note not
their times by such course of the Moon, as is commonly used, that is, from the
full Moon, but from the first quarter, when she begins to be horned; and by
counting after the same manner, they make their accounts more uncertain. There
are many other things reported of them, with which I thought not necessary to
interrupt the order of this History.

As Alexander entered into India, the Princes of the Country addressed
themselves unto him, submiting themselves, and declaring that he was the third
man being begotten of Jupiter that came into their Country. They said that
Hercules and Bacchus were not known to them, but only by fame; but they
rejoiced that they might behold him present with their eyes. Alexander received
them with all the gentleness he could devise, and willed them to accompany him,
because he would use them as Guides in his Journey. But when he saw that the
whole Nation came not, he sent Perdicas and Ephestion with part of his Army
before, to subdue such as would not submit themselves; and willed them to go
forwards till they came to the River of Indus, and there to make Boats, in
which he might transport his Army: and because they had to pass many Rivers,
the Boats were so devised, that they might be taken asunder and carried in
Carts, and afterward joined together again. He appointed Craterus to follow
him with the Phalanx, and he with such Horsemen and Footmen as were light armed
marched before; and being Encountered on his way, he Fought a small Battle, and
drove his Enemies into the next City. When Craterus was come (to the intent he
might strike terror amongst those people that had not yet proved the Macedons
Force) he commanded that when they won the City, they should kill both man,
woman, and child, and burn the same to the ground; but as he was riding about
the Walls, he was hurt with an Arrow. Notwithstanding the City was won, and all
put to the Sword, the very houses not escaping the cruelty of the Conquerours.

After this, he subdued an obscure Nation, and came to a City called Nisa. It
chanced that whiles they encamped in a Wood before the City, there fell a cold
in the night which more afflicted the Macedons than ever it had done before in
any other place; against the which they prepared the remedy that was next at
hand, and cut down the Wood to make them great fires: the flame whereof took
hold of the Sepulchers belonging to the City, which by reason they were made of
Cedar, they were soon set on fire, and never left burning till they were all
consumed. The fire made both an Alarm in the City, and in the Camp; for the
Citizens thereby judged that their Enemies would make some attempt against
them; and the Macedons perceived by the barking of the Dogs, and the noise of
the men, that the Indians would salley out upon them.

Wherefore Alexander issuing out of his Camp in order to Battle, ^lew such as
attempted the Fight. Thereupon, they within the City became of diverse opinions;
some were minded to yield, and others thought good to adventure the extremity.
When Alexander understood of their division, he caused his men to abstain from
slaughter, and only to maintain the Siege. At length, they were so wearied with
the discommodities of the War, that they yielded themselves. They affirmed
their original to be from Bacchus, who indeed builded their City at the foot of
a Mountain called Meroe: the quality of which Mountain being reported to
Alexander by the Inhabitants, he sent Victuals before, and passed thither with
his whole Army, incamping upon the top thereof.

The Mountain grew full of Vines and Ivy, abounding with Springs that flowed
out in every place. The same was also plentiful of many kinds of Apples of most
pleasant taste: the ground also brought forth Corn without cultivation. There
grew plenty of Lawrel-trees, with many kinds of wild fruit. I cannot impute
it unto any motion of religion, but rather to plenty and wantonness, that
caused Alexander to repair thither: where, of the Ivy and the Vine-leaves were
made Garlands by the Soldiers, who ran up and down the Hills (after a
dissolute manner) all the hollows and valleys thereabout rebounding with the
voice of so many thousands of men, calling upon Bacchus, to whom that place was
dedicate: which license and liberty being begun of a few, was spread so
suddenly through the whole Army, that the Soldiers scattered abroad without
order, lay here and there reposing themselves upon the grass and leaves that
they had gathered together, as it had been a time of quiet and most assured
peace: which licentiousness of the Soldiers, rising by chance, Alexander did
not withstand, but ten days together made Feasts to Bacchus, during which time
he plentifully banqueted his whole Army. Who can therefore deny, but that
greatness of fame and glory, is oftentimes a benefit rather of fortune than of
virtue? for their Enemies had no heart to set upon them, whiles they were
drowned in this excess of banqueting, drunkenness, and sloth, but were as much
afraid of their drunkenness, as if they had heard their cry encounting with
them in Battle: which felicity preserving them here, did afterward defend them
after the same manner in the midst of their Enemies, returning as it were in
triumph from the Ocean Sea, when they were given all to feasting and to
drunkenness.

When Alexander descended from the Mountain, he went to a Country called
Dedala, which the inhabitants forsook, and fled to the Woods and wild
Mountains; and therefore he passed from thence into Acadera, which he found
both burned and abandoned likewise of the inhabitants, whereby of necessity he
was compelled to use the War after another manner. For he divided his Army into
diverse parts, and showed his power in many places at once. By which means he
oppressed them before they could provide for themselves, and subdued them to
their utter ruin. Ptolomeus took most Cities, but Alexander won the greatest,
and afterward joined again his Army together, which he had thus divided. That
done, he went forwards and passed a River called Choaspe, where he left Cenon
to besiege a rich City called Bezira, and he himself went to Mazage, where
Aassacanus being dead, had left the Dominion both of the Country and the City
to his Mother Cleophes. There were three hundred thousand Footmen to defend
that City, which was both well fortified and strong of situation, being
enclosed upon the East with a swift River, having steep Banks defending the
City, that it could not be approached on that side. Upon the South and the West
parts, nature (as it were for the once) had planted high Rocks lying betwixt
them, and deep hollows and pits made many hundred years before; where the Rocks
ceased, there began a Ditch of Wonderful depth and wideness. The Wall wherewith
the City was enclosed, was 35 Furlongs in compass; whereof the nether parts
were builded of stone, and the upper parts of clay; yet the stones were mixed
with the clay, to the intent that the frail substance clinging to the harder,
the one should bind the other: and lest the Earth washed upon with the rain
might fall all together, there were stanchings of Timber put betwixt to stay
the whole work, which, covered over with boards, was a way for men to go upon.

Alexander beholding this kind of fortification was uncertain what to do. For
he saw he could not approach to the Walls, but by filling of those Ditches and
hollow places; and that he could not otherwise fill them, than by making of a
Mount, which was the only way he had to bring his Engines to the Walls; but
whiles he was viewing the Town after that manner, he was struck from the wall
with an Arrow on the thigh, which he pulled out, and without wrapping of his
wound, he called for his horse, and let not for his hurt to give order for
such things as he thought expedient. But at length, when by hanging of his leg,
the blood drew from the wound and waxed cold, whereby his hurt began to pain
him, he then said he was called the son of Jupiter, but yet he felt in himself
the infirmities of a diseased body. Notwithstanding he would not return into
the Camp, before he had viewed what was necessary, and gave order for all
things he would have done. After the Soldiers had received their orders, by
plucking down of Houses without the Town, they got great plenty of stuff to
make the Mount withal; and by casting stocks of trees on heaps into the ditches
and hollow places, the Mount within nine days was raised up to the top of the
walls, and the Towers were planted upon the same; such was the labor and
diligence that the Soldiers used in this business. The King before his wound
was closed up, took the pains to see how the Works went forwards; and when he
perceived them in such height, he commended the Soldiers for their diligence,
and caused things to be brought to the walls; by reason of which, they that
defended the walls were sore afflicted with shot: and by reason they had not
seen any such kind of work before, they were wonderfully amazed, especially
when they beheld the towers of such bigness to come forwards, and yet could not
perceive by what means they were moved; they therefore judged it to be done by
the power of the gods. And besides, they could not think it a matter of man's
invention, that so great Darts and Spears as came among them, should be shot by
Engines. Despairing therefore of the defense of their City, they retired into
the Castle; and because they could not be satisfied any manner of way till they
had yielded themselves, they sent Ambassadors to the King to ask pardon; which
being obtained at his hand, the Queen with a great train of Noble women came
forth, bearing in their hands cups of gold full of Wine. The Queen presenting
her little Son before the Kings feet, not only obtained pardon, but also a
restorement to her former dignity. Therefore some thought that her beauty
procured her more favor than his mercy: but this is certain, that the Child
which afterward she brought forth (whosoever did beget it) was called
Alexander. From this place Polipercon was sent with a power to a City called
Nora, where he overthrew in Battle the inhabitants that encountered with him,
whereby he got the City to his possession.

There were many other Cities obscure of fame which came into Alexanders hands,
by the abandoning of the inhabitants, who assembled themselves together in
arms, and kept a Rock called Dori^is. The same was, that Hercules had besieged
this Rock beforetime in vain, and by reason of an Earthquake was enforced to
depart. When Alexander viewed this Rock, and saw how steep it was and
unpassable, he became void of counsel, till such time as an old man that knew
well the place, came to him with his two sons, offering for a reward to guide
his men by a way to the top of the Rock. Alexander promised them fourscore
Talents; and keeping one of his sons as a pledge, he sent him to perform what
he had promised.

Mullinus the Kings Secretary was appointed with certain Soldiers light armed,
to follow the Guide, whose purpose was to deceive the Indians, by fetching a
compass about the Rock; but this same Rock was not as the most part of Rocks
are, which lying asloap, have ways up unto the top by degrees; for it stood
upright after the fashion of a Butt, being broad beneath, and ever as it grew
upward, it grew less and less, till it became sharp in the top; and it was
enclosed on the one side with the River of Indus, having high and steep banks,
and upon the other side with deep ditches and hollow places, full of water and
mud. Wherefore there could be devised no way to win it, except those ditches
were first filled. There was a Wood at hand, which the King commanded to be cut
down; and causing the boughs to be shred off for the carriage, they filled the
hollows with the bare stocks. Alexander bare the first tree, and all the
Soldiers followed with a courageous shout: for there was no man that would
refuse to do that which they saw the King begin, so that within seven days the
ditches and hollow places were filled up. Then the King appointed the Agrians
and the Archers to go to the Assault, and did choose thirty young men of such as
he judged most apt for the purpose, out of his own Band, appointing Charus and
one Alexander to be their Conductors, and exhorted Alexander that the
remembrance of his Name might make him hardy.

At the first, because the hazard was so manifest^, the King was not determined
to adventure his own person; but when the Trumpet blew to the Assault, he was
of such a ready courage, that he could not abstain, but making a sign to his
Guard that they should follow him, he was the first that set foot upon the
Rock. There were few contented to ^arry behind, but many left their array
where they stood in order of Battle, and followed the King. The chance of those
was miserable whom the running River swallowed in, when they fell down from the
Rock: which sight was sorrowful to such as were out of danger, being admonished
by the peril of others, what they ought to fear themselves; hereupon their
compassion being turned into fear, they lamented as well themselves, as those
whom they saw die before their faces. At length, they advanced so far, that
without getting of the Rock they could not retire back again without apparent
destruction. For their Enemies rolled down great stones upon them, wherewith
they were easily beaten down, by reason the Rock had so slippery and unstable
standing. Yet for all that, Charus and Alexander, who were appointed to the
leading of the thirty chosen Soldiers, had gotten to the top of the Rock, and
began to fight hand to hand. But there was so many Darts cast at them from
afar, that they received more wounds than they could give: wherefore Alexander
both mindful of his name and of his promise, whiles he fought more eagerly than
warily, was enclosed about and slain. Whom when Charus saw dead, he ran upon
his Enemies; and unmindful of all things, saving of revenge, he slew many with
his Pike, and diverse with his Sword. But being laid at by so many at once, he
fell down dead upon the body of his Friend. The death of these two so hardy
young men, and of the rest, moved Alexander greatly; yet perceiving no remedy,
he caused the Retreat to be sounded. It was greatly for their safeguard, that
they ret^ed by little and little without appearance of any fear. And the
Indians contented to have repulsed their Enemies, pursued not after them.
Alexander hereupon was determined to leave off his purpose, seeing he saw no
hope how to win the rock: yet he made a countenance as though he meant to
continue the Siege still. For he both caused the ways to be closed up, and
made an approach with towers of wood, always putting fresh men in the place of
them that were wearied.

When the Indians perceived Alexanders obstinacy, two days and two nights they
banqueted continually, and played upon timbrels, after this manner to cause
their Enemies to think they had no doubt in the Siege, but trusted certainly to
prevail. The third night the noise of the timbrel ceased, and many torches were
seen burning, that the Indians had lighted to see which way they might escape
down the Rock in the dark of the night. Alexander sent Balachrus to discover
the Event, who found that the Indians were fled, and that the Rock was
abandoned. Then a sign was given that the whole ^^my should give a shout
together, whereby they did strike such fear amongst their Enemies flying
without order, that many of them thinking the Macedons at their backs, leaped
down the Rocks, and slew themselves; whereof some ma^med in their falling, were
left behind their fellows that fled away.

Thus the King being Conqueror of the place rather than of the men, testified
notwithstanding, with solemn sacrifice to the gods, a greatness or victory, and
set up Altars on the rock to Minerva and Victoria. And though the Guides that
he appointed to his light armed men, performed not so much as they promised;
yet their reward was truly given them. And the rule of the Rock, with the
Country thereabouts, was committed to Sisocostus, he himself going forwards
with his Army from thence to Ech^lima.

Alexander understanding that certain straights through the which he should
pass, were kept by one Erix with twenty thousand armed men, he committed that
part of his Army that were heavy laden to Cenon, to be brought on by soft
journeys; and going before in person with the Slingers and Archers, he put his
Enemies to flight, making the way clear for his Army to pass that followed
after. The Indians, whether it were for the hatred they did bear unto their
Captain, or else to get the favor of the Conqueror, killed Erix as he fled
away, and brought his head and his armor unto Alexander. He considering the
foulness of the act, would not honor the doers for their example sake, nor
punish them because they served his purpose.

From thence by sixteen encampings he came to that part of the River called
Indus, where Ephestion had prepared all things in such sort as he had
commission. One Omphis was King of that Country, who before had persuaded his
Father to submit himself unto Alexander, and immediately upon his Fathers death
sent Ambassadors unto him to know his pleasure, whether he should take upon him
as a King before his coming, or else live privately in the mean season: And
although he was permitted to govern as a King, yet he would not use the
authority granted him until the King came. He had caused Ephestion to be
received in the best sort he could devise, but notwithstanding he had not
visited him, because he would not commit his person to any man's fidelity, but
to the Kings.

When he understood of Alexanders coming, he went toward him with his whole
Power, whose Elephants by small distances mixed in Battle amongst his Footmen,
showed afar off like Castles. At the first Alexander did not take him a Friend,
but as an Enemy; and therefore set his Men in order of Battle, and his Horsemen
in wings in readiness to Fight. When Omphis understood the error of the
Macedons, he commanded his men to stay, and putting his spurs to his Horse, he
rode forwards alone: Alexander did the like, not questioning whether he were a
Friend or an Enemy, but thought himself secure, either through his own manhood,
or the others fidelity. Their meeting, as it appeared by their countenances,
was very friendly; but for want of an Interpreter they could not speak
together: therefore after they had called one unto them, the Indian King
declared unto Alexander, that the cause he met him with an Army, was to put
immediately his whole power into his hands; and tarried not to entreat for any
assurance by Messengers, but upon trust only had committed both his Person and
his Kingdom to him, whom he knew to make War for the winning of Glory and Fame;
and therefore could not fear in him any perfidiousness.

Alexander rejoiced to see his simplicity, and proffered him his right hand as
a pledge of his promise, and restored unto him again his Kingdom. He presented
unto Alexander fifty and six Elephants, with many other Beasts of exceeding
greatness, and three thousand Bulls, which is a Cattle of great value in those
Countries, and m^^h esteemed by Kings. Alexander enquired of (...) whether he
had under his Dominion more Soldiers, (...) of the ground* He answered, that
he was driven of necessity to have more Soldiers, because he was at War with
two Kings, whose Kingdoms lay beyond the River of Hydaspis; their names were
Abiasares, and Porus, but the authority remained in Porus. He said, that he was
prepared and resolved to adventure the hazard of the Battle with such of them
as should invade him first. Hereupon Alexander granted unto Omphis both to take
upon him the Diadem, and the name of his Father, that was called Taxiles; the
custom of the Country being such, that the Name ever followed the Kingdom,
whosoever enjoyed it.

When he had received Alexander honorably in hospitality three days, the
fourth day he declared how much Corn he had delivered to Ephestion, and to his
Army; presenting to the King, and to all his Friends, Crowns of Gold, and
besides of Coined Silver fourscore talents. Alexander rejoiced so much in his
good will, that he both returned again to him his Gifts, and gave him besides a
thousand Talents of the spoil he brought with him, with much Plate of gold and
silver, many garments after the Persian manner, and thirty of his own Horses,
with the same furniture they did wear when he did ride upon them; which
liberality, as it obliged Omphis, so it greatly offended the mind of the
Macedons. For Meleager at Supper when he had well drunk, said, He was very glad
that Alexander had yet found one in India, whom he judged worthy to receive the
Gift of a thousand Talents. The King bearing in mind how much he had repented
the slaying of Clitus for the rashness of his tongue, refrained his anger; but
yet told him, That envious men were ever Tormentors to themselves.

The next day the Ambassadors of King Abiasares came unto Alexander, who
according to their Commission offered all things unto his will: whereupon
assurance being confirmed, they returned again to their Master. Alexander
therefore thinking that through the greatness of his name, Porus might be
brought to do the like, sent Cleochares to him to demand tribute, and to summon
him to come and do homage, when he should enter the bounds of his Kingdom.
Porus made answer, That of those two requests he would perform one, which was,
to meet him at the entry of his Kingdom, but that should be in Arms, and with a
Power. Alexander therefore being determined to pass the River of Hydaspis,
Burzantes that had been Author of the Rebellion amongst the Arachosians, was
taken, and brought to him bound, with thirty Elephants; an apt. assistance
against the Indians, that are wont to put more trust in those beasts than in
the trust of their own Nation. Gamaxus, King of a small portion o^ India, which
had confederated with Barzantes, was brought likewise bound unto him. Wherefore
committing them both to prison, and the Elephants to Omphis, he came unto the
River of Hydaspis. But Porus lay encamped on the further side to hinder his
passage, having fourscore and ^ive Elephants of huge strength o^ body, three
hundred Wagons of War, thirty thousand ^ootmen, amongst whom, there were many
Archers, whose shaf^s (as has been said before) were more heavy than they
could wield. Porus himself did ride upon an Elephant greater than all the rest;
who also being of a big stature, appeared notable in his Armor that was
garnished with gold and silver, having also a courage equal to the strength of
his body, and so great a wisdom as was possible to be found amongst so rude a
Nation.

The Macedons were not so much afraid with the sight of their Enemies, as they
were with the greatness of the River they had to pass, which being four
Furlongs in breadth, and so deep that no footing could be found, appeared to
them like a great Sea; and yet the largeness thereof nothing mitigated the
violence of the stream, but it ran with no less ^ury than if it had been
narrow, appearing by the repercussion of the water in many places, to be full
of great stones in the bottom.

This River being sufficient to affright them of it self, the sight of the
further bank, full of Horse and Men; was an increase to their terror; where
the Elephants that had bodies of an unreasonable greatness stood in their
sight, being provoked to bray of purpose, to the intent that with their
terrible noise they should fill their Enemies ears with fear. Though the
Macedons were courageous, and their hearts full of good hope, as they who
oftentim^s had experience of their own acts, yet their Enemies and the River
both together, made them wonderfully amazed; for they could not think how to
keep a steadfast course to the further shore in so weak and uncertain Boats; nor
when they were there, could they see how to arrive with success.

There were many Islands in the midst of the River, into the which both the
Indians and the Macedons did swim, holding their weapons above their heads:
Th^re they skirmished together in the sight of both Kings, who by experience of
this small bickering, made trial of the success of the Battle to come.

But amongst the Macedons there were two noble young men, called Sisimachus and
Nicanor, excelling in courage, and in hardy attempts; and through their
continual good fortune, had got a resolution to despise all peril. Other young
men took them for their Captains, and without any other armor saving their
Pikes, swom over into an Island which was full of their Enemies, where through
their boldness only, they slew many of them, and so might have returned with
glory, if rashness (where it finds prosperous success) could ever be content
with measure: But while with scorn and pride they tarried for their Enemies,
they were suddenly enclosed by such as did swim over the River, and were killed
with Darts, which they cast at them from afar. Such as escaped their Enemies,
were drowned in depth of water, or eddies of the stream.

This fight put Porus in great courage, who saw all their doings from the
further shore: And though Alexander was long uncertain what way to take, yet at
length he deceived his Enemies by this policy. There was an Island in the River
greater than the rest, and apt to hide his design, by reason it was full of
Wood, and had a great ^ampi^r cast upon that bank which was toward his
Enemies, there both his Footmen and Hosemen might stand covered from the sight
of the Indians; and the rather to turn their eyes another way from looking
toward the Island, he caused Ptolomy with a great number of Horsemen to show
themselves against their Enemies far off from the Island, and to put the
Indians in fear of them, making ever a show as though they would swim over the
River; which thing Ptolomy did many days together, to the intent that Porus
should be enforced to remove his Army to that part to withstand him, and
thereby brought them out of sight of the Island. Alexander also caused his own
Pavilion to be set upon the Rivers side over against his Enemies, and all the
pomp that pertained to the state of a King to be set forth within their view,
with his Lifeguard standing in sight, the same which was wont to attend his
person: Furthermore, Attalus, who was equal with Alexander in years, and like
unto him both in face and personage, stood there openly apparelled like the
King, that it might appear to Porus, that Alexander was still remaining there,
and went not about to pass the River.

The execution of this design was first let by a tempest, whereby
afterward it was furthered, and brought to good effect; fortune ever using to
turn her discommodities into good success toward him. For when the Enemies
were thus attent to observe Ptolomy who lay upon the river against him, and
Alexander with the rest of his Army was busy about the passing of his men into
the Island before mentioned, there fell suddenly a great storm, scarcely
tolerable to such as lay within their Cabines* which so much afflicted the
Soldiers abroad, that they forsook their Boats, and fled again to land. And
yet for all this, their busling and noise was not heard of their Enemies,
through the vehemence of the shower.

As this Tempest began suddenly, so it suddenly ceased* but the clouds remained
so dark, that there appeared not so much light as the Soldiers might know one
another by the face, when they spoke together; which darkness might have feared
some other men, considering that they had to row in a River that they knew not,
their Enemies (peradventure) waiting for them at their landing, whither they
went as blind men that for glory fought in peril. But Alexander used that
which put other men in terror, to serve for his desire, and willed that every
man (upon a sign given) should enter into their Boats with silence: his Boat
was the first that lanched from the shore, toward the further side of his
Enemies, Porus only keeping his Watch against Ptolomy. There was but one Boat
that stuck fast by the way upon a Rock, and all the other recovered the land.

Alexander then commanded the Soldiers to prepare their armor and fall into
array; and whilst he was dividing his men, to put them in order of Battle, and
to march toward his Enemies, it was reported to Porus, that a great number of
men of War were come over the River, and landed, which would straightway give
him Battle. But he, at the first (according to the fault that is in man's nature
through overmuch confidence in himself) believed it not, but thought that
Abiasares, who was confederate with him, had come to his assistance. Yet when
the day appeared, and the truth was manifest, Porus put forth a hundred armed
Wagons, and four thousand Horsemen, under the leading of Hagis his brother, to
keep Alexander in action.

They counted those Wagons their principal Force; for every one of them
carried six men, two Archers, two with Targets, and two that ruled the Horses,
which were not unarmed; but when it came to the Fight, they let their reins
loose, and bestowed their Darts among their Enemies. But the use of those
Wagons served to small purpose; for the shower that had fallen more violently
than was accustomed, had made the fields wet and slabby, that the Wagons could
not stir, but stuck in the mire, and became immovable; whereas Alexander being
without baggage, or any thing that might be an impediment unto him, fiercely
invaded his Enemies.

The Scythians and the Dahans were the first that gave the onset, and Perdicas
was appointed with the Horsemen to charge upon the right-hand-Battel of the
Indians. Then the Battles beginning to join on all parts, they that had the
charge of the Wagons, counting them their last refuge, let loose the reins,
and rushed forward into the midst of the Fight.

The coming of these Wagons appeared to be a matter doubtful and dangerous to
both Parties; for at the first brunt the Macedons were born over and overthrown
by them; and when the Wagons came in any rough or miry place, the Indians were
thrown out of them. For when the Horses that drew them were once galled, and
put in fear, they carried the Wagons without government, and tumbled part of
them in the mire, and part into the River: a few traversed the fields, and fled
for succor unto Porus, who seeing his Wagons scattered all over the Fields,
and to wander about with their Rulers, he distributed the charge of his
Elephants amongst his Friends, and placed his Footmen and Archers behind them.

He had many that sounded upon Timbrels (being Instruments that the Indians
used in the stead of Trumpets) wherewith their Ears were so filled, that the
noise of their Enemies little moved them. They did bear also the Image of
Hercules in the front of their Foot-battel; which was done for an encouragement
for them to fight well, and for a note of reproof and scandal to them that
should ^ly from their Standard; for it was loss of life to leave it in the
Field: So that the fear they conceived of Hercules, who sometimes had been
their Enemy, was then turned into a Veneration and Religion.

The sight, both of the Elephants, and Porus himself, astonished the Macedons,
and caused them a while to make a stand; for the beasts being set in order
amongst the armed men, showed afar off like high Towers; and Porus himself
exceeding the stature of most men, the Elephant whereupon he did ride was an
addition unto his height, which excelled so much all the other Elephants, as he
himself excelled the rest of men: So that Alexander beholding both Porus and
his power, said, That at length he had found a Jewel equal unto his heart; for
we have to do (quoth he) both with terrible Beasts, and with notable Men of
War: And thereupon he looked toward Cenon, and said unto him:

When I with Ptolomy, Perdicas, and Ephestion, shall set upon the left Battle
of our Enemies, and you shall see us in the heat of fight, do you then set
forwards my right Battle, and freshly assail them when you see them begin to
fall out of order. Antigonus, Leonatus, and Tauron, do you bend against their
Main Battle, and set upon the Front: Our Pikes are long and strong, and cannot
serve to any better use, then against the Elephants, wherewith they may be
thrust through, and such overthrown as are carried upon their backs: The
Elephants are but an uncertain force, which use to do most harm unto their own
part* for as they use to go against their Enemies so long as they are at
command; so when they are once put in fear, they turn against their own men,
and show most rage toward them.

He had not so soon spoken these words, but he put Spurs to his Horse,
advancing against his Enemies* and when, according to his appointment, he had
given the Charge, Cenon with a great Force brake upon the left Battle; and the
Phalanx, at the same instant, brake in amongst the midst of their Enemies. When
Porus saw the Horsemen give the Charge, he put forwards his Elephants to
encounter them; but they being slow Beasts, and not apt suddenly to move, were
prevented by the swiftness of the Horses: and their Bows stood them not in any
great stead, for by reason their Arrows were so long and heavy, they could not
nock them on their Bows, except they first staid their Bows upon the ground;
and the ground was so slippery, that they could not have any perfect footing;
and while they were preparing themselves to shoot, their Enemies were come
amongst them.

Then every man fled from the order that Porus had given, as it chances
oftentimes amongst troubled minds, where Fear bears more rule then the
Captains appointment; for in so many parts as their Army was divided, so many
Generals became among them. Some would join all their Battles in one, others
would have them divided; some willed to stay, and others to go forwards, and
enclose their Enemies about; there was no general consultation amongst them.
Porus notwithstanding, accompanied with a few, with whom shame prevailed more
then fear, assembled such of his Forces together as were dispersed abroad, and
advanced against his Enemies, setting his Elephants in the front of the Battle.
They put the Macedons in fear, troubling, with their unwonted cry, not only the
Horse that naturally do fear them, but also amazed the men, and disturbed their
order; insomuch, that they who a little before thought themselves Victors,
looked about which way to fly and save themselves: which when Alexander
perceived, he sent against the Elephants the Agrians and Thracians, who were
men light armed, and more apt to skirmish afar off, then to fight hand to hand.
They bravely assaulted the Elephants and their Governors, and sore afflicted
them with the multitude of their Darts and Arrows that they bestowed amongst
them; and the Phalanx came constantly forwards against them who were already in
fear; but such as pressed over-forward in fighting with the Elephants, procured
their manifest destruction; and being trampled to death with their feet, they
were an example to others, not to be overhasty in adventuring themselves: The
most terrible sight was, when the Elephants with their long Trunks, called
Proboscis, took the Macedons in their Armor from the ground, and delivered
them up to their Governors.

The Battle was prolonged doubtfully till the day was far spent, the Soldiers
sometimes flying from the Elephants, and sometimes pursuing after them, until
that with a certain kind of crooked weapons, called Copidae (prepared for the
purpose) they cut the Elephants upon the legs: These the Macedons had right
aptly divided; for not only the fear of death, but also the fear of a new kind
of torment in death, caused them to leave nothing unattempted. Finally, the
Elephants wearied with wounds, with their violent struggling, did cast their
Governors to the earth, and did tear them in pieces; for they were put in such
fear, that they were no more hurtful to their Enemies, but driven out of the
Battle like sheep.

Porus being forsaken of the greater part of his men, ceased not to cast Darts,
whereof he had plenty prepared upon his Elephant, amongst them that surrounded
him, whereby he wounded many; and by reason he lay open to every man's blow, he
was laid at on all parts, till he received nine wounds behind and before;
through which he bled so much, that he had no power to cast any more Darts, but
for feebleness, they fell out of his hands. The Elephant also which he did ride
upon, pricked forwards with fury, made a great disturbance amongst the
Macedons, until that his Governor seeing the King so faint, that he let fall
his Darts, and to be almost past his remembrance, stirred the Beast to fly
away, whom Alexander followed with all the speed h^ could: But his Horse being
thrust through with many wounds, fell down dead under him; wherefore while he
was about to change, and take another, he was cast far behind.

In the mean season, the Brother of Taxiles that was sent by Alexander unto
Porus, began to exhort him that he should not be so obstinate to prove the
extremity, but rather yield himself unto the Conqueror: But he,
notwithstanding that his strength was almost decayed, and his blood failed; yet
stirred up at a known voice, he said, That he knew him to be the Brother of
Taxiles, a Traitor to his King and his Country; and with that word took a Dart,
which by chance was not fallen from him, and threw it so at Taxiles Brother,
that it passed through the midst of his Breast into his Back; and having showed
this last proof of his Manhood, he fled again more fast then before: But when
the Elephant, through many wounds that he had received, fainted in like sort,
then he stayed, and turned his Footmen toward his Enemies that pursued him.

By that time Alexander was come near unto him; who understanding the obstinacy
of Porus, willed none to be spared that made resistance: whereupon every man
threw their Darts against Porus, and the Footmen that stood in his defense,
insomuch that at length he was so oppressed, that he began to fall from his
Elephant. Then the Indian who was his Governor, thinking that Porus desired to
have alighted, caused the Beast, after his accustomed manner, to b^nd toward
the earth, who submitting himself, all the rest, as they were taught, bowed
down their bodies likewise; which was the cause of Porus taking, and of the
rest. When Alexander saw Porus on the ground, he caused him to be spoiled,
thinking he had been dead, and diverse ran about him to pull off his Armor and
his Vesture; which thing when the Elephant saw, he began to defend his Master,
running upon the Spoilers, and endeavored to lift him up again upon his back:
whereupon, they all setting upon the Elephant, slew him, and laid Porus in a
Cart; whom when Alexander did behold to lift up his eyes, he being moved with
no hatred, but with compassion, said unto him:

What fury possessed thee, hearing the Fame of mine Acts, to hazard the Battle
with me and my Power, seeing Taxilis was so near an example of the Clemency
that I use to such as submit themselves? To whom he made this answer:

Forasmuch as I am demanded a Question, I will answer as freely as I am spoken
unto: Knowing mine own strength, and not having proved thine, I thought no man
of greater Power then my self; but now the success of this Battle has declared
thee to be the Mightier: and yet therein I do impute to my self no little
felicity, that I have won the second place, and am next unto thee

He was asked moreover his Opinion, after what manner he thought good the
Victory should be used? Use it (quoth he) after such sort as this days fortune
shall suggest unto thee, wherein there has been sufficient proof showed how
transitory is the felicity of man.

This Admonishment availed him more then if he had submitted himself, or made
suit for his life: For when Alexander saw the greatness of his courage, and his
heart so void of fear that it could not be broken with any adversity, he was
moved not only to give him his life, but also honorably to entertain him; for
as long as he lay diseased of his wounds, he took no less care for the curing
of them, then if he had fought in his quarrel; and when he was once healed
(contrary to that which all men looked for) he received him amongst the number
of his friends, and enlarged his Kingdom greater then it was before. There was
nothing in Alexanders nature more perfect, or more constant, then that he would
ever have Virtue in admiration, when it was such that it deserved true praise
and glory, especially when he saw the same in his Enemy: But when it was found
in any of his own men, it was somewhat cross unto him, thinking that their fame
might be a destruction to his own greatness, which he ever thought to grow
greater, as they were of greatness whom he subdued.

THE NINTH BOOK OF QVINTVS CVRTIVS.
Of the Acts of Alexander the Great, King of Macedon.
ALexander rejoicing in this so Noble a Victory, whereby he saw the Confines of
the Orient opened unto him, offered up Sacrifice to the Sun; and to cause his
Soldiers to be more willing to go forwards in finishing the rest of the Wars,
he assembled them together, and (after he had commended their doings) he
declared how in the last Battle they had defeated and broken the force of the
Indians Power, and should find from thenceforth nothing but a plentiful prey:
For he said, that in the Country whereunto he was going, the riches chiefly
remained which were so much spoken of throughout the world, in respect whereof
the spoils of the Persians were but trifles; and that occasion was now given
them, not only to fill their own houses, but also Macedonia and Greece with
Pearls, with precious stones, with Gold, and with Ivory. The Soldiers being
desirous both of Riches and Glory, because they had never found his words vain,
promised him to do whatsoever he would have them: Whereupon he dismissed them,
full of good hope, and set them about the making of Ships; to the intent, that
having overcome all Asia, he might visit the Ocean Sea that was in the end of
all the world. The Mountains, next at hand, were plentiful of Timber to make
Ships withal, in cutting down whereof, the Macedons found Serpents of such
bigness, as they had not seen before; and also Rhinocerotes, Beasts that be
seldom found in any other place; which name was given to them by the Greeks,
for in the Indian Language they are otherwise called. Alexander builded a City
upon either side of the River Hydaspis; which once performed, he gave to every
one of his Captains a Crown of Gold, and a thousand pieces of Gold besides;
preferring and rewarding every one according to their quality, degree and
deserving.

Abiasares, who had sent Ambassadors unto Alexander before the Battle fought
with Porus, did send Ambassadors to him now again, offering to do all things
that he would appoint, so that he might preserve his body at liberty; for he
desired not to live, except he might remain a King; and he thought himself
unfit to Reign, after he had once been a Captive. He returned answer to
Abiasares, That if his coming should be grievous, he would not stick to visit
him in Prison. Having thus vanquished Porus, and passed the River of Hydaspis,
he marched forwards into the inner-parts of India, which was a Country full of
great Woods, and high Trees, the Air very wholesome and temperate, the shadow
of the Trees mitigating the heat of the Sun, and the plenty of Springs keeping
the ground moist; there were also many Serpents seen, whose Scales glistered
like gold: There was nothing more dangerous then the poison proceeding from
them; for immediately upon the stinging, death followed, until such time as the
Inhabitants of the Country showed a remedy. From thence, through Deserts, they
came unto the great River Hidraores, whereunto there joined a great Wood, which
having such Trees as are not wont to be seen in other places, was also full of
wild Peacocks. Alexander removing his Camp from thence, took a Town by
assault; and taking Hostages, appointed them to pay Tribute.

After that he came to a great City (builded after the manner of that Country)
which was both well walled, and also environed about with a deep Moat: The
Inhabitants came forth against Alexander, and joining their Chariots together
in a front (wherein their Custom was to fight) they proffered him Battle: Some
used Darts, some Spears, and other Pole-axes, and with great agility leaped to
and from their Chariots, when either they found an advantage to invade their
Enemies, or else would rescue their Fellows that were in distress. This
unwonted kind of fighting put the Macedons at the first in a fear, especially
being hurt afar off by their Enemies, and not able to come to fight with them
hand to hand. But after they had considered their disordered manner, they
esteemed not their force, but enclosed their Enemies about, and thrust their
horses in with pikes; and the sooner to defeat them, they cut the Traces
wherewith the Chariots were tied, to separate them asunder. When they had after
that manner lost eight hundred of their men, they fled again into the City,
which the next day the Macedons did win by assault: Some there were that saved
themselves by flying, who seeing the City lost, swam over the water, and filled
all the Towns thereabout with fear: They declared of what invincible force
their Enemies were, judging them, in respect of their power, rather to be gods
then mortal men.

When Alexander had gotten that City, he sent Perdicas, with a part of his
Army, to destroy the Country, and committing another part to Eumenes for the
subduing of such as would not submit, he, with the rest of his power, came unto
a strong City, to which many of the Inhabitants of the Country fled:
Notwithstanding that they sent to Alexander for peace, yet they prepared
nevertheless for the war, by reason of a Sedition which rose amongst them,
which made them to be of diverse Opinions; some would rather have endured any
extremity then yield, and others thought they were not able to make resistance;
and whilst they differed so in Opinions, and had no common consultation
amongst themselves, such as held Opinion to yield up the City, opened the
Gates, and received in their Enemies: And notwithstanding that Alexander had
just cause of displeasure against the contrary Faction, yet he pardoned them
all, and receiving their Hostages, removed toward the next City. When the
Indians, that stood upon the walls, beheld the Hostages that were brought
before the Army, and perceived them to be of the same Nation, they desired
communication with them, who declaring both the Kings Clemency and his Force,
it did move them to deliver up their City; whose example the rest of the Cities
did follow.

From thence he came into the Kingdom of the Sophites, who are a Nation as the
Indians think most excelling in wisdom, best governed, and who have the most
civil Conversations amongst them. The Children that are there begotten, are not
nourished and brought up according to the will of their Parents, but by the
order of such who have the charge committed unto them to view the state of the
Infants: If they perceive any not apt to become active, or else wanting any of
their limbs, they cause them straightways to be killed. They use to Marry
without respect of Kindred they come of, or greatness of Parentage, making no
choice but in the shape of the body, which is the thing only esteemed amongst
them. The King himself was in the Chief City of that Country, against which
Alexander brought his power: The Gates were shut, and no man appeared in Arms
upon the walls to make any defense; wherefore he stood in doubt a great while,
whether the City was abandoned, or whether the Inhabitants had kept themselves
secret for some policy. While he remained in that expectation, suddenly the
Gate was opened, and the King (who in goodliness of person excelled all the
rest) came forth with his two Sons: He did wear a garment of gold, and Purple
impaled, that covered the Calf of his leg; the Sandals he did wear on his feet
were set with precious stones: All his arms were garnished with Pearls, and he
had hanging at his ears two precious stones, which were excellent both for
bigness and brightness: he had in his hand a Scepter of gold, set with precious
stones, called Berilli, which (after his salutation made) with humble
submission he delivered unto Alexander, yielding both himself, his Children,
and his Kingdom into his hands.

There were in that Country notable Dogs for the hunting of wild Beasts, but
above all, most eager on the Lion; the King therefore, to show their force and
quality unto Alexander, put four of them to a great Lion, who straightway took
hold of him: Then one who was accustomed to that Office, took one of those Dogs
by the Leg to pluck him off from the Lion; and because he would not lose his
hold, he cut off his Leg with a Sword: but when the Dog hung nevertheless upon
the Lion, he was cut in sunder by pieces, till such time as he died, having his
teeth still fastened in the Lions flesh; such an eagerness had Nature wrought
in those Creatures, as it is committed unto memory. In the compiling of this
History, sometimes I am enforced to write things that I can scarcely believe;
for I neither dare affirm the things whereof I doubt, nor conceal such things
as I have received for truth. Alexander leaving this King within his own
Kingdom, came unto the River of Hydaspis, and there joined with Ephestion, who
had subdued the Country thereabouts. One Phegelas was King of the next Nation,
who commanding his Subjects to continue the tilling of the ground as they were
wont to do, met Alexander with rich Presents, refusing nothing that was
commanded him.

When he had tarried with him two days, and was determined the third day to
have passed the River, he found therein great difficulty, by reason that the
stream was so large, and full of great stones: He stayed therefore a while to
be more fully advertised of the state of those Countries, and of all such
things as were necessary for him to know. He understood by Phegelas, how beyond
that River there lay a Desert of ten days journey, and next to that Desert the
River of Ganges, which was the greatest River in all the Orient: He declared to
him, that beyond Ganges there inhabited two Nations, called Gangaridans and
Pharasians, whose King was called Aggramenes, who used to come to the Field
with twenty thousand Horsemen, two hundred thousand Footmen, two thousand armed
Wagons, and three thousand Elephants, which were counted of all to be the
greatest terror. These things seemed incredible unto Alexander; and therefore
he inquired of Porus, if the things were true that had been told him. He
confirmed Phegelas report concerning the force of the Nation, but he said their
King was not descended of Noble Blood, but of the basest of men, his Father
being a Barber, who with great pain did get his daily bread, until he came in
favor with the Queen, who preferred him to the King her Husband, who was
afterward slain by his Treason: Then he, under a pretense to become Tutor unto
the Children, usurped the Kingdom to himself, and putting the Children to
death, did beget him that was now King, being in hatred and disgrace with the
people, as one that followed more the manners of his Fathers former Estate,
then such as did be seem the Dignity of a Prince.

When Alexander heard Porus affirm this, he was in great trouble of mind, not
that he regarded the multitude of his Enemies, or the force of their Elephants,
but the greatness of the Rivers, and the situation of the Country, so
difficult to enter. He thought it a hand Enterprise, to seek out Nations so far
inhabiting the uttermost bounds of the World: Yet on the other side, the
greediness of glory, and the unsatiable desire of Fame, made no place seem too
far, nor any Adventure to be over-hard: He doubted also that the Macedons, who
had passed so many Countries, and were grown old in war, would not be content
to follow him over so many Rivers, and against so many difficulties of Nature
lying in their way: For he judged, that since they abounded, and were laden so
with Spoil, they would rather seek to enjoy such things as they had got, then
to travel any further to purchase more. He could not think the same desire to
be in his Soldiers that was in himself: for he compassed in his mind how to
get the Empire of the whole world, into which he had but yet made his entry;
whereas they, wearied with travel, and thinking to have past all peril, looked
to enjoy with speed the fruit of all their labor: Yet for all that, his desire
at last overcame his Reason; so that assembling his Army together, he spoke
unto them after this manner:

I am not ignorant (my Soldiers) how that there are now many rumors spread
amongst you by the Indians, purposely to bring you in fear; but the vanity of
their lying is not so new a thing, that it is able any more to deceive you. The
Persians, after that manner, would have made the Streights of Cilicia, and the
Plains of Mesopotamia terrible unto you; yea, and put you in fear of the Rivers
of Tygris and Euphrates; and yet we waded over one of them, and passed the
other by a Bridge. Fame never reports things truly, but makes them to be
greater then indeed they are: Even our Glory, though it be grown to a certain
perfection, yet it is more in Fame then in effect. Which of you of late did
think that you should have been able to endure the Elephants, showing afar off
like Castles? Who thought I could have passed the River of Hydaspis, when it
was reported to be much greater then it was? We should long ago (my Soldiers)
have fled out of Asia, if Tales could have caused us to turn our backs. Think
you that the Flocks of Elephants to be greater then the Herds of Beasts you
have seen in other places, seeing they are so rare in the world, so strange to
be taken, and so much difficulty in the making of them tame? The same vanity
that has reported them to you to be of such numbers, has numbered also the
Horsemen and the Footmen of your Adversaries. Concerning the Rivers, the more
broad they are, the more gently they do run: for such as are narrow, and of
small breadth, are always most violent in their course; where contrariwise, the
broad Rivers pass their course more mildly. But you will peradventure say, that
all the peril is at the landing, where your Enemies shall wait for your
arrival: Whatsoever the River be, the hazard is all one at the shore. But
imagine that all these things were true, whether is it the greatness of the
Beasts, or the multitude of the men, that puts you in fear? As concerning
the Elephants, we have had experience of them of late, how more violently they
rage against their own party, then against us: Why should we fear them, but
only make less the greatness of their bodies with such weapons as we have
prepared for the purpose? What matter is it whether they are of the like number
that Porus had, or whether they are three thousand; seeing we perceive that
when two or three are wounded, the rest begin to fly away? And forasmuch as
they cannot well be governed when they are but few, when there are so many
thousands together, they must needs be an impediment one to another, and breed
a confusion amongst themselves; they are so unwieldy, by reason of their huge
bodies, that they be neither apt to pass forwards, nor yet to fly: I have
always so little esteemed them, that when I have had plenty of them I would
never use them, knowing very well, that they are more dangerous to such as
employ them, then to their Enemies. But peradventure it is the multitude of
their Horsemen and Footmen that move you: Were you never wont to fight against
such numbers? or is it the first time you have encountered with disordered
multitudes? The River of Granike is a witness how invincible the power of the
Macedons is against any multitude; and so is Cilicia that flowed with the
Persians blood, and Arbella, whose Plains are strowed with their bones. You too
late begin to number the Legions of your Enemies, after that with your
Victories you have made Asia a Wilderness: When you passed over the Hellespont,
you should then have considered your small numbers: Now the Scythians do follow
us, we have did at hand from the Bactrians, and we supply our power with the
Sogdians; yet for all that, it is not these men in whom I put my confidence: I
have a regard unto your force; I reserve your manhood about me as a Pledge and
assurance of my achievements: So long as I stand in the field amongst you, I
will neither weigh my self, nor mine Enemies, do you but show an appearance
that there is hope in you, and cheerfulness: We are not newly entered into our
travels, but have passed all our labors, being come unto the rising of the
Sun, and to the Ocean Sea, except our own sloth be our impediment: from thence
having subdued the world, we shall return Conquerours into our Country. Do not
you as those negligent Husbandmen, that lose their fruit after it is once ripe:
The rewards of our journey are greater then our peril: The Country into which
we are now marching is rich, and of no force; thither I purpose to bring you,
both to win glory, and to get you spoil; for worthy are you to carry those
riches into your Country, which the Sea does there so plentifully cast them up
upon their shore: You are men of that virtue, as to leave nothing unprovided,
nothing undone: I desire and conjure you, by the glory you have gotten, in
which you exceed the state of men, and by all that I have deserved of you, and
you of me, in which we remain invincible, that you will not forsake me,
purposing to visit the end of the world: Me, I say, that have been brought up
as a child amongst you. I will not make mention how I am your King; in oother
things I have commanded you, let me now entreat you once in this; It is I that
make this request unto you, who never brought you on, but I put my self
foremost in the adventure and danger, and oftentimes with my own Buckler have
defended my Army: Take not the Victory out of my hands, by which (if envy be
not the let) I shall become both equal in glory to Hercules and Bacchus: Give
you assent to mine intercession, and at length break your obstinate silence:
Where is your shouting become, that was wont to be a Declaration of your
cheerfulness? Where are the cheerful countenances of my Macedons? I know not
you my Soldiers, and it seems that I am not known of you: I speak, methinks,
to your deaf ears in vain, and in vain go about to stir up your unwilling and
immovable minds.

Notwithstanding all these words, they hung down their heads toward the earth,
and persevered still in silence: Then he proceeded.

I know not (said he) wherein I have unwittingly offended you, that you will
not once vouchsafe to look me in the face: I seem to be solitary, and in a
Wilderness; Is there none of you that I speak unto will answer me? Is there
none at the least who will deny my request? What is the thing that I require?
even your own glory, and your own profit. Where are they now whom I saw not
long ago contending, who should first take up their King when he was wounded,
and now you leave me alone, you forsake me, you betray me to mine Enemies: But
I will not leave mine enterprise though I go alone; leave me alone to those
Rivers, to those Beasts, and to those Nations, the very names of whom you fear
so much. The Scythians and Bactrians shall go with me, who of late were mine
Enemies, and who now are my Soldiers; I had rather die then be a King to be
ruled, and at other men's appointment: Go, get you home, go I say, and triumph
of the abandoning of your King; for I will here either obtain the Victory,
whereof you have despaired, or else die a death that shall be honorable.

Notwithstanding what he said, there was not one Soldier that would open his
mouth to speak, but stood waiting when some of the Princes and great Captains
should declare unto the King, that there remained not in them any obstinate
refusal of the Wars, but that they were exhausted with wounds, and so wearied
with continual travel, that they were not able to endure any longer. As they
stood thus astonished, and afraid in silence, and looking upon the ground,
there began first a whispering and a rumor amongst them, and afterward a
lamentation; and by little and little, they began more manifestly to show their
complaints, the tears falling from their eyes. The Kings anger was then so
turned into compassion, that he himself was not able to abstain from tears: At
length the whole Assembly bursting out into an excessive weeping, Cenus took
upon him to press forwards toward the Judgment Seat where Alexander stood,
signifying that he had somewhat to say: When the Soldiers saw him pull his
Helmet from his head, (for so it was the custom to speak unto the King) they
began to require him that he would deliver the cause of the whole Army: Then
Cenus began on this manner:

May the gods defend us from all wicked thoughts, as I doubt not but that they
do; there are none of your Soldiers but are of the same mind toward you,
that they have been in times past, if it be your pleasure to command them to go
forwards to fight, to hazard themselves, or with their blood to commend your
Name unto Posterity. And if you will needs persevere in your Opinion, though we
are unarmed, naked, and without blood, we will either come after you, or go
before you, as you shall think expedient: But if you will be content to hear
your Soldiers griefs and complaints, which are not fained, but expressed by
the utmost necessity, I humbly beseech you then, that you would vouchsafe
favorably to hear them, who constantly (...) followed your Authority and
Fortune, and are yet ready to follow wheresoever you will appoint. O Alexander,
with the greatness of your Acts* you have (...) only your Enemies, but also
your own Soldiers* Whatsoever man's mortality is able to fulfill, that is
performed by us, having passed over so many Seas and Countries better known to
us, then the Inhabitants themselves: We now remain almost in the uttermost end
of the world, and yet for all this, your purpose is to pass into another world,
and seek out an India unknown to the Indians. Ye covet to pluck out the wild
beasts and Serpents out of their Dens and lurking places, minding to search
further with your Victories, then the Sun has visited with his beams; which
truly is an imagination answerable to your heart, but (...) exceeding our
capacity and power: Your manhood and courage is always increasing, but our
force is now declining. Behold our bodies destitute of blood, pierced with so
many wounds, and deformed with so many (...); our swords now are dulled, and
our (...) consumed; we wear apparel after the manner of the Persians; because
our Country garments do ^ail us we degenerate into a strange habit; who is he
that has a Cors^et or Horse particular to himself? Examine how many of the
Macedons remain amongst us, and what remains to every man of the Spoil: Being
the Conquer^urs of all men, of all men we are the poorest: It is not abundance
or excess that troubles us, but the very War it self: Our ammunition of War is
consumed, and yet you mind to put forth this goodly Army of yours naked unto
Beasts, the multitude of whom, though the Indians purposely do increase, yet by
their vain report, we may perceive the number to be great. But if you be
absolutely determined to pass yet further into India, the Country that lies
Southward is not so desert as the other; which being subdued, you may pass to
that Sea which Nature has appointed to bound in the world. Why do you seek
that glory afar off, which remains to you ready at your hand? Here the Ocean
Sea does meet us; and if we mistake not, we are come to the utmost place where
your Fortune leads you. I had rather speak these things before, then behind
your back; for I seek not so much to win the favor of the Soldiers, as I
desire that you should rather hear the voice of them speaking, then the murmr
of them complaining.

When Cenus had made an end of his Oration, there arose a cry and lamentation,
which in confused voices every where called Alexander their King, their Father,
and their Lord. Then the other Captains (and especially the more ancient of
them, who by reason of their age had the more honest excuse, and greater
authority) made the like request; so that the King was not able in that
obstinacy, either to chastise them, or assuage them: Therefore uncertain what
to do, he leaped from the Judgment Seat, and commanding his lodging-door to be
shut, he admitted no man to come unto him, but such as were accustomed to be
about his person. Two days he consumed in this angry melancholy, and the third
day he came forth amongst his men, causing twelve Altars of square stone to be
set up as a Monument of his journey, and willed the Trenches of his Camp to be
made wider, and the places where the Soldiers lay to be enlarged greater then
served for the bigness of their bodies, thinking by form and shape of things
thus increased, to leave a deceitful Wonder to Posterity.

From thence he returned by the way he had passed before, and encamped near
unto the River of Acesines. Cenus chanced there to die, whose death the King
lamented; but yet he said, that for so few days he had made an overlong
Oration, as though he alone should have returned into Macedon. By that time the
Navy of Ships which he had appointed to be made, stood in readiness, and
aflote; and Memnon, in the mean season, brought him out of Thrace 6000
Horsemen, and besides from Harpalus 7000 Footmen, with twenty five thousand
Arms that were wrought with silver and gold, which he distributed amongst his
men, and commanded the old to be burned, purposing to pass unto the Ocean Sea
with a thousand Ships: But before he departed, he reconciled by Affinity Porus
and Taxiles, betwixt whom there was a new discord risen upon their old hatred.
He had obtained of them great aid, both in making and the furnishing of his
Fleet.

During the time he was about this business, he builded two Cities, the one
whereof he called Nicea, and the other Bucephalon, naming the latter by the
name of his Horse that was dead. He gave order that his Elephants and Carriages
should pass by Land, and he sailed down the River, proceeding every day about
forty furlongs, so that he might always land his power in such places as he
thought convenient. At length he came into a Country where the Rivers of
Hydaspes and Acesines do join together, and do run from thence into the bounds
of a Nation called Sobions. They declared, that their Predecessors came from
Hercules Army, who being left there sick, did inhabit the Country: They were
clothed in beasts skins, using Clubs for their weapons: And though they had
left the customs of the Greeks, yet there appeared many things amongst them,
that declared from whence they were descended.

Here the King landed, and marched two hundred and ten furlongs within the
Country, which he wasted, and took the chiefest City in the same. There were
forty thousand men that stood in defense against him upon a Rivers side; but he
passed the water, putting them to flight; and after they fled into the City, he
wan it by force: The young men were all slain, and the rest sold as slaves.
After that he assaulted another City, where he was repulsed by the great force
of the Defendants, and lost many of his men: But when the Inhabitants saw that
he continued still the Siege, despairing of their safeguard, they set fire on
their houses, and destroyed themselves, their Wives and Children; which fire
when the Macedons quenched, they kindled the same again: It seemed a strange
contention, the Citizens to destroy their own City, and their Enemies laboring
to preserve it; the Wars so contrarily changed the Laws wrought in man by
nature: The Castle was saved, wherein a Garrison was left. Alexander went about
this Castle by water, which was environed with three of the greatest Rivers in
all India, Ganges excepted; Indus passing on the North-side, and Acesines
running into Hydaspes upon the South. Where these Rivers met, the waters rose
like surges of the Sea, being full of Mud and Ouze, which by the course of the
water were driven upon the shore: for all that the Rivers are broad, yet the
Channels are but narrow, wherein the Ships must pass. The waves did rise so
high and thick, breaking sometimes upon the Poops, and sometime upon the side
of the Ships, that the Mariners began to vail their Sails; but they were so
troubled through fear, and the violent swiftness of the stream, that they could
not order their tackling, so that two of their greatest Ships were drowned in
sight; and the smallest Vessels, which were less able to be governed, were
driven upon the shore without any harm. The King chanced upon the place where
the Waves swelled highest, wherewith his Ship was so tossed and traversed, that
the Helm could not direct its course; wherefore the King fearing to be drowned,
pulled off his garments, being ready to cast himself into the water, and his
Confidents did swim near thereabout, being ready to receive him. It appeared to
him doubtful which peril was the greatest, either to swim, or to continue still
aboard. But the Mariners labored wonderfully with their Oars, adding all the
force that lay in man's power to cut through the Waves, by whose importunate
travel the water seemed to divide asunder, and to give place, so that at length
they got out of the surges; and yet not able to bring the Ship to the shore,
dashed upon the next flat, it appearing that the Ships and the Stream had
fought a Battle together.

Alexander having escaped this peril, set up to every River an Altar, whereupon
he offered due Sacrifice; and that done, he past forwards thirty furlongs. From
thence he came into the Country of the Sudricans and Mallians, who being
accustomed to be at war among themselves, were then joined in Society. They
assembled in Arms to the number of nine thousand Footmen, ten thousand
Horsemen, and nine hundred armed Wagons; whereof when the Macedons were
advertised, who believed that they had passed all perils, seeing a fresh War
arise with a new fresh Nation, they were amazed with a sudden fear, and began
again with seditious words to repove their King: They alleged, that he would
lately have compelled them to pass the River of Ganges, to make war upon those
Nations inhabiting beyond the same; which enterprise, though it were left, they
had not for all that ended the War never the more, but rather made an exchange
for a new labor, being put forth amongst this wild Nation, to make the Ocean
Sea open to him with their blood, and to be drawn beyond the Sun and the Stars:
They were compelled (they said) to visit those places that Nature coveted to
remove from man's knowledge: They grudged, that to their new Armor there were
new Enemies raised up, whom if they should vanquish, and put to flight, they
could not see what benefit they should receive thereby, but only darkness and
obscurity of the Air, which always covered the deep Sea, replenished with
multitudes of Monsters wallowing in those immovable waters, in which dying
Nature did faint away.

The King little moved for himself, was much troubled for these passions of his
Soldiers: wherefore he assembled them all together, declaring of how feeble a
force those Nations were, whom they feared so much, and who only remained, and
were an impediment to them (having passed over so many Countries) to attain to
the period of their travels, and to the end of the world. He showed how that in
respect of their former fear, he had left his Enterprise over Ganges, with the
Conquest of the Nations inhabiting beyond the same, and had directed his
journey this way; whereas their glory shall be as great, and their danger less,
seeing the Ocean was in a manner within sight, the Air whereof he felt blowing
in his face: He required them therefore, that they would not envy the glory he
sought, by passing the bounds of Hercules and Bacchus, seeing that with so
little pain they might give unto their King perpetual Fame and Immortality: In
doing whereof, they should depart out of India as Conquerours, whereas
otherwise they should seem to ^ly away from thence. It is the property of all
multitudes, and specially of Men of War, to be drawn with every little motion,
amongst whom, as sedition does soon arise, so it is soon pacified.

There was never a more cheerful cry made of any Army before, then the
Soldiers now made to Alexander, who willed him to lead them wheresoever he
would, and make himself equal in glory unto them whose Acts he did emulate.
Alexander rejoicing in the willingness that appeared in his Soldiers, removed
straight ways toward his Enemies, who were the stoutest people of all the
Indians. They prepared themselves manfully for the Wars, and chose for their
Captain one of the Oxidracans, who was of an approved Manhood; he incamping at
the foot of a Mountain, made fires all abroad, to cause his number to appear
the greater, and went about in vain to fear the Macedons when they were at
rest, by making of alarms, with their cries and manner of howling. When the day
appeared, Alexander having an assured confidence to obtain the Victory,
commanded the Soldiers* to put on their Armor, and cheerfully to fall in
order of Battle: But the Indians (whether it were for fear, or by reason of
some sedition risen amongst them) suddenly fled into the Desert Mountains; whom
Alexander followed in vain, and not able to overtake them, took their Carriage.
After this he came to the City of the Oxidracans, whereunto great numbers were
fled, as well in trust of the strength of the place, as of their own power. As
Alexander was about to make the approach, Demophon, his Diviner, admonished him
that he should either defer the assault, or else not meddle with it at all, for
there appeared signs that his life should be in jeopardy. When Alexander had
heard his words, he beheld him, and said:

If any man should interrupt thee when thou art busy about thy Science, or
considering of the Entrails, should not he seem unto thee to be troublesome,
and his coming to be ungrateful? Yes truly (said he.) So art thou now unto me
(said Alexander) for having so great actions in hand, of more moment then the
Entrails of Beasts, I find no greater impediment then a Superstitious Diviner.

And as soon as he had spoken the word, he caused them to rear up the Ladders;
and whilst other men sticked and stayed at the danger, he mounted up the wall
in his own person. The same was very narrow on the top, not divided with loops,
(as is commonly used) but enclosed with one whole and continual Battlement
round about, which caused it to be the more hard to scale: Alexander therefore
having no convenient place to stand for his defense, stayed upon the wall,
receiving upon his Target the Darts that were cast at him from all parts. His
Soldiers could not get to him, they were so beaten from the walls by the shot
that came from above: Yet at the last, when they saw their King given up into
their Enemies hands, shame overcame their imminent danger. But their overmuch
haste became their hinderance, and was the cause why they could not come to the
rescue of their King: For whiles every man coveted to ascend the Ladders, they
were so heavily laden, that they brake asunder; and such as were mounted upon
them fell down again, deceiving Alexander of his only hope: so that in the
sight of all the Army he stood destitute on the walls, as in a Desert, without
any aid or succor, and had wearied his left arm (with which he held his
Target) in receiving the Darts thrown at him. His friends cried unto him to
leap down unto them, who stood in readiness to receive him: But he giving no
car unto them, undertook an incredible enterprise, and such a one as has not
been heard of before, deserving rather the report of rashness, then of any fame
that might sound to his glory; for with a desperate leap he cast himself into
the City that was full of his Enemies: For before he could recover his feet
again, it was likely either he should have been slain, or taken alive. But he
by chance so conveyed his body, that he fell upon his feet, and fought with
such as came against him: Fortune so provided, that he could not be enclosed
about, by reason of an old tree, which as it had been of purpose stood near the
wall, whose broad boughs being full of leaves, covered him from above; and the
greatness of the stock kept his enemies from coming at his back; and upon the
forefront he received the darts that were cast against him with his Target. For
though there were never so many that contended with him afar off, yet durst
there no man come near unto him; and the boughs kept off the arrows and darts
as well as his Target did.

In this extremity, the greatness of Alexanders Fame chiefly fought for him,
and next of all desperation, a great encouragement for a man to die honestly.
At length, through the multitude of his enemies that continually flocked about
him, both his Target was laden with shot, his Helmet was broken with stones,
and his legs fainted and failed under him by reason of his continual travel:
which when his enemies perceived, they without fear drew more near unto him; of
whom he received two with his sword in such sort, that they fell down dead at
his feet: and from that time forward none was so bold to approach so near him,
but threw Darts, and shot Arrows at him afar off. He lay open to every man's
blow, and yet (though with great pain) defended himself upon his knees, until
such time as an Indian shot an Arrow at him that was two Cubits long, which a
little above his right thigh passed through his Corslet; by reason of which
wound he shed so much blood, that he let his sword fall, as one at the point of
death; and therewith became so faint, that he had not strength to pluck out the
Arrow. Then the Indian which had hurt him came with great joy to spoil his
body: but when Alexander felt his enemies hand upon him, moved (as it is to be
thought) with despite to receive an infamy to that extremity, he called again
his spirits that were passing away, and with his sword thrust his enemy (being
unarmed) through the body. When he had thus slain three of his enemies, who lay
dead before him, all the rest stood amazed afar off. Then Alexander desiring
before his last breath should fail to be killed fighting, began to raise up his
body upon his Target; but his strength would not serve him thereunto, and
therefore he reached at a bough that hung over his head, coveting thereby to
have raised himself; but his ability not suffering him, he fell down again upon
his knees, and by a sign given with his hand, challenged his enemies if any of
them durst come and fight with him. At the last Peucestes repulsing his enemies
on another part of the walls, got into the Town; and coasting along, came unto
the place where the King was. When Alexander espied him, though he had no hope
to live, yet he took his coming for a comfort to his death, and for all his
feebleness began to rear up himself. Then came Timeus, and within a while
Leonatus, and after them Aristonus. When it was once published amongst the
Indians, that Alexander was entered within the walls, they left their defense in
other places, and came flocking thither, where they fiercely assailed such as
stood in defense of the Kings person. Timeus, after he had fought notably, and
received many wounds, was there slain: Peucestes also, notwithstanding that he
was stricken and wounded with their Darts, yet with his Target he defended the
Kings person, without any regard of himself: And Leonatus, whiles he resisted
the Indians that eagerly ran upon Alexander, received so sore a blow on the
neck, that he fell down in a swound at the Kings feet. By that time Peucestes
became so feeble of his wounds, that he was not able to defend him any more:
The last hope and refuge remained in Aristonus, who also was so grievously
wounded, that he could not endure any longer the force of the Indians.

In the mean season the fame was spread amongst the Macedons, that the King was
slain; which being a matter that should have put others in fear, stirred up
their hearts, and made them the hardier: For from that time forwards, there was
none that had respect of his own peril, but adventured unto the wall; and
breaking down the same with Pickaxes, entered in at the breach, making slaughter
of their Enemies, of whom few stood at defense, but fled away.

There was neither man, nor woman, nor infant spared; for whomsoever they met,
they judged him to be the person that had hurt their King; and so at length,
with the slaughter of the multitude, their just anger was satisfied. Clitarchus
and Timagenes do write, that Ptolomeus, who afterward became King of Egypt,
was present in this encounter: But he himself, that used not to deny any thing
that stood with his own glory, did put in memory how that he was then absent,
being employed on another Enterprise. Such a negligence was then in those who
did write the Antiquities of things, or such a credulity, which is a fault no
less than the other. When Alexander was brought into his lodging, the
Surgeons cut off the stale of the shaft, in such sort that they moved not
the head that was within the flesh; and when they saw the wound bare; they
perceived hooks to be on the Arrow-head, so that without the destruction of his
body it could not be pulled out, except by incision they made the wound
greater; and yet in that point they feared, lest blood flowing too abundantly,
should be an impediment unto them; for the head was very great, and it seemed
to be entered far within his body. There was one Critobulus that was very
cunning* and most excellent amongst the Physicians and Surgeons; and yet in
so dangerous an accident as this, he was fearful and in doubt to undertake the
Cure, lest if any thing should chance to the King otherwise than well, whilst
he remained under Cure, the blame thereof might ^ight upon his head; therefore
when Alexander perceived by his weeping the fear he was in, and that through
trouble of mind he looked pale in the face, he said unto him:

What is it that thou look for? Or why do thou stay in ridding me quickly
out of this pain, at the leastwise by death, if thou can not otherwise bring
it to pass^ For seeing my wound is incurable, why fear thou that any thing
should be laid to thy charge?

When Critobulus heard his words, he either ceased or dissembled his fear, and
exhorted Alexander that he would suffer himself to be held while they pulled
the Arrow-head that was within his flesh; for the least motion he said might be
hurtful unto him. The King would not be held, but kept his body at a stay
without moving, in such sort as they appointed him. When they had cut the wound
wider, and pulled out the head, there issued out such abundance of blood, that
the King fell in a swoon, and a dimness came over his sight, and he stretched
out himself as one in the pangs of death. Then they wrought all the means they
could to stanch the blood; but when they perceived it would not avail, his
friends began to weep and lament, thinking verily there had been no way but
death. Notwithstanding at length he ceased his bleeding, and recovering again
his spirits, began to know them that stood about him.

All that day, and the night ensuing, the men of War stood in arms about the
Kings lodging, confessing that all their lives depended upon his breath; and
would not remove from thence before they understood that he took some rest: but
when they knew that he was fallen in a sleep, they returned into the Camp,
bringing unto the rest more certain hope of his recovery. Alexander, about the
curing of his wound, remained there seven days, and understanding that a
constant fame of his death was spread abroad amongst the Indians, he caused two
Ships to be fastened together, and a Lodging to be made for him in the midst;
so that remaining upon the water, from both sides of the land he might be seen
of them that thought he had been dead. When the Indians perceived he was alive,
it took away the hope that some had conceived upon the false Report.

From thence he passed down the stream, leaving a distance between his Ship and
the rest of the Navy, to the intent that with the beating of the Oars, they
should not disturb him of his rest, which was necessary for his weak body. The
fourth day after his embarquing, he came into a Country abandoned of the
Inhabitants, but plentiful both in Corn and Cattle, in which place he thought
to rest himself and his Soldiers. It was a custom amongst the Macedons, that
when their King was diseased, the chief Princes and the great Men watched about
his Lodging; which custom being then observed, they entered all together into
the chamber where Alexander lay; at whose sudden coming he was somewhat amazed,
especially because they came all together. He thought they had brought him some
strange tidings, and enquired of them if they understood of any new Assembly of
his Enemies. Then Craterus that was appointed to speak in the behalf of them
all, spoke unto him after this manner.

Do you think that the coming of any Enemies could make us so careful (though
they were entered within your Camp) as we are of your health and safeguard,
though, of all, this is the thing which you regard least? Though all Nations
conspire against us with their Power, though the whole world were filled full
of men of War, the Seas overspread with Ships, and never so many strange beasts
brought against us, it consists in the presence of your Person to make us
Conquerours. But how can any God promise that you, who are the Light and Star
of Macedonia, can be of any continuance? seeing you are so desirous to put your
person in such manifest perils, not remembering that with your death you draw
with you into ruin the lives of so many of your Contrymen? Who is he that
either can, or does desire to live after you? We are come so far following your
Fortune and Authority, that, without you, none of us are able to return home
again. If you were yet contending with Darius for the Kingdom of Persia, though
we all would wish you would not adventure your person so perillously, yet in
that case we could not marvel so much at your prompt resolution; for where the
danger and the benefit that ensues thereof are equal, the fruit is the greater
when the business succeeds well, and the comfort is the more when the thing
chances evil. There are none, not only of us who are your Soldiers, but even
of such as were your Enemies, having any understanding of your greatness that
can suffer so base a town, and of so little fame, to be bought with the price
of your life. My heart shrinks at the remembrance of the danger which we but
late did see with our own eyes; I am amazed to rehearse how those vile hands
were in a readiness to have carried the spoils of your invincible Person, if
Fortune of her clemency had not preserved and delivered you from their
cruelty. So many of us as were not able to follow you, are all Traitors, and
Forsakers of our Prince: And though it was a matter that lay not in our power,
yet if it please you to note us all with reproach, there is none that will
refuse any punishment in the purgation of it; notwithstanding, we would require
you, that you would spare us for some other purpose. We will gladly go
whithersoever you will have us; we require War be it never so obscure, and
covet the Battle, though our fighting shall want Fame, so that you will reserve
your self to those hazards which are correspondent for the greatness of your
estate. How soon does glory vanish away* and become of no praise, amongst such
Enemies as are of no reputation? And what thing is there more unworthy, than to
consume the glory you have gotten elsewhere, amongst them where your glory
cannot appear?

When Craterus had ended his speech, Ptolomy and the others spoke to him to the
like effect, and all at once with weeping eyes required of him, that he would
not from thenceforth be any more so thirsty to win praise, but seeing he had
gotten sufficient already, he should content himself therewith, and regard his
health and safety, whereon their universal estate did depend. The King took so
gratefully their loving affection, that he familiarly embraced every one of
them; and after he had willed them to sit, revolving in his mind more deeply
their former communication, he said thus unto them:

My faithful loving Friends and Country men, I render you most hearty thanks,
not only that you prefer my Safety before your own, but also that since the
beginning of the Wars you have not pretermitted any thing, wherein your love
and benevolence might be showed toward me; so that I must confess that my life
was never so dear unto me as it is now, because I desire long to enjoy you. You
are desirous to offer your selves to death in my cause, because you judge that
I have deserved that benevolence at your hands; but your imagination and mine
is not after one way: You peradventure do covet to enjoy me, to (...) of me
continually Fruits; and I measure not my self by the continuance of my time,
but by the greatness ^f my glory. I might have been content with the ri^h^^
which my Father left me, and with the ease of my body, within the bounds of
Macedon, have looked for an obscure and ignoble old age; and yet I cannot see
that they who live in sloth and idleness can assure themselves of their own
destiny; For even such as esteem felicity in long life, are oftentimes
prevented with sudden death: But I, who number not my years but by my
Victories, have lived long, if I well weigh the gifts of Fortune: For beginning
mine Empire in Macedonia, I have Greece in my possession; I have subdued Thrace
and Illyria, I reign over the Tribals and the Medians, being Master of all Asia
that lies between Hellespont and the Red Sea, and now am not far from the end
of the world; the which I determined to visit, and to lay open to men a new
nature, and a new world: I passed out of Asia into Europe in the moment of an
hour, being but eight and twenty years of age, and having reigned but nine
years, and I am now become the Victorer of both Regions; Do you think it then
meet that I should now cease from the purchase of that glory whereunto I have
only devoted my self? No, I will never cease, but wheresoever I shall have
occasion to fight, I shall think my self to be in the Theater, where the whole
world does behold me. I will give Nobility and Fame to places that are obsure,
and will lay open to all Nations those Countries which Nature has removed
furthest from them; in doing whereof, it shall be grateful for me to end my
life, if Fortune will have it so: I am come of such a Stock, that I ought to
desire many things before long life. I pray you to remember that we are come
into these Countries, where the name of a Woman is celebr^ted for her Virtues.
What Cities did Semiramis build? What Nations did she subdue? And what great
Works did she accomplish? We are not yet become equal unto (...) Woman in
glory; and yet you would have me to be satisfied with it. Be the gods
favorable unto our purpose; for there remains for us yet greater things to do.
And it is the next way to make those Countries which we have not yet touched to
become ours, if we esteem nothing to be of small value where there is any
occasion to purchase glory. Let it be your care to preserve me from the evil
conspiracy of my own people, and then there are no adventures in the War shall
put me in fear. Philip was more sure in the Front of the Battle abroad, than in
the Theater at home; he oftentimes avoided the force of his Enemies, but he
could not eschew the violence of his own Subjects: And if you consider the end
of other Kings, you shall number more that have been slain by their own men,
than by any Foreign power: But because there is an occasion now offered me to
utter that which I have long conceived in my mind, it shall be the greatest
fruit I can receive of my travels, if my Mother Olympias, when she departs
this life might be consecrated to immortality: if she depart in my time, I
will do it my self; but if I shall be prevented by death, remember you to
perform what I have determined.

Having spoke these words, he dismissed his Friends from him, and continued
many days in the same place. Whilst these things were doing in India, the
Greek Soldiers that had lands and habitations appointed them at Catabactria,
through a sedition that chanced amongst them, rebelled against him, not so much
for any hate they did bear to Alexander, as for fear of punishment; For they
killed diverse of their chief Rulers, and assembling in force together, took the
Castle of Bactria that was negligently kept, and procured the Bactrians to
rebel with them.

Athenodorus was the Chief among them, who took upon him the name of a King,
not so much for the desire of the Kingdom, as by authority to make himself of
power to convey himself and others home into his own Country: But one Bicon of
his own Nation became his Enemy, and conspiring against him, did invite him to
a Banquet, where he was slain by one Boxus Macerianus.

The next day following, Bicon assembled the Greeks together, persuading them
that he slew Athenodorus but in his own defense, whose purpose was to have
destroyed him. But there was some that perceived his policy, and the suspicion
was spread amongst the rest, so that the Greeks fell to arms on purpose to slay
Bicon: But such as were chief, mitigated the wrath of the multitude; and
contrary to his expectation, he was delivered from that present peril: Yet he
could not be so contented, but within a while after he conspired them that
saved his life; whose falsehood being known, they took both him and Boxus,
determining that Boxus should be put to death out of hand, and that Bicon
should end his life by torments.

As they were tormenting him, the Greek Soldiers suddenly in a fury, for what
cause it is uncertain, ran to arms; the noise of whom being heard by them who
had the charge of Bicon, they set him at liberty, fearing that the coyl had
been raised for his deliverance. He, naked as he was, came running amongst the
Greeks where they were assembled; whose miserable estate so changed their
minds, that they willed him immediately to be set at liberty. By this means
Bicon being twice delivered from death, returned into his Country with the
Greeks, abandoning the Colony whereunto he was appointed by Alexander. These
things were done in the Confines of Bactria and Scythia.

In the mean season, the King of the two Nations, which we spoke of before,
sent an hundred Ambassadors unto Alexander, who being honorable Personages,
did ride in Wagons richly apparelled, having garments of linen Cloth
embroidered with Gold, and empaled with Purple. They declared that the cause of
their coming was to yield themselves, their City, their Country, and their
Liberties (which they had kept inviolately for so many Ages) to his will and
appointment; of which their submission the gods (they said) were Authors, and
not any fear; for they were contented to yield themselves before they had
proved their power with him. The King called a Council, and received them under
his protection, appointing them to pay such Tribute as they did before pay to
the Arachosians, and besides to send two thousand five hundred Horsemen to
serve him in his Wars; all which things they performed obediently. This done,
he made a great Feast, whereunto he invited those Ambassadors, and his Lords:
he used therein sumptuous preparation, ordaining an hundred Beds of Gold to ^at
upon, which being set a small distance one from another, were drawn about with
Curtains garnished with Gold and Purple.

In that Feast there was showed and set forth all the great exc^ss and
voluptuousness, which either by long custom was used amongst the Persians, or
by corruption was taken up amongst the Macedons, the vices of both these
Nations being there mingled together. There was at that Feast one Dioxippus of
Athens, a noble Champion, and by reason of his excellent force, well known unto
the King, of whom certain envious and malicious persons, betwixt earnest and
jest, said, That he did nothing but fat his body like an unprofitable beast;
and when others went to the Battle, he would anoint his body with Oil, and
prepare himself to eat. Amongst others that used evil words of despite against
him, there was at the same Feast one Horratus a Macedon, who in his drunkenness
challenged Dioxippus, that if he were a man, he should fight the Combat with
him the next day, upon life and death, where the King should judge either him
to be rash, or the other too much a Coward. Dioxippus laughing to scorn the
pride and arrogance of the Soldier, accepted his proffer. The next day they
were more earnest to go unto the Combat than they were before in making the
Challenge: when the King saw them so bent, and that they would not leave their
purpose, he consented to their will.

There were great numbers of men assembled at the Combat, amongst whom, there
were many Grecians who favored Dioxippus part. The Macedon came into the Lists
armed at all points, holding in his left hand an Iron Buckler and a Spear, and
in his right hand a casting-Lance; and having his Sword girt to his side, was
furnished as though he should have fought with many men at once. Dioxippus came
forth anointed with Oil, with a Garland upon his head; and having a red Cloth
wrapped about his left arm, he held in his hand a great knotty Cudgel. The
diversity of their Weapons brought every man into a wonderful expectation; for
they thought it not only a rashness, but a madness for Dioxippus who was naked,
to encounter the other who was armed. The Macedon thinking to kill his
adversary before they should come to fight hand to hand, threw at him his
Lance, which Dioxippus avoided by bending of his body; and before that he could
charge his Pike, he leaped to him, and with his Cudgel brake the same asunder:
when the Macedon had lost both his Weapons, he began to draw his Sword; but
Dioxippus prevented him with a close, and taking both his feet from under him,
threw him upon the earth, and there plucking his Sword from his side, set his
foot upon his neck, and held up his Cudgel to have struck out his brains, if
the King had not caused him to stay his hand.

This Triumph ended with displeasure both unto the Macedons, and unto Alexander
himself, especially because this thing was done in the presence of the Indians;
fearing lest the valor of the Macedons, famed so much in the world, might
thereby grow into contempt. Hereupon Alexander grudging at Dioxippus, had his
ears open to the Accusation of those who did envy him. They, within a few days
after, had caused a golden Cup purposely to be conveyed out of the way, which
the Ministers having imbezelled, they made complaint to Alexander of the loss
thereof. Oftentimes men show less constancy in their countenance, than in the
offense it self; for in their complaint Dioxippus perceived by their looks that
they noted him as the Thief; which he could not endure, but parting out of the
Feast (after he had written a Letter to the King) he killed himself.

Alexander was very sorry for his death, which he took for no token of
repentance, but rather of indignation: For it afterward appeared, through the
overmuch rejoicing of his Enemies, that he had been falsely accused. The
Ambassadors of the Indians that were dismissed home, within a few days after
returned again, presenting unto Alexander three hundred Horses, one thousand
and thirty Wagons every one drawn with four Horses, certain Vestures of
Linen Cloth, a thousand Indian Targets, and one hundred Talents of Iron, Lions
of a rare bigness, and Tigers that were tame, the Skins of great Lizards, and
the Shells of certain Fishes.

The King then commanded Craterus to conduct his Army along the River whereupon
he sailed, and embarquing such as were accustomed to accompany him, he with the
stream passed into the Bounds of the Mallians, and from thence came unto the
Sabracans, who were a Nation of great power, not ruled by Kings, but by a
Government of the People. They had gathered together six thousand Footmen, and
six thousand Horsemen, and five hundred armed Wagons, and had chosen three
Captains that were approved men of War: But when such as inhabited next unto
the River (the Banks being full of Villages) saw all the River, as far as they
could view, overspread with Ships, and the Armor glistering of so many men of
War, they were amazed at the strangeness of the fight, and thought that some
Army of the gods, or else Bacchus (whose name was famous amongst those Nations)
had been come amongst them. The cry of the men of War, with the clashing of the
Oars, and the strange noise of the Mariners exhorting one another, filled their
fearful ears. They ran therefore amongst their Countrymen, who had assembled
their Forces, declaring their madness if they would contend with the gods; for
they said the Ships could not be numbered that carried those invincible people:
with which words they put such fear amongst the men of their own Nation, that
they sent immediately Ambassadors to yield themselves.

When he had received their submission, he came the fourth day into another
Country, the people whereof durst no more withstand him than the other did; and
there he builded a City, which he named Alexandria: and from thence he entered
into a Country, the inhabiters whereof they call Musicans, there he understood
by the accusation of the Paromisidans, that Desteriores (whom Alexander had
appointed Lieutenant amongst them) had ruled in excessive pride and
covetousness, and therefore he commanded him to be put to death: And Oxiartes
Lieutenant of the Bactrians being also accused, was not only acquitted, but had
a greater Rule committed unto him.

When he had subdued the uttermost part of the Musicans, he put a Garrison into
their City, and advanced from thence into another Nation of the Indians called
Prestians; of whom Oxicanus was King, who with a great Power retired himself
into a strong City, which Alexander won the third day after he began his Siege:
Upon the taking of the Town, Oxicanus fled into the Cstle, and sent
Ambassadors to treat for peace; but before they were come to Alexanders
presence, two Towers of the Castle fell with a great noise, by the ruins
whereof the Macedons got into the Castle, where Oxicanus with a few standing at
defense, was slain.

The Castle being razed, and all that were within sold as slaves, Alexander
came into the bounds of Saba, where beside many Holds that yielded to him, he
took the strongest City of that Country by force of a Mine. It seemed a
wonderful thing to the Indians, being ignorant of such Policies of War, for
armed men to come forth of the ground in the midst of their City, where there
appeared no sign of any way under the Earth. Clitarchus does write, that there
were eighty thousand Indians slain in that Country, besides many prisoners sold
as slaves. The Musicans in the mean time rebelled; for the suppressing of whom
Python was sent thither, who took the Prince of the Nation prisoner, and
brought him to Alexander, whom he caused to be hanged upon a Cross as the
Author of the Revolt; which done, he returned again to the River where he had
commanded his Navy to tarry for him. The fourth day after he came to a Town at
the entrance into the Kingdom of Samus, the King whereof had newly yielded
himself; but the Citizens had shut their Gates, and would not be at his
Commandment; whose small number Alexander regarded so little, that he sent five
hundred Agrians unto their Gates to proffer them Skirmish, to the intent that
by retiring, they might draw them by little and little out of their strength,
thinking they would follow the Chase, when they should see their Enemies flying.

The Agrians did as they were appointed; and when they had once provoked their
Enemies, they immediately turned their backs, and the Indians pursued them,
until they came to the Ambuscado where the King lay in person; then the Agrians
turned, and the Fight was renewed so fiercely, that of three thousand Indians,
there were five hundred slain, and a thousand taken, the rest recovered the
City: but the end of the Victory was not so pleasant as the beginning; for the
Indians had so envenomed their Arrows, that such as were hurt died of the
wounds: and the Physicians could not devise the cause of so strange a death;
for even the lightest hurts were incurable. The Indians trusted that Alexander
through his rashness might have come within that danger, who by chance fighting
amongst the foremost, escaped unhurt.

Ptolomy was lightly wounded upon the left shoulder, and being in a greater
danger than the greatness of his wound showed, caused the King to be careful of
him; for he was near of kin unto him, and some thought that Philip was his
Father; but it is certain that his mother was Philip his Concubine: He was one
of them that had the charge of the Kings person, a valiant man of War, and yet
more famous in the arts of Peace: he was moderate both in his apparel and
living; liberal, easy to be spoken to, and without any such height of mind,
as is accustomed to be in men descended of the Royal Blood; by reason of which
qualities, it is uncertain whether he was better beloved of the King, or of the
Soldiers.

This was the first occasion he had to prove how the minds of men were
affectionate toward him; for even in that danger, the Macedons began to divine
of his fortune, whereunto afterward he ascended. They had no less care of
Ptolomy than of the King himself; who used him so familiarly, that when he was
wearied either with travel or care of mind, he would ^it for his solace with
Ptolomy, and at that time caused his bed to be brought into his own chamber:
When Ptolomy was laid there, he fell suddenly in a sound sleep, in the which it
seemed that a Dragon offered to him an herb out of his mouth, for the healing
of his wound, and taking away of the venom. When he awaked, he declared his
dream, and showed both the color and fashion of the herb, affirming that he
could know it, if any man could find it out. This herb was sought by so many,
that at length it was found; and being put upon the wound, the pain staightways
ceased, and the scar within short space was closed. When the Indians were
disappointed of the hope they had conceived that way, they yielded themselves
and their City.

From thence Alexander went into the next Country, called Parthalia, the King
whereof called Meris left the City, and fled into the Mountains, so that
Alexander took the same, finding a wonderful prey of Sheep, of Cattle, and of
Corn. There he took Pilots that knew the River, and came unto an Island which
stood in the midst of the stream, where he was compelled to remain the longer,
because the Pilots being negligently kept, were escaped away. He sent therefore
to seek out others; but when he could find not any, there entered a vehement
desire into his head to visit without any Guide, the Ocean-Sea, and the end of
the world, committing his own life, and the lives of so many thousands, to a
River which none of them did know. They sailed as men ignorant of all places
they came unto, either how far the Sea was distant from them, what Nations did
inhabit the Countries thereabouts, or whether the Mouth of the River were
navigable for Galleys, or not. In all these things they were led by a blind
and doubtful imagination, having no other comfort in their rash Enterprise, but
only that they trusted to their continual felicity. When they had gone forwards
four hundred Furlongs, the Ship-masters told the King, that they felt the air
of the Sea, whereby they knew the Ocean was at hand. Thereat he rejoiced
greatly, and exhorted the Mariners that they would with all the power they
could, make way with their Oars, to bring him to the sight of the end of the
World, which he had so long desired.

Now (said he) our Glory is perfect, when our manhood is such that nothing can
stay us: now the World is come into our hands without any further hazard of
War, or shedding of Blood. Now since the Bounds that Nature has wrought be so
near at hand, we shall shortly see things unknown, saving to the immortal gods.
Yet notwithstanding he set some men upon the Land to take some of the
Countrymen, by whom he trusted to have known the certainty of the truth. When
they searched out their Cottages, at length they found out some of the wisest
who were hidden, who being demanded how far the Sea was from them, they made
answer, that they never heard it named; but they said, that within three days
sailing, they should come unto a place where a brackish water did corrupt the
fresh; by which words the Mariners understood that they meant the Sea, of the
nature whereof the people were ignorant: then the Mariners rowed cheerfully,
their desire growing ever the greater, as they approached near unto the place
which they hoped to be the end of their travel. On the third day they came
where the Sea and the River joined together, mixing with a small flood their
waters that were of a contrary nature: Then because the tide was somewhat
against them, they haled toward another Island standing in the midst of the
River, which being an easy place to land at, the Macedons ran about to seek
Victuals, in surety as they thought, being ignorant of the chance that came
upon them.

About three of the clock, according to its ordinary course, the tide came
rolling in from the Sea, and with his force did drive the stream backward,
which at the first being but stayed, was afterward so vehemently repulsed,
that it caused the water to return backward with greater fury then a swift
stream is accustomed to run. The common sort that knew not the nature of the
Ocean, thought the same to be a wonderful thing, and that it had been a token
sent to them of Gods wrath: and while they were in that imagination, the Sea
swelling more and more, overflowed the Land which they saw before dry; and as
the water mounted, the Ships and all the Navy was dispersed here and there.
Such as were upon land were amazed with the suddenness of the event, and ran
from all parts in great fear unto their Ships. But in a tumult, haste does
always heart, and gives impediment. Some there were that went about to set
forward their Ships; others forbade rowing, and removed not at all; otherwhiles
they made haste away, and would not tarry to take in their company, and they
moving but slowly could make no way. Some, when they saw them press on
Shipboard in such throngs, for fear of taking in too many, would receive none
at all; so that both the multitude and the small number were an equal
impediment unto the haste they made. The cry that some made in bidding men
tarry, and the noise that others made in willing them to go forwards, with
their voices that differed, and agreed not in one effect, took away the use
both of their sight and hearing. The Mariners could not help it, whose words in
the tumult could not be heard, nor their commandments observed amongst men in
fear and out of order. The Ships therefore did beat one against the other, the
Oars crashed asunder, and every Ship either thrust forward or did put back one
another. No man would have judged it to be one Fleet, but rather two Navies
sighting a Battle upon the Sea. The Sterns did strike against the poop; such as
went before, troubled them that came after; and at last the words of men in
their choler came unto blows. The tide had now over-flown all the Plains
thereabout, so that nothing appeared above the Waters save the Hills, which
seemed so many little Islands, whereunto many did swim, and left their Ships
for fear.

Whilst the Navy was thus dispersed abroad, and partly floated as they happened
in any valley, and partly stuck in the ground as they lighted on the flats;
there came suddenly another terror greater then the first: For when the Sea
began to ebb, the water fell back again into his wonted course, with so great
violence as it came forwards, and restored the sight of the Land, which before
was drowned as in a deep Sea. The Ships then forsaken of the water, fell upon
their sides, and the Fields were strewed with broken boards and pieces of Oars.
The Soldiers durst not go forth to Land, and yet were in doubt to tarry on
Shipboard, looking ever for some greater mischief to come, then what they saw
present or past. They could scarcely believe what they saw and suffered, which
was a Shipwreck upon the land, and a Sea within a River. They thought no end
could come of this calamity; for they knew not that the Sea should shortly
return again, and set their Ships afloat: And therefore they proposed to
themselves Famine and all extremities. The Monsters also of the Sea, which
after the water was past, were left on dry land, did put them in great fear.

The night approached, and despair brought the King into a great agony: yet no
care could so overcome his heart, that was invincible, but he watched all
night, and sent Horsemen to the mouth of the River, to bring him word when the
tide came. He caused two Ships that were broken to be amended, and such as were
overwhelmed to be hoised up again; warning all men to lie in wait, and be in a
readiness against the water should arise. When he had consumed all that night
in watching and giving exhortation unto his men, straightways the Horesemen
returned on a main gallop, and the tide at their heels, which mildly
increasing, began to raise again their Ships; and when it had once over-flown
the Banks, the whole Navy began to move. Then all the Coast rebounded with the
unmeasurable rejoicing that the Soldiers and Mariners made for their
safeguard, whereof they were before in despair.

When they saw the danger past, they inquired one of another, by what reason
the Sea could so soon ^bb and flow; and debated the nature of that Element,
which one while disagreed, and another while was obedient and subject to the
time. The King conjecturing by the signs he had seen before, that after the
Sunrising the tide would serve to his purpose, at midnight with a few Ships
did sail down the Stream; and passing out at the mouth of the River, he entered
four hundred Furlongs into the Sea; and being Master of his desires, he there
made sacrifice to the gods of the Sea, who were worshipped in those Countries,
and returned again unto his Navy. On the next day he returned backwards against
the Stream, and arrived at a salt Lake, the nature whereof being unknown,
deceived many that rashly entered into the water; for their bodies by and by
became full of scabs; which disease taken by some, the contagion thereof
infected many others: but they found that Oil was a remedy for the same.

Alexander lying still with his Army, waiting for the Spring of the year, sent
Leonatus before by Land where he thought to pass, to dig Wells, because the
Country was very dry, and destitute of water. In the mean time, he builded many
Cities, and commanded Nearchus and Onesicritus (that were most expert in the
Discipline of Sea-service) with his strongest Ships to pass into the Ocean, and
to go so far forwards as they might with surety, to understand the nature of
the Sea; and willed them at their return, to land either within that River, or
else within Euphrates. When the Winter was well passed, he burned those Ships
which were unserviceable, and conveyed his Army by Land. After ^ine Incampings
he came into the Country of the Arabitans, and from thence in nine days came
into the Country of the Gedrosians, who being a free Nation, by a general
Counsel had amongst them, yielded themselves; of whom there was not any thing
demanded saving only Victuals.

The fifth day he came into a River, which the Countrymen call Barabon, beyond
which there lay a barren Country, greatly destitute of water, through the which
he passed, and entered amongst the Horitans. There he betook the greater part of
his Army to Ephestion, and divided the Soldiers that were light armed to
Ptolomy and Leonatus; and so they wasted the Country with three Armies at once,
and took a great booty. Ptolomy turned toward the Sea, Leonatus on the other
hand, and Alexander himself in the midst. In that Country he builded also a
City, and brought men out of Arrachosia to inhabit it. From thence he came
amongst the Indians, who, lying upon the Seacoast, do inhabit a great Country
that is waste and desert. They use no Traffic, Commerce, nor Conversation
with any of their Neighbors: but the desartness of their Country made them
savage, being wild of their own nature. Their nails and hair are never cut:
they made their Houses of the Shells of Fishes, and of other things that the
Sea casts up; and being clad with the skins of wild Beasts, do ^eed on
Fishes dried with the Sun, and such Monsters as the Sea does cast upon the Land.

Here the Macedons consumed their Victuals, and first endured scarcity, and
afterward extreme hunger, searching out in every place the roots of the Palms,
which is the only Tree that grows in that Country: But when that kind of
nourishment failed them, they killed their Carriage-beasts, and abstained not
from their Horses; insomuch that lacking Beasts to bear their Baggage, they
were enforced to consume with fire those Spoils of their Enemies, which had
caused them to travel into the uttermost bounds of the Orient. After their
Famine, there followed a Pestilence; for the unaccustomed nourishment of the
unwholesome meat they did eat, with the travel of their journey, and the
anxiety of their minds, did spread Diseases amongst them in such sort, that
they could neither continue in a place, nor yet go forwards without great
destruction: Hunger oppressed them when they tarried, and the Pestilence was
more vehement ever as they went forwards. The Fields therefore were strewn full
of men that were half dead and half alive; and such as were but half sick were
not able to follow the Army, it marched with so great a speed: For every man
thought so much to further his own safety, by how much he made haste to get
before his fellows.

Such as fainted and could not follow, desired both such as they knew and knew
not, to help them forwards: but they had no Beasts whereupon to set them, and
the Soldiers (who had the imminent mischief that fell upon other men,
represented before their own eyes) could hardly bear their own Arms; wherefore
when they were called upon, they would not vouchsafe once to look back, fear
had so taken away all compassion from them. Then they who were left behind,
cried upon the gods and their King for help, alleging, That they were all of
one Country and Religion, which was a Band for one to relieve another: But when
they had cried long in vain unto their deaf ears, through desperation they
raged, wishing the like end to their Friends and Companions which they
themselves endured.

The King possessed both with sorrow and shame, because he and none else should
be the cause of so great a destruction amongst his men, did write to
Phrataphernes, Ruler of the Parthenians, to send to him upon Camels, Victuals
ready to be eaten; and certified the Princes of the Countries round thereabout
of his necessity, who did slack no time, but made provision according to his
will. Thus his Army delivered only from Famine, was brought within the bounds
of the Gedrosians; and forasmuch as the same was a Country fertile of all
things, he thought good to stay there a while, with rest to recover again his
feeble Soldiers.

There he received Letters from Leonatus, that he had won the Victory of the
Horitans, who encountered him with eight thousand Footmen, and five hundred
Horsemen. He was advertized from Craterus. That he had taken and put in hold
Ozines and Zariaspes, two Noblemen of Persia, who went about to rebel.
Alexander also understanding that Memnon was dead, gave the charge of the
Country whereof he had the rule, unto Siburtius, and afterward marched into
Carmania. Aspastes was Governor of that Nation, who being suspected of
Innovation whiles Alexander was in India, met him on the way: But Alexander
dissembling his wrath, entertained him gently, and gave unto him his accustomed
honor, till such time as he had better proof of the accusation which was laid
against him.

When the Princes of India, according to his appointment, had sent out from all
their Countries great plenty of Horses, and other Beasts, both for Saddle and
Draught, he gave Carriage again to all men that wanted, and restored their
Armor to the former beautifulness and excellency: for they were come into a
Country joining upon Persia, which was both abundant in all things, and also
quietly established under his subjection. He thought it then a time to
counterfeit Bacchus, in the glory and fame which he got amongst those Nations.
Whether it were a Triumph that Bacchus first instituted, or a pastime used of
him in drunkenness, Alexander was determined to counterfeit his Acts, having
his mind elevated above the estate of man. He commanded therefore all the
Villages through the which he was to pass, to be strewed with Flowers and
Garlands, and Wine to be set forth at every man's door, for all men that would
drink. He caused Wagons also to be made, of largeness able to carry great
numbers, and decked the same with precious Furniture. The King went foremost
with his Friends, and next to them his Guard, wearing upon their heads Garlands
of Flowers, some playing upon Flutes, some upon Harps: every one generally
through the Army adorned his Chariot according to his ability and substance;
and consuming the whole day in Banqueting, did hang their rich Armor beside
them. Alexander, with such as he called to his Company, was carried in a
Chariot, laden with Cups of Gold, and other golden Vessels; and with his
drunken Army he marched thus seven days together, in ostentation of the prey
they had gotten; wherein they showed such dissoluteness, that if one thousand
of the subdued people had given them the onset, they might have taken them
Prisoners, and led them away in triumph. But Fortune, which has appointed both
Fame and Estimation to things, turned all this disorder unto his Glory: for
both the Age that was then, and the Posterity that came after, marvelled, and
took it for a wonder, that he durst go so dissolutely among those Nations, not
yet established under his Empire; the barbarous People reputing his Rashness
for an assured Confidence. But shedding of blood ensued after this Triumph: For
Prince Aspastis (spoken of before) was commanded to be put to death: So that
his excess in Voluptuousness, was no let unto his Cruelty, nor his Cruelty an
impediment to his Voluptuousness.

THE TENTH BOOK OF QVINTVS CVRTIVS.
Of the Acts of Alexander the Great, King of Macedon.
ABout the same time Cleander, Sitacles, Agathon, and Heracon, who by the Kings
appointment had put Parmenio to death, returned to him, bringing with them five
thousand Footmen and a thousand Horsemen. There were many Accusers that
followed them out of the Province whereof they had the Governance; their
behavior being such, that the acceptable service they had done to Alexander,
in killing of Parmenio, could be no satisfaction for the multitude of offenses
they had committed. They used such an universal spoil, not abstaining from
Temples, nor from consecrated things. The Virgins also and great Ladies of the
Country whom they had ravished, complained of them, lamenting the shame they
had sustained. They used such Covetousness and inordinate Lust in their
Authority, that it caused the name of the Macedons to be hated amongst those
Nations. And yet among all the rest, Cleanders offense was most horrible, who
ravishing a Virgin of Noble Parentage, gave her to his Slave to use as his
Concubine.

The greater part of Alexander Friends were not so much offended with their
cruelty and foul acts, whereof they were accused, as with Parmenio his death,
which they kept in silence, lest the rehearsal thereof might have procured them
favor with the King; rejoicing that the Kings Justice was fallen upon the
Ministers of his Wrath, and that no Power or Authority gotten by evil means,
could have any long continuance.

Alexander hearing the Cause, said, that the Accusers overslipt the greatest
Offense, which was the despair of his own safety; for if they had either hoped
or believed that he should ever have returned out of India, they durst never
(he said) have committed any such heinous offenses. He commanded them therefore
to prison, and six hundred Soldiers to death, who had been the Ministers of
their cruelty; and they also were executed the same day, whom Craterus had
brought as Authors of the Rellellion out of Persia. Within a while after,
Nearchus and Onesicritus, who had been commanded by the King to search the
Ocean-sea, returned to him, declaring some Discoveries by knowledge, and some
by report: They showed him of an Island not far from the mouth of Indus, which
abounded with Gold, and had no breed of Horses amongst them; wherefore the
Inhabitants would give a Talent for every Horse brought from the Main-land.
They also told him of great and monstrous Fishes (whereof those Seas were full)
which carried down with the Tide, would show their bodies as big as a great
Ship, and follow the whole Fleet with a terrible noise; and when they dived
underneath the water, they troubled the Seas, as it had been a Shipwreck.
These were things they had seen; the rest they received by the report of the
Inhabitants: as how the Red Sea took his name of King Erithrus, and not of the
color of the Water. They showed also another River not far from the Main-land,
growing full of Palm Trees, where was a great Wood, and in the midst thereof
stood a Pillar, where King Erithrus was buried, with an Inscription on it of
such Letters as were used in that Country.

They added besides, That such Vessels as carried the Merchants, and the
Vassals of the Army, through the covetousness of the Gold which had been
reported unto them, were landed in the Island by the Mariners, and were never
seen after. These words moved Alexander much, and put him in a great desire to
get more certain knowledge of those parts; and therefore he commanded them
again to Sea, willing that they should coast the Land, till they came within
the River of Euphrates, and from thence to come up to Babylon against the
Stream. The things were infinite that he compassed in his head: for he
determined after he had brought the Seacoast of the Orient under his
subjection, to go out of Syria into Africa, for the envy he bare to the
Carthaginians; he purposed from thence to pass over the Deserts of Numidia,
toward the Gades, where he understood by fame that Hercules had planted his
Pillars; and so directing his Journey through Spain (the which the Greeks of
the River Iberus call Iberia) to go over the Alps into Italy, till he should
come to the Coast where the next passage was unto Epirus. For this intent he
gave commandment to his Officers in Mesopotamia, That they should cut down
Materials in Mount Libanus, and convey the same to Capsagas, a City in Syria,
and there make Galleys of such greatness, that every one of them might be able
to carry seven Oars upon a Bank; and from thence he willed them to be conveyed
unto Babylon. He also sent commandment to the King of Cyprus, to furnish them
with Iron, Hemp, and Sails.

Whiles these things were in doing, he received Letters from Porus and Taxiles,
signifying, That Abiazares was dead of a Disease, and that Philip his
Lieutenant in those parts was slain, they being put to death who were the
Actors of it. Alexander in the place of Philip preferred Eudemon that was
Captain of the Thracians, and gave Abiazares Kingdom to his Son. From thence he
came to Pasargades, a Country of the Persians, whereof Orsines was Lord, who in
Nobility and Riches exceeded all other men in those parts, as one that derived
his Pedigree from Cyrus, that once was King of Persia. The Riches his
Predecessors left him were great, and he by a long continuance in his
Inheritance and Authority had much increased the same.

He met Alexander coming thitherwards, and presented both him and his Friends
with Gifts of sundry sorts, which were a multitude of young Horses ready to be
backed, Chariots wrought with gold and silver, precious Movables, excellent
Pearls, and sparkling Stones, weighty Vessels of Gold, Robes of Purple, and
four thousand Talents of coined Silver. But this his liberality was the
occasion of his death: for when he had presented all the Kings Friends with
Gifts above their desire, he honored not Bagoas the Eunuch with any Gifts at
all, whom Alexander especially favored for the use of his body, by which he
did oblige the King unto him: There were therefore some that gave him
admonition how much Alexander esteemed Bagoas; but he answered them,

That his custom was to honor the Kings Friends, and not his Minions; and that
it was not the manner of the Persians to have any in estimation, who did
pollute themselves in so shameful an abuse.

When his words were reported to the Eunuch, he used the Power which he had got
by dishonest Arts, to the destruction of that noble and innocent man; for he
did suborn certain lewd persons of Orsines Country, to bring in false
Accusations against him, which he warned them to present at such a time as he
should appoint unto them. In the mean season, whenever Bagoas got the King
alone, he would fill his credulous ears with tales against Orsines; ever
dissembling the cause of his displeasure, lest thereby he might lose the
reputation of his false report.

The King had not Orsines yet in suspicion of such a Crime as afterward he was
charged with; but he began to grow with him out of estimation. His accusation
was ever so secret, that he could never get knowledge of the peril that was
privily wrought against him. This importunate Favorite, in his vile
conversation had with the King, was mindful ever of the malice he bare to
Orsines, whom he would not cease to bring in suspicion of Covetousness and
Rebellion, so often as he saw Alexander bent to use him familiarly. And now the
false Accusations were in readiness, which he had prepared to the destruction
of the innocent, whose fatal destiny, which did approach, could not be avoided.

It chanced that Alexander caused the Tomb wherein Cyrus Body was buried to be
opened, pretending to use certain Ceremonies for the dead, but thinking in very
deed that his Tomb had been full of Gold and Silver; whereof there was a
constant fame amongst the Persians: But when it was viewed, there was nothing
found but a rotten Target, two Scythian Bows, and a Scimiter. Alexander caused
the Coffin wherein Cyrus Body was laid, to be covered with the Garment which he
himself accustomed to wear, and set thereupon a Crown of Gold; marvelling that
the sumptuousness used in burial of such a King, endued with so great Riches,
was no more then in the burial of an ordinary person. When this thing was in
doing, Bagoas stood next unto Alexander, and beholding him in the face said
unto him:

What marvel is it though the Sepulchers of Kings be empty, when Lords Houses
are not able to hold the Gold that they have taken out from thence? For my
part, I never saw this Tomb before; but I have heard Darius report, That there
were three thousand Talents buried with Cyrus. From hence (said he) proceeded
Orsines liberality, in winning your Favor by the gift of that which he knew he
could not keep.

When he had thus stirred up Alexanders wrath against Orsines, he presented
them whom he had suborned to accuse him; by whose report, and by Bagoas
informations, Alexander was so incensed against Orsines, that he was put in
prison before he could suspect he was accused. The Eunuch was not contented
with the destruction of this innocent man, but at his death laid violent hands
upon him; unto whom Orsines said, I have heard that Women in times past have
reigned, and born great rule in Asia; but it is now a more strange thing that
an Eunuch should have the Empire in his hands. This was the most Noble of all
the Persians: He was not only an innocent man in this matter, but such a one as
did bear singular affection unto Alexander, and had showed great liberality to
him and his. At the same time Phradates, who was suspected to have gone about
to make himself King, was put to death.

Alexander began then to be much inclined to the shedding of blood, and to be
credulous in hearing of false reports: of such a force is Prosperity to change
a man's nature, wherein few men have consideration of Virtue. Thus he who a
little before would not condemn Lincestes Alexander, when he was accused by two
Witnesses, and suffered diverse of more mean estate to be acquitted, though it
vexed him that they seemed not guilty to other men; thus he who bestowed
Kingdoms upon his Enemies whom he had subdued, was in the end so much altered
from his former inclination, that against his own appetite, at the will of a
vile Minion, he would give Kingdoms unto some, and take away Lives from others.

About the same time he received Letters of the Affairs in Europe, whereby he
understood that whiles he was in India, Zopyrius his Lieutenant in Thrace made
an Expedition against the G^tes, where by Storms and Tempests that suddenly
rose upon him, he was destroyed and all his Army. When Suthes understood the
defeat of that Army, he procured the Odrisians that were his Countrymen to
revolt; so that all Thrace was in a manner lost thereby, and Greece it self
stood in no great safety.

The Writers of the Acts of Alexander the Great, make mention in this place of
Calanus an Indian, a man very famous in Philosophy, who by the persuasion of
King Taxiles, followed Alexander, and ended his life after a strange manner:
When he had lived threescore and thirteen years without any Disease, at his
coming into Persia he felt a pain in his belly, by which conjecturing that the
end of his life was come, lest such a perpetual felicity as he had lived in
should be interrupted by any long Disease, or tormented by the multitude of
Medicines which Physicians do use to administer, he required Alexander that he
would cause a Fire to be made, that he might burn himself in the same.

The King began to dissuade him from his purpose, thinking to have withdrawn
him from the execution of so horrible an act; but when he perceived with what
stedfastness and constancy he upheld his resolution, and that there was no way
to keep him any longer in life, he suffered a Fire to be made according to his
will, into which Calanus did ride on horseback, making first his Prayer to the
gods of his Country; and taking the Macedons by the hands, required them that
they would spend that day pleasantly in banqueting with their King, whom not
long after he said he should see at Babylon.

When he had spoken these words, he went cheerfully into the Fire; and carrying
his body in a comely posture, he kept still the same gesture and countenance at
his death, which he was accustomed to do in his life. When the Fire flamed, the
Trumpet sounded, and the Men of War made such a shout as they were accustomed
to do when they joined in Battle with their Enemies, which rebounded, to the
skies; the Elephants also made a terrible noise. These are the things which
grave Writers do testify of Calanus, who was a notable Example of an
invincible mind, and constantly bent to endure adversity.

From thence Alexander advanced to Susa, where he took to Wife Statira, the
eldest Daughter of Darius, whose youngest sister called Dyrpetis, he gave in
marriage unto Ephestion, and bestowed fourscore Virgins of the Noblest of all
the Nations he had conquered, to the principal Macedons, and to the chief of
his Friends, because he would not seem alone to begin so strange a Custom.
These Marriages were celebrated after the Persian manner, and a magnificent
Feast prepared at the Espousals, at which there were nine thousand Guests
present, to every one of whom Alexander gave a drinking Cup of Gold. At the
same time the Rulers of the Cities whom Alexander had subdued and builded, sent
unto him thirty thousand young Soldiers that were all of one age, furnished
with (...) Armor, and fit for any Enterprise of the War, whom he called
Epigony, that is to say, Successors. The Macedons at their coming seemed to be
somewhat appalled, who wearied with long War, used often in their Assemblies to
murmur, and speak mutinous words against their King; for which cause he
prepared these Soldiers to restrain the arrogance of the others, and gave them
great benevolences.

Harpalus, to whom the King had committed the charge of the Treasure and
Revenues at Babylon, hearing of the Acts that Alexander had done in subduing
the greater part of the Kings of India, and his success to be so prosperous
that nothing could withstand him, knowing the unsatiable desire that was in
Alexander to visit far Countries, and to increase his Glory, thought it should
be a hard matter for him to return to Babylon again: Wherefore he gave himself
to delight and riot, misusing many that were Noble and free-women, and wallowed
in all kind of voluptuousness; insomuch that he sent for a famous Harlot called
Potonice, to whom he both gave many great and Princely Gifts while she was
alive, and also after her death spent thirty Talents on her Tomb.

Having in these and such other voluptuous Vanities consumed a great part of
the Treasure, when he understood that Alexander was come out of India, and did
execute Justice upon his Officers, who misused them over whom they had the Rule
(by reason he was privy to his foul Conscience) he feared the like might fall
on himself: And therefore gathering together five thousand Talents, and six
thousand mercenary Soldiers, he took his way toward Athens, no man being
willing to receive him by the way. When he came to Tenaron (where a great
number of the mercenary Greeks who had been discharged out of Asia were
assembled) he left his Soldiers there, and went to Athens with his Money.

When he was come thither, a great number of Citizens flocked about him; but
more for love of his Money, than for any respect unto himself: but especially
the Orators, whom by small Rewards he easily corrupted to defend his Cause
before the People. But afterward, at a general Assembly, he was commanded to
depart the City; and so he returned again among the Greek Soldiers, by whom he
was slain. After that, with thirty Ships they passed over to Sunium, which is a
point of Land in the Territory of Athens, from whence they determined to have
entered into the Haven of the City.

These things being known, Alexander, who was much moved as well against the
Athenians as against Harpalus, prepared a Navy to make War in person
immediately against them. As he was busied about it, he understood by secret
Letters, both how Harpalus had been in Athens, and had corrupted with Money the
chief of the City, and also how afterward, by a Council of the People, he was
commanded to depart from thence, and returning amongst the Greek Soldiers, he
was betrayed and slain by one of them. These news greatly rejoiced Alexander,
whereby he had occasion to leave off his Journey into Europe; but he sent
commandment to all the Cities of Greece, that they should receive all their
banished men, such only excepted as had committed any murder on their own
Countrymen. Although the Greeks kn^w this to be the breach of their Laws and
Liberties, yet as men that (...) not disobey his Will, they called home their
banished men, and restored to such of them their Goods who did remain: Only the
Athenians, who evermore defended obstinately the Liberties of their
Commonwealth, and who had not been accustomed to live under the obedience of
any King, but under the Laws and Customs of their Country would not permit that
such dregs of men should live amongst them, but did drive them out of their
bounds; ready to suffer any thing, rather than to receive such who sometime
were the vomit of all their City, and the refuse of the Outlaries.

The time was come that Alexander now intended to dismiss his old Soldiers,
and to send them home into their Country; but he willed first thirteen thousand
Footmen and two thousand Horsemen to be chosen out, to remain still in Asia,
which he judged might be kept with a small Army, because (he thought) the many
Garrisons he had planted, and the Cities which he had newly builded and filled
with Inhabitants, would be able to awe such as should attempt any Rebellion.
But before he would distinguish who should depart, and who should remain, he
caused a Proclamation to be made, That all Soldiers should declare their debts
(wherewith he perceived many of them to be heavily burdened); and though it did
rise through their own excess, yet he was determined to discharge every man.
But the Soldiers thinking it had been but a device to find who were most
prodigal, delayed the time, and brought not in their Declarations.

The King perceived shame to be the cause thereof, and not disobedience or
obstinacy; and therefore he caused Tables to be set up through his Camp, and
ten thousand Talents to be brought forth; of all which Treasure, when their
Debts were paid, according to the just account, there remained of Talents no
more but an hundred and thirty: Whereby it appeared, That they who were the
Conquerours of so many rich Nations, brought out of Asia more Glory than Spoil.
After it was once known that some should be dismissed, and some remain behind,
they thought the King would have established his Kingdom perpetually in Asia:
Wherefore like madmen, and unmindful of all Discipline of War, they filled the
Camp full of seditious words, and came to the King more arrogantly, and with
greater violence than ever they did before, and all with one voice required to
be discharged, showing him the hoariness of their hair, and their faces
deformed with scars. And herein they could not be staid, either by chastisement
of their Officers, or by any reverence of their King; but when he would have
spoken unto them, they would not suffer him to be heard, but disturbed his
Speech with their tumultuous cry, and violent throng, protesting, That they
would never move one foot forwards to any place, except it were toward their
own Country. After some hours (because they thought that Alexander would
incline to their purpose) they kept silence, and stood in expectation what he
would do. Then Alexander spoke thus unto them:

What means this so sudden a consternation of your mind, and this so
petulant and so wild an insolence? I am afraid to speak unto you, you have so
(...) broken your obedience toward me. I am now become a King at the
appointment of my People; you have neither left me the liberty to speak unto
you, nor to know you, nor to exhort you, nor to behold you. Being determined to
send some into their Country, and to bring the rest with me shortly after, I
see those who are to be dismissed, to cry out and mutiny, as well as those who
I appoint to stay with me. What is the meaning of this? The cry is all alike
everywhere, although the Cause is diverse. I would fain know whether they
complain that depart, or they that are to tarry?

When he had spoken those words, they cried all (as it had been with one mouth)
All, All, All. Then he said;

Truly it cannot be so; nor can I be persuaded that you should all be grieved
for the cause you declare, seeing it touches not the greatest part of you; for
I have appointed more to depart, then to remain with me. There must needs be
something of worse consequence then appears, that you should turn away from
me. When was it ever seen, that a whole Army has forsaken their King? The
Slaves run not from their Masters all at once; but there is always a shame in
some to leave him, when the rest forsake him. But why do I forget that you are
desperately mad? why do I go about to cure those that are uncurable? I condemn
from henceforth all the good hope that ever I conceived of you, and am
determined to deal no more with you as with my Soldiers (seeing you will not
be mine) but as with men ungrateful, and unmindful of my goodness. The cause of
this your madness is even the abundance of your prosperity, whereby you forget
your old estate, from which you are delivered through my benefit. You are men
worthy to have spent your lives in your former beggary, seeing you can better
(...) your adversity than prosperous fortune. Behold, you who not long ago
were Tributaries to the Illyrians and the Persians, do now disdain Asia, and
the spoils of so many Nations: You, who under Philip did go half naked, do now
contemn Robes of Gold and Purple. Your eyes cannot endure any longer to behold
the light of Gold and Silver: You desire again your Wooden Dishes, your Targets
made of Wicker, and your Swords covered with rust. I received you (...) this
gallant condition, with five hundred (...) when all my Exchequer exceeded not
the (...) Talents. This was the Foundation of (...) with (without envy be it
spoken) I have (...) the greatest part of the World. Are you weary of Asia,
which has ministered unto you occasion of so much Glory, that by the greatness
of your Acts you are made equal unto the gods? Do you all make such haste into
Europe, to forsake me that am your King? The greater part of you should have
lacked Money to bear you home, if I had not paid your debts. Are you not
ashamed, who have plundered all Asia, to carry the Spoils of so many Nations
within your bellies only? and to return home to your Wives and Children, not
being able to show any of the Rewards of your Victory? Many of ye in the way
shall be compelled to pawn your Armor, if you forsake this good hope which you
might receive at my hand. These are the goodly men of War that I shall want,
who of all their Riches have nothing left them, but only their Concubines. The
wa^ lies open for your departure; Get you gone out of my sight: I, with the
Persians, will defend your backs when you are gone: I will hold none of you:
Deliver mine eyes, you ungrateful Countrymen, of the sight of you. Shall your
Parents and Children (think you) receive you with joy, when they shall see you
return without your King? Shall they covet to meet such as are fugitives, and
forsakers of their Prince? I shall (...) at your departure; and wheresoever you
shall be, I shall desire to be revenged; honoring always, and preferring above
you, those whom you have left here with me. Now you shall know of what force an
Army is, that is destitute of a King; and what moment does consist in me alone.

When he had spoken these words, he leaped in a fury from the Judgment Seat,
and ran into the throng of the armed men, where he took with his own hands such
as had mutined most against him; of whom there being not any that durst make
resistance, he delivered thirteen to his Guard to be safely kept. Who would
have thought that an Assembly, who a little before had spoken unto their Prince
with such audacity and rigor, could have been so suddenly appalled with fear;
and seeing their Companions led to execution, durst none of them make the least
attempt to oppose him? But the inordinate liberty they used before, and
seditious violence, was then so staid, that not one of them durst resist the
King, running amongst them, but were all astonished for fear, and stood like men
amazed with doubtful imaginations, looking what he would determine of
themselves. Whether it were the reverence they bare to his Name, because the
Nations that live under Kings are accustomed to honor them as gods; or whether
it were the Majesty of his Person, or else his own assured Constancy, executing
his Authority with such violence, that did put them in such fear: but they
showed a notable example of Patience; for they not only not stirred at the
execution of their Companions, whom they knew to be put to death in the
nightime; but were more diligent in performing their duties than they were
before, pretermitting nothing pertaining to obedience, and the natural
affection toward their Prince: For on the next day they came to the Court, and
being not suffered to enter, but all shut out saving the Soldiers of Asia,
they made a sorrowful cry and lamentation, which spread over all the Camp,
protesting, That they would not live, if the King continued still in his wrath.
But he that was obstinate in all things which he had once conceived in his
head, having commanded the Macedons to keep still in their Camp, did assemble
the strange Soldiers together; to whom, by an Interpreter, he made this
Oration.

At what time I came first out of Europe into Asia, my trust was to bring many
noble Nations and a great power of Men under my Empire and Dominion, wherein I
was not deceived: For besides that Fame reported you to be the men of Valor, I
have found in you one thing more, which is an in^^^parable Obedience, Fidelity,
and Affection toward their Prince. I thought Voluptuousness had o^^^flown all
Virtues amongst you, and that through your great felicity you had been drowned
in Pleasures: But I find otherwise, and perceive that none do observe the
Discipline and Order of the Wars better than you, nor execute the same with
more activity and resolution; and being manful and valiant men, they embrace
Fidelity as well as Fortitude. This I do but now confess, but I knew it long
ago: which was the cause that I chose you out of the Youth of so many Nations,
to be my Soldiers, and did incorporate you amongst mine own People, causing
you to wear the same Armor; but your Obedience toward Authority appears
much better in you, than in them: Therefore I have joined to my self in
Marriage the Daughter of Oxares, who is a Persian, not disdaining to beget
Children upon a Captive: And afterward desiring abundantly to increase the
Issue of my body I took to Wife the Daughter of Darius, and was the Author that
my near Friends should beget Children upon their Captives; minding by this holy
Covenant to exclude the difference between the Conqueror and the Conquered.
Wherefore you must now think, that you are not Soldiers by me adopted, but
more natural; and that Asia and Europe is one Kingdom, without any difference.
I have given unto you Armor after the manner of the Macedons: I have brought
all strangeness and novelty into a custom; and now you are both my Countrymen
and my Soldiers; in all things receiving one form and fashion. I have not
thought it unseemly for the Persians to shadow the Customs of the Macedons, nor
for the Macedons to counterfeit the Persians, seeing they all ought to be under
one Law and Custom, who should live under one King.

When he had made this Oration, he committed the custody of his Person unto the
Persians; he made them of his Guard, and his Officers of Justice, by whom when
those Macedons who had given the occasion of this Sedition were led bound unto
Execution, one of them who was more ancient, and of greater estimation than the
rest, spoke after this manner:

How long will you give place unto your will, in executing us after this
strange manner? Your Soldiers and your own Countrymen are drawn to Execution
by their own Prisoners, before their cause is heard. If you have judged us
worthy of death, at leastwise change the Ministers of your wrath.

This was a good admonishment, if he had been patient to hear the truth; but
his wrath was grown into a fury, so that when he saw those who had the charge
of them to stay a little, as willing to respite the Execution, he caused the
Prisoners to be tumbled into the River, and there drowned. Notwithstanding the
cruelty of this punishment, the Soldiers were not moved to any sedition, but
repaired in great numbers to their Captains, and unto such as were near about
the King, requiring, That if there yet remained any infected with the same
Offense, that he should command them to be put to death; proffering their
bodies to be punished, and executed at his own will.

After it was known that the dignity of being the Kings Lieutenant was given
unto the Persians, and that they were distributed into diverse Orders, with such
names given unto them as were unto the Macedons, and that the Macedons were
rejected with reproach; they could not then longer contain themselves, nor the
dolor they had conceived in their hearts; but with a great throng pr^ssed to
the Court, wearing only their nethermost Garments, and leaving their Weapons
without the Gate, in token of repentance: there with weeping, and all tokens of
humility, they made request to be admitted to the Kings presence, beseeching
that he would vouchsafe to pardon their Offense, and to pacify his wrath with
the death of so many of them as he should think good, rather than to suffer
them to live in such a reproach; which except he would release, they protested
they would never depart out of the place. When these things were declared unto
Alexander, he caused the Court-gates to be opened, and came forth amongst them;
where beholding their lamentation and repentance, and the posture of their
miserable affliction, he could not abstain to weep a long time with them, and
in consideration of their modesty, forgave them their former offenses; and
after he had moderately told them their faults, and again comforted them with
gentle words, he discharged many from the Service of the Wars, and sent them
home magnificently rewarded, writing to Antipater his Lieutenant in Macedonia,
that he should assign them the chief places in the Theaters at Triumphs and
public Shows, where they should sit with Garlands on their heads, willing,
that their Children after their deaths should enjoy their Fathers Pay. He
appointed Craterus to be their Ruler, to whom also in the place of Antipater he
had committed the Government of Macedonia, Thessalia, and Thracia, Antipater
being sent for to repair unto him with a supply of young Soldiers.

Alexander had received Letters before, both from him and Olympias his Mother,
by which there appeared to be some discontents between them: For his Mother
accused Antipater that he went about to make himself King; and Antipater did
write how Olympias did many things otherwise than did become her. Antipater did
take his calling away so grievously to heart, that he conspired thereupon to
poison Alexander, who having accomplished what he resolved to have done,
advanced to Ecbatana in Media, to set in order the necessary Affairs of his
Empire, and there ordained solemn Triumphs and Feastings.

It chanced that Ephestion, whom the King entirely loved, and used in the place
of a Brother, did die at the same time of a Fever; whose death Alexander took
more heavily than may well be credited, committing in his grief many things
that were unbeseeming the Majesty of a Prince: He commanded Ephestions
Physician to be hanged, as though he had died through his negligence. He lay
embracing of the dead body, and could hardly be taken away by his Friends, but
continued his sorrow night and day.

There are many other things written on this Subject, which are scarcely
credible; but it is certain, that he commanded Sacrifice to be made unto him,
as to a god, and consumed in his Burial, and in making of his Tomb, above
twelve thousand Talents. As he was returning to Babylon, the Chaldean Prophets
met him on the way, exhorting him not to enter into the City; for it was
signified, That if he went thither at that time, he should be in great peril of
his life. Notwithstanding, he regarded not their Admonitions, but went forward
in his Journey, according as he was appointed; for he understood that
Ambassadors were come thither from all Regions, and tarried for his coming:
the terror of his name was so spread through the world, that all Nations
showed an obsequiousness toward him, as though he had been appointed to be
their King: This caused him to make haste to Babylon, to keep there as it were
a Parliament* of the whole World. When he was come thither, he received the
Ambassadors gently, and afterward dismissed them home again.

There was about the same time a Banquet prepared at the house of one Thessalus
Medius, whereunto the King (being invited) came with such as were appointed to
keep him company: But he had no sooner drunk of Hercules Cup, but that he gave
a deep groan, as though he had been struck to the heart; and being carried out
of the Feast half dead, he was so tormented with pain, that he required a Sword
to have killed himself. His Friends did publish abroad, that drunkenness was
the cause of his disease; but in very deed it was prepared Treason, the infamy
whereof, the Power of his Successors did oppress. The poison prepared long
before, was delivered by Antipater unto his Son Cassander, who, with his
brethren Philip and Iolla, were accustomed to serve the King at meat: he was
warned that he should not commit the said Poison to any Person, except it were
to Thessalus, or to his own brothers Philip and Iolla, who were both accustomed
to take the assay of the Kings Cup; and having the poison ready in cold water,
mixed it with Wine, after they had tasted it. When the fourth day was come, the
Soldiers, partly because they suspected he was dead, and partly because they
could not endure to want long his sight, came sorrowfully unto the Court,
desiring to see the King; who by his commandment were admitted unto his
presence, by such as had the charge of his person.

When they beheld him lying in that estate, they made great sorrow and
lamentation, for he seemed not to them to be the same whom they were accustomed
to behold, but rather a dead Corpse. If their grief were great, the sorrow of
them who stood next to the Bed, appeared much greater; whom when Alexander
beheld to lament after that sort, he said unto them:

When I shall depart, you shall find a King worthy of such men as you are.

It is a thing incredible to speak, how that during the Soldiers of his whole
Army came to visit him* he never altered his countenance nor gesture, but
continued in that presence, which he gave unto the first, unto the last man.
When he had dismissed the multitude, as though he had been discharged of all
debt of life, he lay down to rest his weak body; and his voice beginning to
fail him, he commanded his Friends to draw near unto him: then taking his Ring
from his Finger, he delivered it to Perdiccas, and gave therewith a commandment
that his Body should be conveyed to Hammon. They demanded to whom he would
leave his Kingdom? he said, To the worthiest. By which words it appeared, that
he foresaw the Contention that was like to ensue upon his death. Perdiccas
moreover demanded of him, when he would have divine Honors done unto him. At
such time, said he, as you shall find your selves in Felicity.

These were the last words Alexander spoke, and shortly after he died.
Immediately after his death, the Court was full of howling and lamenting; and
by and by, as it had been in a desert place, all things were hush, and a
sorrowful silence was spread over all grief being converted into imagination,
what the event should be. The young men of the Nobility that were accustomed
about the Kings person, could not bear the greatness of their dolor, nor keep
themselves within the compass of the Court, but ran (...) as men out of their
wits, whereby their City (...) filled with sighs and tears, and no kind of
lam^^^ation pretermitted, that sorrow is accustomed (...) administer in such a
case: Such therefore as were without the Court, as well Macedons as others,
come running thither, where the Conquerours from the conquered could not be
discerned, so equal and mutual was their sorrow.

The Persians called upon their just and merciful Lord, and the Macedons made
invocation unto him that was so just and gracious a King; and thus there was a
certain contention among them. They did not only use the words of grief and
heaviness, but also of murmuring and indignation, that so young a Prince, being
in the flower of his age, and so fortunate in success, should by the envy of
the gods be so taken out of this world. They called to remembrance what a
cheerfulness they had always seen in his countenance, both when he led them to
the Battle, or when he besieged or assaulted any City, or when he would give
any commendation to the Valiant in any Assembly.

Then the Macedons repented that ever they had denied him divine honor,
confessing themselves both wicked and ungrateful in depriving him of any name
whereof he was worthy. And when they had continued long in the veneration and
desire of him that was dead, they began to lament their own condition, who
coming out of Macedon, were beyond the River Euphrates, amongst the midst of
their Enemies, who unwillingly received their new Government. They saw
themselves left destitute, and the Empire without any certain Heir; for want of
whom every one would go about to draw the Power of the State into his own
private interest. Then they began to conceive and foresee the Civil Wars that
did ensue, and that they should be enforced to shed their blood again, not for
the Conquest of Asia, but for the Title of some such a one as would go about to
make himself King. Moreover, that such who by reason of their age had been
discharged from the Wars by their noble and righteous King, should now be
enforced to spend their lives in the quarrel of one who was but his Soldier.

Whiles they were in these imaginations, the night came on* and increased their
terror: The men of War watched in their Arms, and the Babylonians looked over
the Walls, peeping out from the tops of their houses, to discover some
certainty how the Affairs passed. There was not one that durst kindle any
light; and because the use of the eye did fail, they laid their ears to hear
the rumor and words that were spoken; and many times they were afraid, when no
cause of fear was; and when they met together in the narrow streets, or dark
lanes, they would be amazed, and suspect each other as enemies. The Persians
after their accustomed manner, cut short their hair, and with their Wives and
Children lamented the death of Alexander in mourning Garments with unfeigned
affection, not as a Conqueror, or one that lately had been their Enemy, but as
their right and natural King; for they being accustomed to live under a King,
could think no man more worthy then himself to rule over them.

This sorrow was not contained within the walls of the City, but straightways
it spread over all the Country thereabouts. And the Fame of so great a mischief
flying throughout Asia, brought early tidings thereof unto Darius Mother: She
at the first report did tear asunder the garment she did wear, and putting on
mourning apparel, she pulled her hair, and fell down grovelling upon the earth.
One of her Neeces sat by her mourning for the death of Ephestion, who not long
before had married her, and in an universal heaviness bewailed the cause of her
private sorrow: but Sisigambis alone sustained all their miseries, and bewailed
both her own condition, and her Neeces, her fresh sorrow causing her to call to
mind things past. A man would have judged by her behavior, that Darius had
been newly slain, or that she had now celebrated the Funerals of two Sons
together: She did not only lament the dead, but sorrowed also for the living.

Who shall now (said she) take care of these young Women? Or who can be like
unto Alexander? Now we are taken Prisoners again: We are newly fallen again
from our Dignity and Estate. After Darius death we found one to defend us: but
now since Alexander is gone, who will have respect unto us?

Among these things, she called to mind how Occhus the cruel King had slain
her Father, and four-score of her Brethren in one day; and that of six Children
born of her Body, there was but one of them left alive. She saw that Fortune
had advanced Darius, and caused him to flourish (...) to the intent she might
end his life by (...). Finally, she was so overcome with sorrow, that (...)
covered her head, turning her self from (...) and Nephew that sat at her feet;
and abstaining both from meat, and from beholding the light, (...) ended her
life the fifth day after she was determined to die. This her death was a great
argument of the clemency which Alexander had showed toward her, and of his
justice toward all the Captives, seeing that after Darius death she could not
endure to live; but after Alexanders departure, she was ashamed to continue any
longer.

Consider Alexander justly, and we must impute all his Virtues to his own
nature, and his Vices either to his youth, or to the greatness of his Fortune:
there was in him an incredible force of Courage, and an exceeding sufferance of
Travel: he was endued with manhood, excelling not only Kings, but also such as
had no other virtue or quality: he was of such liberality, that oftentimes he
gave greater things than the Receivers would have wished for of God. The
multude of Kingdoms that he gave in Gift, and restored to such from whom he had
taken them by force, was a token of his Clemency toward them whom he had
subdued. He showed a perpetual contempt of Death; the fear whereof does amaze
other men: And as there was in him a greater desire of Glory and worldly Praise
than reason would admit; so it was tolerable in so young a man, performing so
great and wonderful Achievements. The reverence and affection he bare toward
his Parents, appeared in the purpose he had to consecrate his Mother Olympias
to immortality, and in that he so strictly revenged his Father Philips death.
How gentle was he toward his Friends? and how benevolent toward his
Soldiers? He had a wisdom equal to the greatness of his heart, and such a
policy and foresight as so young years were scarcely able to receive. A measure
he had in immoderate pleasures, and lusted less than Nature desired, using no
pleasure but what was lawful: These indeed were wonderful great Gifts and
Virtues; but in that he compared himself to the gods, coveting divine honors,
and believing the Oracles that persuaded such things; that he was offended with
them that would not worship him, and given more vehemently to wrath than was
expedient; that he altered his habit and apparel into the fashion of strangers,
and counterfeited the custom of those whom he had subdued and despised before
his Victory, these were Vices to be attributed to the greatness of his fortune:
As the heat of youth stirred him unto anger, and to the desire of Drinking, so
age might have mitigated again those distempers. Notwithstanding it must needs
be confessed, that though he prevailed much by his Virtue, yet ought he to
impute more unto his Fortune, which only of all mortal men he had in his own
power. How often did she deliver him from the point of Death? How did she
protect him with perpetual Felicity, when he had rashly brought himself into
peril? And when she had decreed an end to his glory, she even then was content
to finish his life, staying his fatal destiny until he had subdued the Orient,
visited the Ocean, and fulfilled all that man's mortality was able to perform.

To this so great a King, and so noble a Conqueror, a Successor was wanting;
and it was a task of too great an importance for any one man to take it upon
him: his Name and Renown was so great amongst all Nations, that they were
counted most noble, who could be partakers (though it were never so little) of
his prosperous Fortune. But to return again to Babylon, from whence this
digression has been made.

They who had the Guard and Custody of Alexanders person, called into the Court
such as had been his chief Friends, and Captains of the men of War, after whom
there followed a great multitude of Soldiers, desiring to know who should be
Successor unto Alexander. The throng of the Soldiers was such, that many of
the Captains were excluded, and could not enter into the Court. A Proclamation
therefore was made, whereby all men were forbidden to enter, except such as
were called by name: But because their commandment seemed to want authority, it
was but little regarded, and the multitude at first began to make a doleful cry
and lamentation; But immediately the desire they had to understand the event,
stopped their lamentation, and procured silence. Then Perdiccas brought forth
in sight of all the people, the Kings Chair of Estate, wherein Alexanders
Diadem, his Royal Habiliments, and his Armor was laid; amongst which Ornaments
Perdiccas also laid down the Kings Signet, delivered to him the day before; at
the sight whereof they began to weep, and to renew again their sorrow. Then
said Perdiccas:

Lo, here is the Ring wherewith he was accustomed to Seal such things as
pertained to the Government of his Empire, which as he delivered to me, I so
restore it again to you: And though no affliction can be devised by the gods
(were they never so much offended) comparable to this; yet considering the
greatness of the Acts which he has done, we must think that as the gods sent
such a man so to reign in the world, (his time being expired that was
appointed) they have called him back again to the place from whence he came:
Forasmuch therefore as nothing more of him remains capable of immortality,
let us perform the Rites pertaining to his Body, remembering in what City we
are, amongst what kind of people, and what a King and Governor we have lost.
We must consider and consult how to maintain our Conquest amongst those men
over whom it is gotten; for the doing whereof, it is needful for us to have a
Head; but whether the same shall be one or many, it does consist in you. You
are not ignorant that a multitude of men of War is a Body without life. Six
months are now passed, since Roxaue was conceived with child; we desire of the
gods that she may bring forth a Son, which may enjoy this Kingdom when he
comes to Age: In the mean season appoint you by whom you will be governed.

When Perdiccas had spoken these words, Nearchus rose up, and said:

There is no man can deny but that it were requisite that the Succession should
continue in the Blood Royal; but to look for a King that is not yet born, and
to pass over one that is born already is not expedient for such men as the
Macedons are, nor yet does serve the necessity of the time. There is a Son whom
Alexander begot on Barsines, wh^t should hinder why the Diadem may not be set
upon his Head?

Nearchus discourse was acceptable to no man; therefore the Soldiers,
according to their custom, clashed their Spears against their Targets, and
continued making a noise: And when he would not forsake his opinion, but
obstinately maintained the same, it had almost bred a sedition; which being
perceived by Ptolomy, he spoke after this manner:

Neither the Son of Roxane, nor of Barsines, is an Issue meet to reign over the
Macedons, whose names we should be ashamed to mention within Europe, their
mothers being Captives. Have we subdued the Persians to that end, to become
subject to such as are descended of them? That was it which Darius and Xerxes,
being Kings of Persia, did labor for in vain, with so many millions of men of
War, and with so many Navies. This therefore is my opinion, that Alexanders
Chair of Estate be set in the midst of his Court, and that all such as were
accustomed to be of Counsel with him, assemble together, so often as any
business requires to be consulted on, and that the Captains and Rulers of the
Army be obedient to that Order whereunto the greatest number do assent.

There were some agreed with Ptolomy, but few with Perdiccas. Then Aristonus
spoke in this manner:

When Alexander was demanded to whom he would leave his Kingdom, he willed the
worthiest to be chosen: Whom judged he worthy but Perdiccas, to whom he
delivered his Ring? This was not done at such a time as he was alone, but when
all his Friends were present he did cast his eyes amongst them, and at length
ch^se out one to whom he delivered it. For this cause I think it right, that
the Kingdom be committed to Perdiccas.

Many agreed to his opinion, so that the Assembly cried out to Perdiccas, that
he should (...) amongst them, and take up the Kings Signet: But he stayed
between ambition and modesty, thinking the more modesty he used in the
obtaining the thing he so much desired, they would be so much the more earnest
to proffer it to him. When he had stood a good while at a stay, doubting what
to do, at length he drew back, and stood behind them who sat next to him.
When Meleager, who was one of the Captains, saw the stay that Perdiccas made,
he took courage on his seeming unwillingness, and said:

Neither the gods will permit, nor men will suffer, that Alexanders Fortune,
and the weight of so great an Empire should rest upon his shoulders: I will not
rehearse that there are many present more noble than he is, and of greater
worth, without whose consent no such thing may be suffered to be done. There is
no difference whether you make Perdiccas King, or the son of Roxane, whenever
he shall be born: Perdiccas goes about to make himself King, under pretense to
be Governor to the Infant; this is the cause why no King can please him, but
such as is not yet born. And in so great a haste as all we make to have a King,
(which haste is both just and necessary for the preservation of our estate,) he
only does wait for the expiring of times and months, imagining that she should
bring forth a man-child, which I think you doubt not but he is already
prepared to counterfeit and exchange, if need be. If it were so in very deed
that Alexander had appointed him to be our King, I am of opinion that the same
thing only (of all the things he had commanded) ought not to be observed or
performed. Why do not you run rather to seize upon the Treasure, seeing the
people ought to inherit it?

When he had spoken those words, he brake through the press of armed men; and
they who gave way to him, followed him to the spoil, whereof he made mention.
The greediness of the Treasure caused a great Band of armed men to flock about
Meleager, and the Assembly began to fall into sedition, which had grown to a
greater inconvenience, if a mean Soldier (whom very few did know) had not
stepped forth, and spoken to the multitude.

What need we (said he) grow into a Civil War seeing we have a King already,
whom you seek to find? the same is Arideus the Son of Philip, and brother to
Alexander, who lately was our King* born and brought up with him in the same
Religion and Ceremonies that we do use, who being the only Heir, I marvel by
what undesert of his he is neglected? or what has he done, why he should not
enjoy his right descended unto him by the universal law of the world? If you
seek one to be compared to Alexander, you shall never find him: If you will
have such a one as shall be next unto Alexander, this is only he.

When these words were heard amongst the multitude, they kept silence at the
first, as if they had been commanded by Authority; but afterward they cried
with one voice, that Arideus should be called, and that they were worthy of
death who made the Assembly without him. Then Pythan being b^d^wed with tears,
began to speak.

Now I perceive (said he) Alexanders case to be most miserable, seeing he is
defrauded of the fruit, which such as were his Soldiers and Subjects should
bring forth at such a time as this is: For looking only on the Name and Memory
of your King, you are utterly blind in other things.

His words tended directly to the reproof of Arideus, that was his elected
King; but his Speech procured more hatred to the Speaker, than contempt to the
young man against whom it was intended: For the compassion they had of Arideus,
caused them the more to favor his Cause; and therefore they declared with a
general Acclamation, That they would not suffer any to reign over them, but him
only who was born to so great a hope; and still they called for Arideus to come
forth amongst them. Whereupon Meleager (for the malice* ^^d envy he bare unto
Perdiccas) took an occasion boldly to bring him into the Assembly, whom the
multitude saluted as King, and called him Philip.

This was the voice of the people; but the Nobility were of another mind,
amongst whom, Python took upon him to put Perdiccas Plot in execution, and
appointed Perdiccas and Leonatus (descended both of the Blood Royal) to be
Governors of the Son which should de born of Roxane: Adding moreover, that
Craterus and Antipater should have the Rule within Europe; and upon this, they
swear the Soldiers to be obedient to Alexanders Issue. Meleager then doubting,
not without cause, that some evil might come unto him, d^parted with such of
his Faction, but he returned immediately again, bringing Philip with him into
the Court, and cried out to the multitude for the assi^ting of the
Commonwealth, in aiding of the new King, whom a little before they had Elected;
and willed them to make an experience of his Abilities, persuading them that he
was the fittest to Rule over them, being the Issue of P^i^ip, and has both a
King to his Father, and a King to his Brother.

There is no profound Sea so stormy nor tempestuous, or that raises up so many
surges and waves, as a Multitude does motions and alterations, when they swell
with the hopes of a new Liberty, not likely long to continue. There wanted not
some who gave their consent to Perdiccas; but more agreed to make Philip King:
They could neither agree nor disagree a long time together; one while repenting
them of their Counsel, and immediately again repenting them of the repentance.
Yet finally, they were inclined to prefer the Kings Blood.

Arideus was put in such fear with the Authority of the Nobility, that he
departed out of the Assembly; after whose departure, the favor of the
Soldiers was rather silenced than diminished toward him: so that at length he
was called again, and his Brothers Royal Habiliments which lay in the Chair
were put upon him, and Meleager put on his Corslet, following as a defense to
the Person of the new King. The Phalanx clashed their Spears to their Targets,
threatening to shed his blood, who went about to take the Kingdom that pertained
not unto him. They rejoiced that the strength of the Empire should not be
divided, but still continue in the same Blood and Family; the right of whose
Title by Inheritance, coming of the same Bloud-Royal, they showed themselves
ready to defend. For by reason they were accustomed to have the Name of their
King in such honor and veneration, they thought no man worthy of it* but such
a one who by descent was born to reign. Perdiccas therefore was afraid, and
with six hundred men that were of an approved manhood, took upon him to defend
the place where the body of Alexander lay. Ptolomy joined himself unto him
also, and the Band of the young Gentlemen that were about the Kings Person: but
so many thousands of armed men as were on the other side, did easily break in
upon them; amongst whom Arideus was present, with a great Band for the guard
for his Person, whereof Meleager was chief. Perdiccas therefore in great fury
called such to his guard as would defend Alexanders Body; but many of them were
sore hurt with Darts that came from the contrary side.

At last the ancient men plucked off their Headpieces (the better to be known)
and desired them who were with Perdiccas to abstain from Civil War, and give
place to the King, and to the greater part. Wherepon Perdiccas was the first
that laid down his Weapon, and the rest did in like manner. Meleager then
persuaded them that they should not depart, but remain still about the dead
Corpse: But Perdiccas judging it to be a deceit contrived to entrap him, drew
back to the side of Euphrates, lying on the furthest part of the Court. Then
the Horsemen, which consisted chiefly of the Nobility, flocked about Perdiccas
and Leonatus, whose opinion was to depart out of the City, and to take the
Field; but because Perdiccas was not without hope that the Footmen would have
taken his part, he therefore remained still within the City, lest he might seem
to be the cause that the Horsemen should divide themselves from the rest of the
Army. Meleager ceased not to beat into the Kings head, That he could not
establish himself surely in his Throne, but by the death of Perdiccas, whose
ambitious mind* and desire of Innovation, was to be prevented in time. He
willed the King to remember what Perdiccas had deserved at his hands, and that
no man could be faithful to him whom he feared. The King rather suffering than
assenting to his counsel, Meleager took his silence for a commandment, and sent
for Perdiccas in the Kings name; they who were sent having Commission to kill
him, if he should make any delay to come with them. Perdiccas hearing of their
coming, accompanied only with sixteen young Gentlemen (accustomed to attend
upon Alexanders Person) met them as they would have entered into his Lodging,
and calling them Meleagers Slaves, rebuked them with such a constancy both of
mind and countenance, that they returned back as men amazed. Perdiccas willed
such as were in his company to keep on Horseback, and with a few of his Friends
repaired unto Leonatus, intending i^ any violence were moved against him, to
repulse it with a greater force.

The next day the Macedons murmured, and thought it unjust that Perdiccas
should be brought in danger of death; and therefore determined with force to
revenge the rashness of Meleagers doings: But he understanding of the Mutiny
that was among the Soldiers, gave place; and they repaired to the King,
demanding of him, If he had commanded Perdiccas to be taken? He confessed the
thing: but it was done (he said) by Meleagers instigation; for which they ought
not to raise any tumult, seeing that Perdiccas was alive. The Assembly hereupon
brake up, and Meleager became so greatly afraid, especially by the departing of
the Horsemen, that he knew not what to do; for he saw the mischief which he a
little before had intended against his Enemy, to light upon himself: and while
he debated with himself on this, and on that, three whole days were consumed.
Howsoever, the accustomed form and fashion of the Court did remain in the mean
season; for the Ambassadors of diverse Nations did address themselves unto the
King, the Captains of the Army were present, and the Guard waited in Armor as
they were accustomed: But the great sadness that was there, without any
apparent cause, signified some extreme despair. There was such a suspicion
amongst themselves, that men durst not converse one with another, but had
secret imaginations by themselves; and by comparing the time present with the
time past, and the new King with the old, they began to desire the King that
was gone. Then one enquired of another, What was become of the King, whose
Fortune and Authority they had followed? They found themselves abandoned
amongst so many unquiet and unconquered Nations, who were desirous upon any
occasion that might befall, to be revenged of the injuries they had received.

While they were troubled in these imaginations, word was brought, that the
Horsemen (who were under Perdiccas) kept the Fields about Babylon, and stayed
all Victuals from coming to the City: whereupon first began a scarcity, and
afterward a famine; therefore such as were within the City thought good either
to make a reconciliation with Perdiccas, or else to fight it out. It so
chanced, that such as dwelled abroad in the Country, fearing the spoil of the
Villages, repaired into the City; and they within the City, for want of
Victuals departed into the Country; so that every one thought themselves surer
any where, then where their own Habitations were: Then the Macedons doubting
some great inconvenience that might proceed from this fear, assembled together
in the Court, and declared their Opinions. It was agreed amongst them, that
Ambassadors should be sent to the Horsemen, for the sur^^asing of all strife
and division. Pasas a Thessalian, Amissas a Megapolitan, and Perelaus, were
sent from the King, who declaring their Commission, received answer, that the
Horsemen would not lay down their Arms, till the Authors of that Sedition were
delivered into their hands* When they were returned, and their answer known,
the Soldiers, without any appointment, put on their Armor, and made such a
Tumult, that the King was enforced to come forth of the Court, and said unto
them:

If we shall be at strife among our selves, our Enemies that are at quiet shall
enjoy the fruits of our Contention: Remember that the Quarrel is with your own
Countrymen, with whom if you rashly break the hope of Reconcilement, you shall
be the beginners of a Civil War: Let us prove if they may be mitigated by
another Embassy: I am of belief, that because the Body of Alexander remains
yet unburied, they will gladly come together to perform the Obsequies unto the
Dead. And for my part, I had rather surrender up again this Dignity, then that
any blood should be shed amongst my Countrymen; for if no ^^ther hope of
Concord does remain, I desire and beseech you to make a better Choice.

Tears then falling from his eyes, he took the Diadem from his head, and
holding the same forth with his hand, he was ready to have delivered it to any
man who would profess himself to be more worthy then he. The moderation that he
used, both in his words and behavior, caused them all to conceive a great good
hope of his Noble Nature, which till that time was obscured by the height of
his Brothers Fame: They therefore encouraged and importuned him to go forwards
as he had devised: whereupon he sent again the same Ambassadors that went
before, who had Commission to desire that Meleager might be the third Ruler of
the Men of War. That demand was not much stuck at; for Perdiccas was desirous
to remove Meleager from the King, and conceived that the King being alone, the
King would not be able to match with Leonatus and himself.

Upon this Meleager marched out of the City with the Footmen, and Perdiccas met
him in the Fields, riding before the Bands of the Horsemen: There both Battles
saluting one another, Concord and Peace (as it was thought) was confirmed
betwixt them for ever: But it was decreed that Civil Wars should arise amongst
the Macedons; for Government is impatient of Partners, and the Kingdom was
coveted by many: At first they gathered, and afterward dispersed their Forces;
for when the Body was burdened with more Heads then it could bear, the other
Members began to fail. So the Empire of the Macedons, which under one Head
might well have stood, when it was divided into Parts, fe^^ to ruin. For this
cause the people of Rome justly must confess themselves bound unto their Prince
for the felicity they enjoy, who, as a Star in the night, appeared unto them
that were almost lost: Surely it was not the rising of the Sun, but of him that
gave light unto the world in darkness; for without such a Head, the Members
that were at variance must needs have failed: How many Firebrarnds did he
quench? How many drawn Swords did he cause to be sheathed? How great a Tempest
did he pacify with the sudden calm of his presence? The Empire now does wax
verdant and flourishing; let me desire, without envy, that his house may
continue many Ages, and his Posterity for evermore.

But to return again to the order of the History, from whence I was brought
through the contemplation of our Universal Felicity; Perdiccas judged the only
hope of his own safeguard to consist in the death of Meleager, thinking it
necessary to prevent him, being a man both variable* unfaithful, given to
innovation, and besides his mortal Enemy: But with deep dissimulation he kept
his purpose secret, to the intent, that with less difficulty he might oppress
him unawares: He therefore did subo^^ privily certain of the Troops under his
own Command, to complain openly (as though it were without his privity) that
Meleager should be made equal with him in Authority; which words of the
Soldiers when they reported unto Meleager, he became in a great rage, and
declared them to Perdiccas, who seemed to wonder at it, and to be passionately
sorry for it; and finally, they agreed amongst themselves, that the Authors of
such seditious words should be apprehended.

When Meleager perceived Perdiccas so conformable, he embraced him, and gave
him thanks for his fidelity and benevolence: then in a consultation betwixt
them both, they devised how to destroy such as wrought this division betwixt
them; for the bringing of which to pass, they agreed the Army should be purged
according to their Country-custom: To the doing whereof they seemed to have a
sufficient occasion, by reason of the late discord amongst them. The Kings of
Macedon, in the lustration of their Army, were accustomed to use a kind of
Ceremony, dividing the bowels of a Dog into two parts, and to cast the same in
the uttermost bounds of the field on which they intended to muster their Army:
the Soldiers within those bounds were all to stand armed; the Horsemen, the
Mercenary Soldiers, the Phalanx, and every one apart. The same day that this
Ceremony was put in execution, the King stood in order of Battle, with the
Horsemen and the Elephants against the Footmen, of whom Meleager had the Rule.

When the Troops of Horsemen began to move, the Footmen were suddenly possessed
with a great fear; and by reason of the late discord, conceived a suspicion,
that the Horsemen did intend no good unto them: wherefore they stood a while in
doubt, whether they should retire into the City or not, by reason that the
fields served best for the Horsemen. At last they stood still, with a fixed
resolution to fight, if any should offer them violence. When the Battles were
almost met, and only a small distance left, (whereby the one part was divided
from the other) the King, by the provocation of Perdiccas, with a Band of
Horsemen did ride along by the Foot, requiring the delivery of such to be
executed as were the Authors of the Discord, whom in very deed he ought to have
defended; and threatened, if they refused their delivery, to bring against them
both the Horsemen, and the Elephants. The Footmen were amazed with the
suddenness of the mischief which they looked not for, and there was no more
counsel nor courage in Meleager, then in the rest; but they all judged it most
expedient for them to abide the adventure of that request, and to expect rather
then to provoke Fortune.

When Perdiccas saw them astonished, and in fear, he severed out to the number of
three hundred of such who followed Meleager when he brake out of the Assembly
that was first made after Alexanders death, who in the sight of the Army were
cast to the Elephants, and there trampled to death with their feet; of which
Philip was neither the Author nor the Forbidder, but thought to claim that for
his own act, which should appear best in the end. This was a signification, and
a beginning unto the Macedons, of the Civil Wars that insued. Meleager
understanding over-late the deceit of this fine Plot, because there was no
violence offered unto his person, stood at first quietly within the Phalanx,
but shortly after, when he saw his Enemies abusing to his destruction the Name
of him whom he had made King, he despaired of his own safety, and fled into a
Temple: But the Religion of the place could not so defend him, but that he was
there slain.

Perdiccas hereupon brought again the Army into the City; and calling a Council
of all the principal Personages, it was agreed so to divide the Empire, that
the King should remain as Chief of the whole; Ptolomy was to be Lieutenant in
Egypt and Africa, and to have the Rule of the Nations there that were under the
Macedons Dominion: Syria and Phenicia were appointed to Laomedon; Cilicia to
Philotas; Lycia, with Pamphylia, and the greater Phrygia, were assigned to
Antigonus; Cassander was sent into Caria, and Menander into Lydia; the less
Phrygia, that joyneth unto Hellespont, was Leonatus Province; Eumenes had
Cappadocia and Paphlagonia, who was commanded also to defend that Country so
far as Trapezunt, and make War with Arbates, who only remained an Enemy to the
Empire: Media was appointed Python, and Thracia to Lysimachus, with other
Nations thereabouts, bordering upon the Sea of Pontus. It was ordained also,
that such as should be the Governors over the Indians, Bactrians, Sogdians,
and the other Nations lying upon the Ocean and Red Seas, should, in matter of
Justice, use Regal Jurisdiction. It was decreed, that Perdiccas should remain
with the King, and have the Governance of the Men of War that followed him.
Some believe that these Provinces were thus distributed by Alexanders
Testament, but we have found the same to be false, though some Authors do
affirm it.

The Empire being thus divided into parts, every one might well have defended
his proportion, if any bounds could contain men's immoderate desires; for they
who before were but servants to a King, did not long after, under a specious
color, invade one another Kingdoms, being all of one Nation, and having
certain bounds to their Dominions allotted to them: But it is hard for men to
be contented with that they have in possession, when occasion is proffered them
of more; for the first things always appear of no value, when men are in hope
of greater things to come; so that every one of them thought it an easier
matter to increase his Kingdom, then it was at the first to get it. Alexanders
Body, in the mean season, lay seven days unburied; for whiles every man had
care for the establishing of the State, their minds were drawn from the
performing of the Solemn Office to the Dead. There is no Country more fervent
in heat then Mesopotamia; for the Sun there burns so hot, that it kills the
Beasts that are without covert, and burns up all things as it were with fire:
And to the increase thereof, there are but few Springs of water; and the
Inhabitants use such policy in hiding of those they have, that strangers can
have no use of them.

Notwithstanding this, when Alexanders Friends had the leisure to take care of
the dead Body, and came to visit the same, they found it without infection,
corruption, or change of color; the same cheerfulness of spirit which he had
alive, being not yet departed out of his countenance. Then the Egyptians and
the Caldeans were commanded to im^alm his Body after their manner; who at the
first (as though he had been alive) showed a fear to put their hands to him;
but afterward making their prayers that it might be lawful for mortal men to
touch him, they purged his body, and filled it with sweet Odours, and
afterward laid him upon a H^rse of Gold, and set a Diad^m upon his head. It is
recorded that he died of Poison, and that Io^la, Antipaters Son, being one of
his Ministers, had given him the same. Alexander oftentimes would say, That
Antipater coveted the Estate of a King, affecting more greatness then pertained
to a Lieutenant; and that through the glory of the Victory he had gotten of the
Lacedaemonians, was become so proud, that he claimed all things committed to him
as his own. It is thought also, that Craterus was sent to kill him, with those
old Soldiers that were dismissed.

It is certain that there is a Poison in Macedonia, found in a water called
Styges, of such force, that it consumes Iron, and will not be contained in any
thing except in the Hoof of a Horse, or Mule; which Poison was brought by
Cassander, and delivered to his Brother Iolla., who presented it in the drink
which the King last drank. However these things are reported, the power of them
of whom the rumor was spread, shortly after oppressed the infamy thereof: for
Antipater became King both of Macedonia and Greece, who afterward took away by
death the Kings Offspring, all being slain who had any Alliance to him,
although in the most removed Consanguinity. Ptolomy (who had the Rule of Egypt)
conveyed Alexanders Body to Memphis, which within few years after was removed
to Alexandria, where all Honor is given to his Memory and his Name.

FINIS.

