A LETTER OF MERIC CASAUBON D.D. etc. TO Peter du Moulin D.D. and Prebendarie
of the same Church: Concerning Natural experimental Philosophy, and some books
lately set out about it.

ALMA MATTER CANTABRIGIA
HINC LUCEM ET POCULA SACRA

CAMBRIDGE, Printed for WILLIAM MORDEN Bookseller. 1669.

Honored Brother,
YOu have not forgotten, I dare say, (it is not so long since) where and when
you were pleased to bestow a Visit upon me, two young Universitie men being
then with me; and you came with a book in your hand, and delivered it to me
with a smiling countenance, which, as soon as I had opened the book, I did
interpret, having already contested with you more then once about the same
matter, as though by it you hoped to stop my mouth for ever. I cannot say you
did intend it so really: but so I did interpret it then; but it did fall out
much otherwise. For after I had opened it, by the very Title of it, I was much
confirmed in my former opinion, and professed it so to you, which occasioned
much discourse between us until I was weary, and (as my condition is now)
somewhat spent. Ever since that, what I now write, has been in my mind, and I
have had thoughts to impart it to you long before, though still somewhat has
diverted me. The matter in agitation between us (I need not tell you, I know)
was: whether this way of Philosophy, of late years much cried up in London and
elsewhere; was, as set out by some, more likely to prove advantageous, or
prejudicial, if not destructive, to good learning: by which I mean, (not
excluding natural Philosophy) what in former ages of the world, and by many to
this day (by you also I make no question) has been and is accounted true,
solid, useful learning: which has been cherished and countenanced by Kings and
Princes and Public States, in their generations, in all places of Europe
hitherto; and has gotten credit and admiration to the Owners and Professors
of it during their lives, and after their death, immortal fame.

But before I enter upon the business, I must make my way by removing of a
block, which I meet with artificially laid by some, to fright us in our
progress, and hinder the freedom of our enquiry. It is this: Whether it be not
a breach, if not of Allegiance, yet of that respect and reverence we ow to the
Royal Founder, to except against any thing that is done, or written by any, who
profess themselves of the Royal Society? I should not make such a question, but
that I find just occasion, as I conceive. I do not well understand the full
extent of that speech, used by some, to diminish the Royal Society. Diminutio,
in the Civil Law, you know, is a very comprehensive word, and reaches to many
things. Were it but a breach of good manners, and civility; or, as they speak,
want of modesty and breeding, I would be loath to be guilty of it. But God
forbid, that such reasoning should pass for current, in good earnest. That his
Majesty would so far encourage any kind of learning, as not only to be the
FOUNDER, but style Himself the PATRON also of such a Society, is an act well
becoming the magnanimity of a great King, and to be entertained with humblest
acknowledgements by all that pretend to learning. But to interest that Sacred
name, in every thing, or any thing that is done, or written by any, that have
the honor to be of that Society, though commended to us under the title of
good and profitable learning, I think is not justifiable: neither is the whole
Society, as I conceive, concerned (except it be owned by express authority of
the whole body) in what is done by any one or more members of the Society: it
being very possible, that many, who even in those things that concern learning
and knowledge in general, are of different judgments and opinions, may yet
agree in somewhat sufficient to justify their title to this Royal Foundation.

Give me leave to insist a little (for it is a tender point) upon the danger,
or unreasonableness of such remote inferences. Daily public Prayers, you know,
were at first instituted by Primitive Christians, as the most immediate service
of Almighty God: grounding, not only upon the practice of the Church, under
the Law; but also upon the words of St Paul: I exhort therefore etc. for kings,
and all that are in authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in
all godliness and honesty: and that the peace and welfare of kingdoms, the
honor and safety of Kings and Princes, did very much depend on the due and
daily performance of that Service, was so general a belief in those days of
exemplary piety, that we read of heathen Princes and Emperors, who, though not
Christians otherwise, yet have had so much faith and Christianity, as to
commend their safety to the Church upon that account. This, if you please, you
may find out of good records of antiquity sufficiently proved and attested, in
a little Treatise Of the use of Daily Public Prayers; written by me somewhat
hastily, to help a learned Bishop against a pack of bold and confident
Adversaries: sent by me to the late Reverend and learned Archbishop of Armagh;
and by him, at the request of that learned Bishop, shortly after sent to the
Press. In England, beside the authority of such Precedents, and of St Paul's
Exhortation, or institution: that such a Service is established by the
Authority of Kings (who also may in some respect, because of those many
Cathedrals of their foundation, where it is most duly and solemnly performed,
be styled Founders of it in this kingdom:) and Parliaments, who knows not?
Now, (to pass by the consequence of the Royal Authority, and what the wilful
contempt of it may amount to) I ask: The honor, safety and prosperity of
Kings, according to the belief of those Primitive Christians, whom all true
Christians, profess to honor and reverence, being so much concerned in those
Prayers; would it be charitable hence to infer, that none love the King truly,
and study his safety, but those that love and frequent them, when not otherwise
lawfully let or hindered? That some hate and forbear them upon that account,
(factious men otherwise, and Fanatics, or openly schismatical) I make no
question: but to make a general conclusion of it, when we know that the same
effect may proceed sometimes from very different causes, would argue, I think,
great want of judgment and discretion, and as great, if not greater, of
charity. With much more reason I conclude, that a man may write against the
opinions of some of the Royal Society; yea and censure them as they may
deserve, without any reflection at all upon the Royal Founder, or Royal Society
in general.

In the next place, what made me judge of the Book, as I did, at the first
opening of it, by some words in the Title Page, though probably I might tell
you then, yet I will now further explain my self. I observed there, Practical
useful learning, appropriated to the way now in use, by experiments: and those
that go any other way, and follow other studies, which have been formerly in
request, styled, men of the Notional way. By Practical useful learning,
Chemistry and the Mathematics, as the Author does explain himself, are also
comprehended; whatsoever is besides, so far as I can understand by the book, is
proscribed, as useless, notional and unprofitable. I had observed it before in
another book, written by a learned man, a great admirer and abetter of
Experimental Philosophy, who speaks of the Ancients, and ancient learning with
a show of much more respect and moderation: but in effect, to the same purpose,
to cry down all other studies and learning, ordinarily comprehended under the
title of humane learning, to be but umbratick things, verbal things, of little
or no use, since this new light of true real Knowledge especially. Now, what
other arguments need they, either to advance the credit of their way, and of
that way they commend to us; or to cry down any other way that has hitherto
been in request; then to make the world believe, that it is of no use? You know
what judgment was passed against the fig tree, that bare no fruit: And that
earth or ground, which instead of herbs meet for the use of men, bears
nothing but thorns and briars, ( disputing and wrangling, in their phrase) is
pronounced by St Paul, accursed, and worthy to be burned. But, I ask; what is
it that these account useful, and useless? For if nothing must be accounted
useful, (as some seem to determine) but what does afford some use for the
necessities, or conveniences of this present life; I do not know but that a
Brewer, or a Baker, a skilful Horseleech, or a Smith, or the like, may contest
in point of true worth or desert with many, who for their learning, as then
thought, have been reputed generally, the great Lights and Ornaments of their
age: though such, as never meddled in their writings with experimental
philosophy. They that believe that man does consist of two chief parts, the
body and a soul, whereof the soul the more noble and more considerable part, as
even Heathens most of them have determined it: natural reason will oblige them
to believe, that a greater share of care and provision does belong to that
which is immortal, from the right ordering of which all true happiness, present
or future, does depend; then to that which is mortal, and naturally brutish,
and of little continuance. Those men therefore, who have applied themselves by
their writings to promote virtue and godliness, in their kind, (that is, so far
as God was known to them) were generally thought to have deserved of mankind,
as well (if not better) as the most renowned inventours, or promoters of useful
Arts or Trades. Had Aristotle never written any thing but his Ethics, (that
incomparable piece) he deserved the thanks of all ages; and I make no question
but in all ages, even since Christianity, many thousands have reaped the fruit
of that incomparable work, which alone is sufficient where it meets with right
palats to speak its worth; but compared with others, that have written of that
argument since, and have not trodden in his paths, becomes more illustrious. I
might say the same of those Aurea Carmina, which are attributed to Pythagoras,
and which Galen (that excellent both Philosopher and Physician) had in such
esteem, that he did not only commend them to others, as a sovereign antidote
against the diseases of the mind, but himself does profess of himself, that he
was wont first to read, but afterward to repeat them once or twice every day,
for the benefit he reaped by them. So of Cebes his Table: of Cicero's Offices:
and (not to name others) of Epictetus his Enchiridion, though much later then
some of the rest, yet not inferior unto any. And here, by the way; both by him
and some others that have written upon him, we may find this very point
excellently well handled; Whether those men who make it their work to reclaim
men from that (...), or close adherence of the mind to the body and senses
(which most men are naturally prone to) to the care and culture of their souls,
ought in reason to be accounted unprofitable to the Commonwealth; or rather,
of all Professions, the most useful and necessary. I wish some of our
Mechanics, who are so highly conceited of their way, laying aside prejudice
and preengagement (if they can) would take the pains to read those admirable
discourses: it may be they would find, that the sway of the times, more then
any weight of right reason, has led them hitherto, into this opinion.

But alas! poor Aristotle; your Author will not allow of above three books of
his to be worth the reading; and his Ethics is none of them. And elsewhere he
does question, whether those works, generally ascribedto Aristotle, were, or
are his indeed? whereby we may guess, though he have written against him, he
says, how well he was read in Aristotle. Else, the style of Aristotle, so
constant to it self every where, and in a manner unimitable; but much more the
matter so solid and rational every where almost, would easily have convinced
him. But certainly the light account he makes of him all along, reproaching his
adversary so often, for his love to and esteem of Aristotle, would make a man
admire what account he made of himself. I think he had done well, before he had
taken such a task upon himself, to have made it appear (the easier task of the
two, as I conceive) that all men that have been famous in former ages, for
their judgment, wit and learning, were no such thing really as they appeared
unto the world, but mere Idols and Phantasms, not true rational men, such as
this latter age has produced; and their judgment therefore not at all to be
regarded. Then indeed we might with more patience, and equanimity hear what he
has to say against Aristotle, for sound and solid reason, and for all manner
of knowledge attainable by mere man without divine revelation, the wonder of
all ages hitherto. But not to insist on former ages, I will name but one man of
very fresh memory; What, do you think that Julius Caesar Scaliger, for learning
and judgment, may be put in the balance to be weighed with your Author? Vir
propter excellentem omnium disciplinarum eruditionem admirandus: So Pererius,
that learned and judicious Jesuit of him: and so, so many others, that a man
out of all kind of writers might easily swell a book into a great volume of
testimonies concerning that admirable man. He had read Aristotle to the
purpose, it seems, again and again, by the use that he makes of him upon every
occasion: but seldom names him without some intimation of highest admiration
and veneration, that can without Idolatry be deferred unto man. And what think
you of mere Naturalists, such as Laurentius, Fabricius ab Aquapendente,
Casserius Placentinus, (I name them because I have them by me at this time) and
the like? Will their testimony be considerable? Fabricius, I remember, though
he dissent from Aristotle, sometimes freely enough, yet so devout an admirer of
Aristotle was he, that somewhere he does profess some kind of scrupulousness to
acknowledge that Aristotle was ignorant of any thing, in point of nature.
Casserius says little less. Laurentius tells us, what opinion the world
(Philosophi omnes) has always had of Aristotle, styling him, verum naturae
interpretem, ejusdem Genium and Lumen, etc. which himself does also subscribe
to: yet in the same place, he does not only complain of his studied obscurity,
but also, as his judgment and the judgment of diverse others, does give us
this account, that in his writings concerning nature in general, he was much
more happy (beyond what has ever been performed by any other:) then in them,
concerning particular natures, whether of men or beasts: which is a great
commendation, the one proceeding from the strength of his brain and rational
abilities; the other from some defect of sense or better information: which no
man that believes him to have been a man, and no more, can wonder at, or revile
him for. Yet, I believe (and therefore take notice of it) that from this might
proceed that pretty conceit of some men, which passes very current (I find it
in your book twice or thrice) against Aristotle and his Philosophy, among many;
as if his way had been, first, in the retitedness and secrecy forsooth of his
contemplative brain, without the trouble and consideration of particular
objects, to frame to himself general Theories, as certain principles, or
fundamentals; and then to determine of the true nature of particular objects by
those Theories. A pretty fancy I cannot deny; and I doubt he that was the first
author of this, may have many more of the same nature, if well looked into. But
I wonder that any, who can pretend ever to have looked into Aristotle, can
entertain such fancies for real truth. For besides those books of his, which
treat of the nature of particular things, altogether grounded upon matter of
sense and experience; by all his writings it does clearly appear, how much he
did ascribe to experimental knowledge: which to recommend to us the more
effectually; both in his Ethics more then once, and in his Metaphysics, and
elsewhere too (if I be not much mistaken) he does, as to matter of action, or
success, prefer experience without art or knowledge, before art and knowledge,
without experience; though indeed otherwise he does make art of it self, (that
is, general rules and maxims grounded at first upon reiterated experience) and
absolutely, which does look into the causes, and can give satisfactory reasons
of events, more commendable, then illiterate or irrational, though successful
experience. Not likely therefore that Aristotle would frame to himself (which
had been the project of a mad man; and to believe it of him little better:)
general Theories, not grounded at all, upon particular observations: but that
he might be mistaken, or defective in particular observations, (which as long
as there be inquisitive men in the world, may still be increased and rectified)
is very possible: and thereupon his Theories, by men of judgment and
ingenuity, amended or perfected. As on the other side, particular observations
until they be reduced to art or theories, that is, to general rules or maxims
(which is the highest operation of the rational faculty) are not much useful;
which made the great oracle of Medicine to say, that (...); and mere Empiricks
have always been accounted dangerous men.

But having commended Aristotle's Ethics as I have done, against which I know
objections are made by more then one; I think my self bound to give you some
further account about it. What those objections are, I shall not now enquire,
or take upon me particularly to refute: but instead of that, for a general
answer to all objections that are made, or can be made, I shall appeal to the
Divinity of the tenth and last book of the said Ethics, which as I conceive,
with indifferent ingenious men, is very sufficient to make amends for all
defects or defaults, if any such be granted. To give you a right estimate of
that book, according to my apprehension; I cannot better then in saying,
(though I will not say, that Aristotle intended it so,) that it contains,
allowing it but some variation of terms, as must of necessity be supposed, a
full and perfect Paraphrase, or Comment upon the first Psalm; whether penned by
David himself, or by any other, but penned of purpose all men grant, as an
Introduction to the rest of the Psalms, treating of man's Summum bonum, or
chiefest happienss, wherein it does consist. To begin with that which is
positive, or affirmative: His delight says the Psalmist, is in the law of God:
to fulfill it, as I take it, and to frame his life thereby. See Aristotle from
the fifth Chapter of the tenth book, where he begins to discourse concerning
beatitude, first he does by good and solid arguments prove and evince, that it
must consist (...), in the practice, or exercise of virtue: which in the
Gentiles was some kind of fulfilling of the Law, as we are taught by the
Apostle. But then the Psalmist does oppose the seat of the scornful: (so we
translate: but the Hebrew word you know, does comprehend all mockers, jesters,
buffoons in general; and more particularly, such who have an art, and make it
their practice to turn all sins into jesting and merriment, as appears by
Proverbs 14.9. Fools make a mock of sin: (...): it is the same word. Du Muis,
upon the place very well, That no men are more pernicious, and why:) does
oppose, I say, the seat of such, whether mockers, or jesters; to the practice
or study of godliness and virtue. So does Aristotle too, in the said Chapter,
very particularly. He calls them (...) and (...): and says that such are in
great request with great men ordinarily, because of their continual
facetiousness and merriment: but that true happiness is to be found, not in
such mirth and jollity, (or jocantness,) except it be for a time, by way of
necessary relaxation; but in seriousness: and that great men are not always
best judges of what is right. The Psalmist says, that such an one does
meditate in the law of God day and night: Aristotle makes meditation, or
contemplation, as he calls it, (the Hebrew word may comprehend both:) a further
degree of perfection, whereby men (not forgetting the society of men) approach
nearest unto God, and best resemble him. The Psalmist says, God knows the
way of the righteous: and that he shall be as a tree planted, etc. and that
whatsoever he does shall prosper. Aristotle says, that such an one in all
probability (what could he say more, without Divine revelation?) is most
beloved of God? ((...).) and that God will do him good, or requite him, and
that he is likely thereby to become most happy. Who also does maintain, that
this is the way for a man, ((...)) to purchase immortality to himself: there
also reproving a speech very rife in those days among worldly men, (what may we
think of them, who are so set upon the conveniences of this life that they will
scarce allow any thing else to be considerable?) that mortals so born, should
not trouble their minds with the thought of things immortal. What think you?
does this deserve the note or censure of heathen notions? why I say so you
shall hear by and by. But I have done with Aristotle's Ethics.

Now to return to the magnificent Plea of useful knowledge; much such a
judgment ordinary people made anciently of the most renowned Philosophers, as
Anaxagoras, Thales, and others, whom they did acknowledge to teach (...), that
is, things in themselves excellent indeed, profound and sublime: (...), but
useless, because they contributed nothing to the uses of this present life: as,
Aristotle does somewhere report. This in ignorant Heathens might be tolerable:
but in Christians, great pretenders to knowledge, more to be wondered at. I
lighted some years ago upon a little book entitled The reformed Schoolmaster,
etc. but he treats of the reformation of Universities also, whose case he does
make so sad and lamentable, as nothing can be conceived more: but yet does give
us this comfort, that if he may have his will, or desire, they may become a
thousand times (we may bate him nine hundred; I think one hundred will serve)
more useful. Indeed I never read any man that did not pretend to immediate
commission from God, speak more magisterially, and as it were authentically;
but withal I must say, I never read any thing more whimsical and chimerical,
then his Reformation does appear unto me. He does much relish of Comenius his
project of making all men wise, and goes upon the same grounds. When I see fair
Towns built in the air, and a sure commerce between those who inhabit the
earth, and those of the Moon, whoever they are, established: I shall have some
hopes that these projects, in case (which God forbid!) they be believed and
trial made, may come to somewhat. Whether your Author had his Plus ultra from
thence, I know not; but it matters not; for I think no sober man ever denied,
but that all kind of learning (with Gods blessing) is capable of improvement:
but withal it must be acknowledged, that many conceited, whimsical men, as
Lullus, Ramus, and the like, have projected ways of improvement, which, if
generally received, would have proved very destructive to learning. Amongst
other passages of that little book, this is one: Whatsoever in the teaching of
tongues does not tend to make them an help to traditional knowledge by the
manifestation of real truths in sciences, is superfluous, and not to be
insisted upon, especially toward children: whence follows that the curious
study of Criticisms and observation of styles in Authors, and of strains of
wit, which speak nothing of reality in sciences, are to be left to such as
delight in Vanities more then in Truths. Truth and Reality and Sciences; brave
words are they not to work upon them, who either want will or wit to search
into the bottom of things, where in very deed, instead of deeds and realities
nothing will be found but words? Such is his conceit, that boys and children
must be taught things, before they be taught words or languages. His project
was to advance the credit of Januae linguarum: every page almost has them, and
sometimes he speaks of them, as though all useful learning might be reduced to
them. For my part, I wonder they were ever received into any good School,
except it be to cashier good authors out of them, as needless: whereas I think
the best use of languages is the reading of such authors, not for their words
only, but for the excellency of the matter, which in several kinds, and to
several uses, they do contain: and am very confident that where the reading of
such authors is out of fashion, barbarism and grossest ignorance will quickly
follow. I speak it of Poets as well as others. I cannot but admire at the
conceit of a more considerable man of the same society, (as I conceive) who
would erect a new kind of Poetry, grounded upon the Scriptures, and knowledge
of Nature and experiments, and some other heads; excluding ancient Mythology
(the chief ground and foundation of ancient Poetry) as useless and fictitious.
What, would he have all ancient Poets, Greek and Latin, turned out of doors?
Can such a thing enter into the heart of men, that pretend to the improvement
of learning? This indeed Julian the Apostate, did maliciously plot and enact
against the Christians of his time, forbidding them the use of public Schools,
and reading of ancient Poets: which by the Fathers of the Church was looked
upon as none of the least persecutions. And indeed, if ancient Poets, with
their Mythology be turned out of doors; all ancient authors must likewise,
which, without a competent knowledge of ancient Poets and their Mythology (no
more can ancient Fathers, Greek especially, in very many places) cannot be
understood: Of Homer particularly, as elsewhere in a peculiar Dissertation of
this subject, I have had occasion more fully to declare, my opinion is, that by
reason of his antiquity, and that conformity in many rites, speeches and some
choice sentences, which may be observed in him with the Scriptures of the old
Testament, (observed by some learned Commentators, as Ribera and some others in
their frequent quotations out of Homer; which also made learned Capellus of
Sedan, so confidently to profess his opinion, or suspicion at least, that the
Scriptures of the old Testament, were known to him) he does not only very much
conduce to the right understanding of many obscure places in Scripture, but
also may be some confirmation to the antiquity, and by consequent, in some
degree to the truth of the same. And should I say, that St Paul was no stranger
to Homer, (as I am sure, he was well read in Demosthenes) or Homer no stranger
to him; I hope it would be no disparagement to St Paul, or matter of scandal to
any judicious, sober man, no more then the citing of those Greek Poets (
Epimenides, Menander and Aratus) their words, is or has been: much inferior,
the best of them, to Homer in many respects. And for Virgil (the best of Poets
after Homer) that God was pleased to make use of his incomparable wit, (whereof
himself was the Author, or Donor) to celebrate the coming of his Son our
Savior, into the world; has been the opinion of some ancient and later
Christians; men of excellent judgment. But again, a great part of the ancient
Mythology, though with much Sophistication generally, being derived from the
Scriptures, as learned men anciently, and the most learned of this latter age
have thought, and thereupon taken great pains, some of them to trace it to its
first original, supposing that the Scriptures among the learned and judicious,
would receive no small confirmation by their labors herein; how can it now be
dismissed, or casheered, without some wrong to the Scriptures; which never more
(in this visible sad increase of Atheism every where) wanted all kind of
confirmation!

But much more did I wonder at another passage of the same Author, in a more
considerable subject then Poetry is. It is where he treats of the Schoolmen;
favorably enough I must confess, as when he says, If they would be content
with any thing less then an Empire in learning, we would grant them very much.
I think they are much to blame, if no less will content them: and they as much
who uphold them upon that score. All the rest that follows this is very
moderate and reasonable. But the conclusion, And yet I should not doubt, (if it
were not somewhat improper to the present discourse) to prove, that even in
Divinity it self, they are not so necessary, as they are reputed to be; and
that all, or most of our religious controversies, may be as well decided by
plain reason, and by considerations which may be fetched from the religion of
mankind, the nature of government and humane society, and Scripture it self, as
by the multitude of Authorities and subtilties of Disputes, which have been
heretofore in use:] this I do not understand. According to ordinary
construction, the sense is obvious enough; but a sense so amazing, that it is
not credible. It is well known that before the late troubles, a Nobleman of
this Realm wrote a book entitled De Veritate: the end and drift whereof was,
out of the Religions of mankind to extract a Religion that should need no
Christ. And though they that licensed it did not apprehend it so, it seems; (I
did at first sight) yet himself afterward during the troubles in his Epistola
ad Sacerdotes, printed with the rest of his works, did pretty well unmask
himself and openly showed what opinion he had of Christianity. Since him it is
well known, that some body has taken some pains to attemperate Christianity to
the laws of every Country, and commands of Supreme Powers: and this he does
ground, or endeavor to ground, (not as the other, who did scorn them) upon
diverse passages of Scripture. What can this import, in ordinary construction,
but a new Religion? Especially when it is said, that the controversies of it
may be decided by plain reason, as well as by the multitude of Authorities, and
subtilties of Disputes, which have been heretofore in use. For the
controversies of Christianity every body knows began in the Apostles time, (as
does appear by their writings, a great part of which is spent on that argument)
and being prosecuted and increased in succeeding ages (according to old Simeons
prophecy concerning Christ, (...): Luke 2.34. the effect of which prophecy, as
also of St Paul's, Oportet haereses esse, will continue to the worlds end) by an
host of Heretics and Schismatics, who have been happily repressed and
repelled by those blessed Fathers, and authority of general Councils and
Provincial, which every age afforded, whose excellent works by a singular
providence of God, are yet for the most part, extant: who can expect, or
imagine, that any other course can be available to the maintenance of true
Christianity? And certainly, when and where men (whether through force, or want
of good learning) shall be made incapable to uphold their faith with sound
reasoning and disputing (which they call wrangling) what will be the issue, or
who will get by it, any man may guess. Hoc Ithacus velit, and magno mercentur
Atridae: I shall say no more. I profess sincerely, that I can make no other
sense of the words: I say therefore, I do not understand them. Yet I must
acknowledge, that the same Author does elsewhere speak of Christian Religion,
and the chief mysteries of it, very reverently and zealously; much abhorring,
or professing to abhor all innovations in it, or that it should suffer in any
thing by Experimental Philosophy; yet even there, he does not only fetch the
first establishment of it, (which to me sounds but odly, to say no more) from
Experiments, calling miracles Divine Experiments: but also does commend unto
us, men of honesty, trade and business: (such as deal in Experiments, he does
mean certainly) as the best upholders, or testifiers of it; rather then men of
craft and speculation: alleging to that end the example of the Apostles: who
indeed, most of them, by their profession at first, (and such chosen then of
purpose by a singular providence) were no better then illiterate tradesmen and
laborers: but (which he does not tell us) were not only long taught by Christ
their Master; but also immediately and miraculously inspired (besides the power
of miracles given them) by God, before they began to preach the Gospel unto
men: none of which things, I think, belong to the modern professors of
Experimental philosophy. By men of craft and speculation, by the drift and
tenor of his discourse he can intend no other then ancient Fathers, and
Schoolmen and late learned Writers of Controversies. Now such an assertion, I
conceive not only prejudicial, but very destructive to true Religion and
Christianity. These things how to be reconciled, I profess I know not. To speak
therefore as moderately as I can; I said, and say again, I do not understand
him. If you do, I shall be beholding to you to help me.

But I have not yet done with our School-Reformer. Whence follows, says he,
that the curious study of Criticisms and observation of styles in Authors, etc.
And where have we a Commentator almost, either upon the Scripture (besides
those lately collected and set out in many volumes, under the name of Critics)
or upon any good Author, Greek or Latin, that is not put to his criticisms
sometimes, and observation of styles? which in very deed (observation of
styles) is as considerable a study for the preservation and vindication of all
kind of truth, whether sacred, (all truth is, more or less) or civil, wherein
whole kingdoms and Commonweals are much concerned sometimes, as any study can
be. And what think you of Longinus, whose treatise (...), or de sublimi dicendi
genere, (not many years ago set out by a very learned and worthy man, Dr
Langbaine, Provost of Qucens College in Oxford) has been so much commended
and admired by learned men; when he says: (...): so diametrically opposite?
God bless the Universities, and University-Libraries, from such Reformers!

I now return to your Book; where I meet with an Objection against old learning
and Aristotle particularly, which is made by more then one, but by your Author
(as he does not want words to set out his matter to the best advantage) pressed
very vigorously: which is in his own words, that it has kept him from
surveying the works of God, that magnify and discover their Author, from which
only the true Philosophy is obtained. Good God! can any body that has but
looked into Aristotle, though never so perfunctorily (except it be by the help
of some glass that represents things quite contrary) say so? But he goes on:
And the zeal I have for Almighty God his glory discovered in his creatures has
inspired me with some smartness and severity against heathen notions, which
have so unhappily diverted learned men from the study of Gods great book,
universal nature; and consequently robbed him of that honor, and those
acclamations that are due to him for those admirable results of his wisdom and
goodness. This Author (I said before) does not want words: he can express
himself smartly enough upon very light occasions: which in a good cause is no
small commendation: but otherwise I should have been very suspicious, if not
confident, he had borrowed this goodly language from some profane Chemist, such
as our Robert Fludd was, with whom such professions of zeal for the glory of
God are very frequent and ordinary: and to that end to set out his glory in its
greatest Iustre, does propose unto us the consideration of the Philosophers
stone, applying all or most mysteries of the Scripture to it, as that wherein
only, or chiefly, the Goodness, Power and Wisdom of God is to be seen and
admired: so that in very truth, his zeal was more for the Philosophers stone,
then God; or, the Philosophers stone, a God of his own making, for which he was
so zealous. But this I cannot averr upon mine own credit. For though his books,
when I was very young and curious enough to pry into every thing that promised
somewhat more then ordinary, did offer themselves to me in Booksellers shops;
yet I profess I could never dispense so much with my reason or conscience, as
to read long, where I found nothing but what I judged in a high degree both
impertinent and blasphemous. I must therefore discharge my self upon learned
Gassendus, who together with Mersennus, will I think make good what I have said
of him to the full. But indeed it is the common language of all extravagant
Chemists: they all, as many as I have seen that are such, insist upon the same
thing. Neither is it their plea, or language only; but of all men generally,
who professing Christianity would raise admiration, by broaching unheard of
mysteries. There be men in the world we know, who maintain with much show of
zeal and holiness, that the stars of heaven are so many significant Characters
and Hieroglyphics, there placed by God of purpose the better to manifest his
Wisdom to the beholders, and from the right reading and understanding whereof
greatest mysteries depend. Neither want they some places of Scripture, which
they miserably abuse to countenance the business. Gafarell is a great abetter
of this heavenly mystery. The Glory of God, and the Wisdom of God here also
must be the pretense: which to oppose (in very truth, the result and product of
sick brains hunting after Novelties) how can it be less then heathenish
profaneness and impiety. Yes, if you will believe them. But granting, as I do,
and all men will, that well consider of it, that praesentem Deum quaelibet
herba: that there is nothing in nature, in sight so inconsiderable, but may
give an intelligent man matter and occasion to admire and magnify the Power
and Wisdom of God. Is the consideration of all those, (mentioned in this book)
or like curiosities, the Great Book of God, from which men must learn the great
Power and Wisdom of the Creator? It is ordinary enough indeed (observed by
many) among men to wonder at nothing, though never so wonderful and admirable,
but what is unusual, far fetched, and seldom seen. Many who never took notice
of either Sun or Moon, and the benefits of either; the vicissitudes of the
year; the flux and reflux of the Sea and the like, to admire them, or God in
them, because daily and ordinary: will yet gaze with wonder at a Meteor, the
shooting of a Star, as they call it, or an ignis fatuus, and the like. But they
are not thought the wisest of men, that are of that temper. David, I hope,
understood wherein the Glory of God consisted, and for what God himself would
be magnified by men principally, as well as another. We do not find by any of
those admirable Psalms that are written of that subject, that any other works
of God are specified, but those that are very visible to all men, sufficient
also to make God visible to them, who have so much grace (which wicked Epicurus
had not) to believe that they were not made to eat and drink, and to enjoy the
pleasures of this life; but to observe the works of God, and to glorify him
therefore. And besides those admirable Works of the Creation, which many now
(too many) taught by Epicurus and his mates, are apt to despise and vilify, as
being the works not of a wise God, but blind atoms: there be other works of
God not less to be admired: and those be the Works of his Providence and
Government of the World; which the same Psalmist in his 107. Psalm, does very
particularly insist upon, and does advise all men to consider well: they that
are wise, says he, will consider these things; implying also, as I conceive,
that the consideration of those things will make a man wise; so that it is very
possible, if we believe him, for a man to be both wise and religious; a great
admirer of Gods works, his Goodness, Wisdom and Power; who never understood, or
shall understand any of those things, never known before, as we are told here.
After all this, we need less wonder, that your Author (I pray excuse me, that
I call him so, not that I think you are bound to maintain whatsoever he says,
but because I had him first from you) should appropriate substantial wisdom to
this kind of Experimental Philosophy: though I hope he does not intend thereby
Solomon's (...) in our English, found wisdom: intended by Solomon of the true
fear and sanctifying knowledge of God, to which the promises of eternal life
are annexed: from whence it would follow, that according to him, none can be
saved but by this way of Philosophy. But I will be more charitable then to
think he could forget himself so much, though some may justly stumble at such
superlative expressions, and his Philosophy (with sober men) more likely to
lose then to gain by them. For though I deny not (I said it before, and say it
again) that the study of Nature to a man that has grace, and is well grounded
in the principles of Faith, may afford somewhat beside the known and most
visible works of God, as Sun and stars, etc. (wherein God, as the Scripture and
wisest heathens did teach, is most visible) to the glory of God, and
acknowledgment of his Power and Wisdom: yet truly I think they do not go a
right way, either to improve the Glory of God, or humane wisdom, who do so
magnify this study, as though there were no other wisdom in the world to be
thought of, or pursued after; that make it the only useful, true, solid
learning, to which they would have all Schools and Universities fitted, and to
which the Nobility of the land are invited, as to the employment of all
employments most worthy their entertainment. I think the reading of Histories,
and military exercises (among which hunting is reckoned) which may fit them to
do their King and Country service; to maintain the credit of their Ancestors;
will much more become them, then attending on furnaces, or raking into the
entrals of men, or beasts, to find somewhat, which it may be will never make
them much wiser when they know it, nor ever prove of any great use. Other
employments which exercise the body, beside that they are more creditable, they
preserve health also, and keep the body in a constant readiness for more
necessary employments, if occasion be. And though reading of histories does not
exercise the body, yet it may fit them for action; and if they be read with
delight, they may contribute much, not only to compose the mind, in greatest
disturbances; but also to help, yea cure the body, when nothing else will. So
it happened to two great Princes, ( Bodinus is my Author at this time, and he
is one that may be trusted in matter of history) Alphonsus and Ferdinandus
Kings of Spain and Sicily, who when no Physic or Physicians could do them good
toward the recovery of their health; did own it, (under God) the one to the
reading of Livy; and the other of Quintus Curtius. The same is reported of
Laurentius Medices, (that excellent Prince, both learned himself, and a great
promoter of learning) as the same Bodinus does more particularly give account.

I could tell you some stories of my self, how studious I have been from my
youth, of the knowledge of nature in general: not to commend my proficiency
unto you, (I have no reason, which I may partly impute to my sufferings in many
kinds) but probably to satisfy you, that I am still a great lover and honourer
of it. But when I read what mighty things some men promise themselves and
others of their way: what braggings and boastings: what contempt of all other
things: it makes me think of the Hebrew proverb, Non volentis, neque currentis,
etc. whether here also, not considerable: that is, whether it be probable, that
God will give a blessing to such a violent pursuit, that will not keep within
its bounds, but (as the matter is proposed unto us by some writers; for I go no
farther, nor can) does aspire to an absolute Sovereignty over all, that in so
many ages of the world has been accounted useful learning and knowledge. A man
indeed may plausibly suppose, that if rarest things and most beneficial, (some
of them) as the invention of the Compass: of Printing: of Guns and Powder: of a
new world, and the like, have been found out by the inquisitiveness, or
industry of some private men; what may we not hope of the joint labors of an
whole nation, all men being invited and admitted, rich and poor, learned and
unlearned? Yet let it be remembered withal, that there is a supreme cause,
which has a secret influence into all the endeavors of men, to promote or to
put back; to bless or to blast, as it pleases. God knows his own time, and
when that time is come, one single man shall do more perchance, then a
combination of many thousands, at another time. A man might give a probable
reason, now it is done, why God would reserve the discovery of the New world,
lately found out, to these times, and why it was a very seasonable, for his
glory, and the truth of his promises, discovery then. I have said somewhat of
it elsewhere, which I will not trouble you with here. Now, in order to that
discovery, and what ensued upon it; the Compass and the invention of gunpowder
was not expedient only, but in a manner necessary. The invention of Printing
did much promote learning, and learning (good useful learning) that
reformation, which God intended in his Church. Every thing has its proper
time, and that time is a secret of Gods dispensation, which must be left to
God, though man may sometimes not improbably guess, or conjecture. Baptista
Porta was a man that had as great helps and encouragements to seek into the
secrets of nature, as ever any man since Aristotle had. He began betimes, he
was not much above fifteen years of age (as if Providence had designed him for
such a work) when he began to appear in Print, as a Naturalist; and his work
was so well accepted of in the world that it was (set out in Latin at first, as
I conceive) soon translated, himself tells us, into the French, Italian,
Spanish and Arabic Tongues. From that time for thirty five years he followed
it with assiduous and indefatigable industry. He was a man of some means
himself, it seems, and had large contributions from great men, Cardinals and
others: he made his house a kind of Academy for all men that had any curiosity
that way: and himself traveled diverse countries to confer with others. He
neglected not Tradesmen and Artificers; and whither he could not convey his
person, he did address himself by letters, with much earnestness and instancy:
and he professes, that it was always his greatest care not to take things upon
trust, but to make trial first himself, if possible, of what he does deliver
for truth to others. What might not be expected from such a man? I will not
say, he has done nothing; I should do him and the truth great wrong if I did.
He has certainly many secrets, which were first published and perfected by
himself; and I think it were a very good work, if some men studious and well
qualified that way would upon trial declare, what they find in him certain and
unquestionable, and what otherwise, that so we might know what men may
certainly trust to. But what ever he has done, to make the most of it, will
not amount, for the admirableness and usefulness of it, to what has been
invented, or found by some one single man: from whence I conclude, that
greatest secrets will not be extorted from God, by a kind of violence and
presumption, but that man doing his part in his calling, either as a Mechanic,
or Philosopher, God must be left to his own will and pleasure.

And whereas a long Inventory is given by your Author, of things lately
discovered, that were not known to the Ancients; I think it would have been the
part of an impartial man, to have told us at the same time, that we have lost
some things also known to the Ancients, and what they are, which happily might
deserve as much respect; so much at least as not to be passed in silence. Many
such things (besides what is collected by Pancirollus, in a Treatise of that
Argument) have been observed by more then one, Physicians and others, all which
I cannot call to mind suddenly. One thing may be cutting for the stone in the
kidneys, which in Hippocrates time was practiced (I have read it in more then
one) with good success; but now, and ever since Galens time (for which some
blame him) lost and forgotten. To this, diverse other things are added by
learned Physicians, as that which they call dissectio in Empyematibus: exustio
in jecoris humoribus: cranii perforatio in aqua cerebri: sectio supra oculum in
suffusionibus: extractio aquae intercutis: which last, though some venture upon
in these days also, yet it is observed that few or none escape;, for want of
the right way. To these I make no question but many more might be added, and I
am sure I have met with more in their books, which I do not at this time
remember. Whether Galen had any knowledge of the venae lacteae, and the like, I
know not; but I am confident he had that knowledge of all the muscles, sinews,
arteries, fibers and the like, and their proper use in every part of the body,
(as does appear by those admirable books he has written of that subject) as I
think few Physicians have at this day: of which knowledge what use he made may
appear by one story, which I remember to have read in him. A young boy
belonging to a great man in Rome, had received some hurt in his body, by a fall
out of a Coach, or Chariot, such as they had in those days. The boy was very
dear to his Master, who spared no cost to have him perfectly cured. Many
Physicians and Surgeons were employed: but for all they could do, two
fingers of one of his hands continued as it were dead. Galen happened to come
to Rome about that time, and was invited by the great man to see the boy; he
did, and being well informed of all particulars of his fall, he presently took
away all that he found applied to the sick fingers, and applied somewhat to one
of the bones of his back, whereupon the fingers immediately, or soon after
recovered their former use and strength. Yet I know Vesalius made it his
business to contradict Galen as much as he could: but other later Anatomists
have defended him; and Vesalius, though generally acknowledged an excellent
Anatomist, has found some who have taken as much pains to contradict him. It
is my opinion, that there is scarce any art, or faculty, wherein we do not come
short of the Ancients. Indeed their industry, much provoked by the greatness of
rewards, was greater generally; that cannot be denied. Painting, Carving the
Statuaria, are in a manner lost, in comparison of what they had attained to. So
is the Art of Coining of money, as used in the best times of the Roman Empire:
best Writers and Artificers of these days acknowledge it. So is Music.
Ludovicus Vives (besides Pancirollus before named) was of that opinion, I am
sure: and there is so much to be said, that it is so; that I do not see how it
can be doubted, or denied by any man. The secret of those eternal Lamps, as we
may call them, found in diverse ancient graves, though so much, by more then
one, has been written of them, continues a secret to this day: and I doubt
whether modern Chemistry, so much admired by some men, afford any thing that
deserves more admiration. Does any body pretend in these days to understand the
Mathematics, as Archimedes did? What would not men, Kings and Princes give for
one of his inventions? But I have said more of him very lately.

Hitherto nothing has been said to impair the credit or usefulness of Natural
or Experimental Philosophy: but that we would not allow it to usurp upon all
other learning, as not considerable in comparison. Now I crave leave to tell
you, that it is (as all good things, more or less) very apt to be abused and to
degenerate into Atheism. Men that are much fixed upon matter and secundary
causes and sensual objects, if great care be not taken, may in time, (there be
many examples) and by degrees forget that there be such things in the world as
Spirits, substances really existing and of great power, though not visible, or
palpable by their nature; forget I say, and consequently discredit supernatural
operations: and at last, that there is a God, and that their souls are
immortal. This is a great precipice; and the contempt of all other learning an
ill presage. I cannot tell what should make the Metaphysics, that noble
science, so despicable unto them: them I mean, who have declared themselves and
their opinion of it. Indeed, they have nothing to do with the senses, and may
be called Notional: but real though, and the more abstracted from the senses,
therefore the more divine. What a coil has been kept with Cartesius's Ego
cogito: to prove the immortality of the soul thereby? How much more effectually
may it be proved by the capacity men have of Metaphysical contemplations, or
the consideration of Ens quatenus Ens, so abstracted from all that is sensual
and material? For my part, I profess, (next the mysteries of our faith) I never
have been more sensible of the immortality of humane souls, then when I had the
happiness to be conversant with that noble Science. To me truly it is no good
sign, that this secondary kind of Theology, or Divinity, (and so called by
many you know) is so out of request. But Natural Philosophy I grant, is more
taking and bewitching generally: there is a plain reason for it: and though
cried up for the only useful knowledge, yet if well considered, it may be
found sometimes, to have much more of pleasure and curiosity in it then use and
profit; even in that sense (for what is truly useful and profitable, or most
useful and profitable, is another question) which they intend.

Yet (Give me leave, I pray, to tell you this pretty story by the way) if we
must, or may believe every thing that is written by men addicted to this way,
we may find wonderful effects of it, even to moralize men; which indeed is the
best use of any worldly thing which can be made. Gassendus in the life of
Peyreskius a right worthy man, and great Patron of all kind of learning, has
this story of him: Dicebat vero nihil sibi unquam animi regendi persuasionem
aeque fecisse, etc. Give me leave to tell it you in English, though I know you
a great Master of the Latin Tongue. Peyreskius, it seems, had shut in a
microscope, a louse and a fly together; how they fell out Gassendus does not
tell us; but it seems they were not long together but they began to quarrel and
to fight, and Peyreskius was a spectator of the combat: where he observed, that
the louse (the more passionate of the two, it seems) was so distracted and
vexed, that after reiterated goings to and fro, (whether as a coward, to run
away; or for the advantage of fresh onsets he does not tell us) all the blood
of his head was sunk into his tail; the effect he says, of a great passion (he
was striving for his life, a very natural passion this) and very prejudicial to
the state of the body. By this sight Gassendus tells us Peyreskius profited
more to rule his passions in the rest of his life, then he had done by any
thing he had heard, or read before. This is the story: which, when I consider
the Worth and Nobleness of the man, of whom it is written, I could wish that
Gassendus had left out: What? Peyreskius, so learned, so wise a man, to profit
more by the sight of such a combat, and the demeanor of the louse in it, in a
thing of such consequence to a man's life, then he had done by the reading of so
many Philosophers, who have written so excellently of that subject, (and among
other things, have not omitted this very particular, the ghastly countenance
and deformity of a man in passion, and the diseases and dismal accidents it
does expose him to) or the precepts and persuasions of the Word of God, always
divine; but in this Argument, even to humane reason, most excellent and
singular? Galen indeed, I remember, has a story, how by some chance being an
eyewitness to the impatience of a man, who because when he knocked at a door
was answered, The party was not at home, fell into such a rage and fury, both
in words and actions, as no mad man could out do: it made such impression in
him that he was the better for it all his life after. This is somewhat like, as
the sight of a drunken man may work upon an ingenuous youth, to make him abhor
drunkenness for ever. But that the sight of the blood of a louse, passing from
the head to the tail, (which perchance is no such extraordinary thing in a
louse) should be of such force with so brave a man, as Peyreskius was, above
all that he had ever read or observed upon that subject; and that he should as
it were in thankfulness to the louse, make an acknowledgement of it to his
friends, I have not faith enough to believe Gassendus in this: but rather
believe, or suspect that Gassendus made this pretty story, either upon occasion
of somewhat that Peyreskius had told him of a louse or a fly, but not to that
purpose; or of purpose to gratify some friends, who would be glad to hear what
use can be made, even in point of life and manners, of a microscope. But you
will say perchance, does not wise Solomon say, Go to the Ant thou sluggard?
etc. Yes, he does indeed, but to the sluggard: pigro, (...): words of great
weight: as elsewhere I have showed: not to such a man as Peyreskius was; nor as
if Ants by their example could teach men, what their own reason and the good
instructions of other men (beside the Scripture) could not: but to make such
wretches more sensible of their degenerating into brutishness; when they see
such acts of reason performed by those creatures by mere instinct of nature,
which neither their own reason, nor the reason (good instruction) of other men
can persuade them to. Besides, he sends them to what will not require the
labor, or curiosity of much observation, or inquisition; but to that which is
very obvious to all men. Add, that Ants certainly, are more noble creatures
then Lice, because they live in common, and have a form of government among
themselves, which does presuppose some kind of reason, or somewhat answerable
to reason in men. To this purpose, I remember I have read the description of a
City made (I cannot say built) by Ants; the Author whereof is no less a man
then a learned Bishop, as by the elegancy of his style I guess him to have
been. Learned Gillius I am sure is not more accurate in the description of
Constantinople, then he is (for the bigness of it: for I would not have you
think, that it is any thing near so big as Constantinople) in the description
of this city of Ants. He has the dimensions of the longitude and latitude of
every street in it, and the particulars of some public places belonging to it,
with much accurateness. He writes it in good earnest; and for my part I believe
him; though if you do not, I shall not account you an Infidel for it. Yet I do
not deny, but some good may come, even in matters of life, by the observation
of some actions in brutes: but as good, so evil also, when men not knowing, or
forgetting whose image they bare, are more apt (so the greater number) to
prostitute their reason to mere nature, then to rectify nature by right
reason. We read in Herodotus of a people who thought carnal copulation lawful
enough in their Temples, because they observed that beasts that were brought to
and kept in Temples for sacrifices, made no conscience of it. So Pontus
Houterus of Delph in Holland, grounding especially upon the custom of brute
beasts, would infer the lawfulness of incest among men: Non illa (natura)
matrem agnoscit, non sororem, etc. which is very horrible. And I could name
some body else, who does not say much less; but for the reputation he has in
the world I will spare his name. And what will you say to him, who out of his
study (he says, not very busy then certainly:) having observed the carriage
of a Sparrow (the most lascivious of all creatures, as is observed by some
Naturalists) toward its mate, (vicies repetito coitu, and inde ex languore ad
terram decidente) began to quarrel with God Almighty (en sortem iniquam, hoc
passeribus datum, negatum hominibus!) that he had made him a man and not a
Sparrow. It were to be wished that they that are destined to the study of
Nature, were such as have attained by their years to ordinary discretion, and
are well grounded in Religion: I know not what we may expect of wanton Boys,
whom some would have trained up in those studies be times.

But another danger is: may not a man go too far in this study, and overvalue
his progress so far, as to think nothing out of his reach? It was a noble
attempt (as to man) of them that built, or would have built the tower of Babel,
whose top might reach to Heaven: It is not likely they could be so simple, as
to think really they should reach to Heaven by it: they might think they should
be somewhat nearer perchance; and however, get a name among men in after ages,
that they that built such a tower, were somewhat above men. But confusion was
their reward. I have no reason to be against the Art of flying, if discoverable
by humane industry; I have reaped the pleasures of it in my dreams more then
once; and I thought no pleasure comparable to it, though but in a dream. Yet I
doubt it may have somewhat of the Babylonish presumption in the eyes of God;
and that such high curiosities are so far from being useful, that they may be
dangerous. Alas aut expectare, aut sperare, intemperantis and naturae suae
conditionem ignorantis animi est: is Gassendus his judgment upon the matter,
which I hope will excuse me. Yet I must confess, I think there is less offense
in the conceit of Artificial flying then in the conceit of Urim and Thummim,
being an Artificial Chemical preparation, whoever was the Author of it; which I
think deserved to be censured as impious: and if such liberty be taken, or
allowed, I know not how far it may proceed, or how soon Robert Flud his
blasphemies, which Gassendus has censured and confuted may be received for
useful truths or learning.

But I have done. What I had to except against the book you brought me, I have
told you. I must now thank you for it. For in very truth, his Divinity at the
end, which is somewhat mystical (I hope I do not understand it) and those two
particulars, his contempt of Aristotle, and his censuring all other learning
besides Experimental Philosophy, and what tends to it as useless, and mere
wrangling and disputing, excepted: I have read the rest, wherein he does give
us an exact account of late discoveries, with much pleasure. For though I think
many ages may pass before the use of many of those particulars is known; yet
Aristotle has taught me, (and he proves it excellently) that nothing can be in
nature so mean, or so vile, but deserves to be taken notice of, and will afford
to an ingenious speculative man, matter of pleasure and delight.

Sr, I know your relations to some of eminent worth and piety in that
Honorable Society, whom though we have not the happiness to know otherwise,
then by the fame of their writings; yet we honor their worth as much as you
do. I hope you do not think any thing I have written can reflect upon any such.
No, nor upon any others, farther then in those particulars I have mentioned.
You know my condition, and Judge I hope so charitably, that I would not go out
of the World, but in perfect love and charity with all men. As long as I live
continue unto me, I pray, the comfort of your love, and good opinion, who am,

Your affectionate Brother, and humble Servant, MERIC CASAUBON.


