Printed for Henry Rhodes, next the Swan Tavern in Fleet street

(...) Hove sculp:



THE Comical HISTORY OF THE STATES AND EMPIRES OF THE WORLDS OF THE Moon and
Sun.

Written in French by Cyrano Bergerac. And newly Englished by A. Lovell, A.M.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Rhodes, next door to the Swan-Tavern, near
Bride-Lane, in Fleet Street, 1687.

LICENSED,

May 30. 1686. TO. L'ESTRANGE.

THE TRANSLATOR TO THE READER.
IT is now Seven and Twenty Years, since the Moon appeared first Historically
on the English Horizon: And let it not seem strange, that she should have
retained Light and Brightness so long here, without Revovation; when we find by
Experience, that in the Heavens, she never fails once a Month to change and
shift her Splendour. For it is the Excellency of Art, to represent Nature, even
in her absence; and this being a Piece done to the Life, by one that had the
advantage of the true Light, as well as the Skill of Drawing, in this kind, to
Perfection; he left so good an Original, which was so well Copied by another
Hand, that the Picture might have served for many Years more, to have given the
Lovers of the Moon, a sight of their Mistress, even in the darkest Nights; and
when she was retired to put on a clean Smock in Phoebus his Apartment; if they
had been so curious, as to have encouraged the Exposers.

However, Reader, you have now a second View of her, and that under the same
Cover with the Sun too, which is very rare; since these two were never seen
before in Conjunction. Yet I would have none be afraid, that their Eyes being
dazzled with the glorious Light of the Sun, they should not see her; for Fancy
will supply the Weakness of the Organ, and Imagination, by the help of this
Mirror, will not fail to discover them both; though Cynthia lie hid under
Apollo's shining Mantle. And so much for the Luminaries.

Now as to the Worlds, which, with Analogy to ours below, I may call the Old
and New; that of the Moon having been discovered, tho imperfectly, by others,
but the Sun owing its Discovery wholly to our Author: I make no doubt, but the
Ingenious Reader will find in both, so extraordinary and surprising Rarities,
as well Natural, Moral, as Civil; that if he be not as yet sufficiently
disgusted with this lower World, (which I am sure some are) to think of making
a Voyage thither, as our Author has done; he will at least be pleased with his
Relations. Nevertheless, since this Age produces a great many bold Wits, that
shoot even beyond the Moon, and cannot endure, (no more than our Author) to be
stinted by Magisterial Authority, and to believe nothing but what Gray Headed
Antiquity gives them leave: It Is pity some soaring Virtuoso, instead of
Traveling into France, does not take a flight up to the Sun; and by new
Observations supply the defects of its History; occasioned not by the
Negligence of our Witty French Author, but by the accursed Plagiary of some
rude Hand, that in his Sickness, rifled his Trunks, and stole his Papers, as he
himself complains.

Let some venturous Undertaker auspiciously attempt it then; and if neither of
the two Universities, Gresham-Colledge, nor Greenwich-Observatory can furnish
him with an Instrument of Conveyance; let him try his own Invention, or make
use of our Author's Machine: For our Loss is, indeed, so great, that one would
think, none but the declared Enemy of Mankind, would have had the Malice, to
purloyn and stiffle those rare Discoveries, which our Author made in the
Province of the Solar Philosophers; and which undoubtedly would have gone far,
as to the settleing our Sublunary Philosophy, which, as well as Religion, is
lamentably rent by Sects and Whimseys; and have convinced us, perhaps, that in
our present Doubts and Perplexities, a little more, or a little less of either,
would better serve our Turns, and more content our Minds.

THE Comical History OF THE STATES and EMPIRES OF THE WORLD OF THE MOON.

Written in French by Cyrano Bergerac. And now Englished by A. Lovell. A. M.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Rhodes, next door to the Swan-Tavern, near
Bride-Lane in Fleet Street, 1687.

THE Comical HISTORY OF THE STATE AND EMPIRE OF THE WORLD OF THE MOON.
I Had been with some Friends at Clamard, a House near Paris, and magnificently
Entertained there by Monsieur de Guigy, the Lord of it; when upon our return
home, about Nine of the Clock at Night, the Air serene, and the Moon in the
Full, the Contemplation of that bright Luminary, furnished us with such variety
of Thoughts, as made the way seem shorter than, indeed, it was. Our Eyes being
fixed upon that stately Planet, every one spoke what he thought of it: One
would needs have it be a Garret Window of Heaven; another presently affirmed,
That it was the Pan whereupon Diana smoothed Apollo's Bands; whilst another was
of Opinion, That it might very well be the Sun himself, who putting his Locks
up under his Cap at Night, peeped through a hole, to observe what was doing in
the World, during his absence: And for my part, Gentlemen, said I, that I may
put in for a share, and guess with the rest; not to amuse my self with those
curious Notions, wherewith you tickle and spur on slowpaced Time; I believe,
that the Moon is a World like ours, to which this of ours serves likewise for a
Moon. This was received with the general Laughter of the Company. And perhaps,
said I, (Gentlemen) just so they laugh now in the Moon, at some who maintain,
That this Globe, where we are, is a World. But I Would as good have said nothing,
as have alleged to them, That a great many Learned Men had been of the same
Opinion; for that only made them laugh the faster. However, this thought, which
because of its boldness suited my Humor, being confirmed by Contradiction, sunk
so deep into my mind, that during the rest of the way, I was big with
Definitions of the Moon, which I could not be delivered of: Insomuch that by
striving to verify this Comical Fancy, by Reasons of appearing weight, I had
almost persuaded my self already of the truth on it; when a Miracle, Accident,
Providence, Fortune, or what, perhaps, some may call Vision, others Fiction,
Whimsey, or (if you will) Folly, furnished me with an occasion, that engaged me
into this Discourse. Being come home, I went up into my Closet, where I found a
Book open upon the Table, which I had not put there. It was a piece of
Cardanus; and though I had no design to read in it, yet I fell at first sight,
as by force, exactly upon a Passage of that Philosopher, where he tells us,
That Studying one evening by Candlelight, he perceived Two tall old Men, enter
in through the door that was shut, who after many questions that he put to
them, made him answer, That they were Inhabitants of the Moon, and thereupon
immediately disappeared. I was so surprised, not only to see a Book get thither
of it self; but also because of the nicking of the Time so patly, and of the
Page, at which it lay open, that I looked upon that Concatenation of Accidents,
as a Revelation, discovering to Mortals, that the Moon is a World. How! said I
to my self, having just now talked of a thing, can a Book, which, perhaps, is
the only Book in the World, that treats of that matter so particularly, fly
down from the Shelf upon my Table, become capable of Reason, in opening so
exactly at the place of so strange an adventure; force my Eyes in a manner to
look upon it, and then to suggest to my fancy the Reflections, and to my Will
the Designs which I hatch: Without doubt, continued I, the Two old Men, who
appeared to that famous Philosopher, are the very same who have taken down my
Book, and opened it at that Page, to save themselves the labor of making to me
the Harangue, which they made to Cardan. But, added I, I cannot be resolved of
this Doubt, unless I mount up thither: And why not? said I instantly to my
self. Promethus heretofore went up to Heaven, and stole fire from thence. Have
not I as much Boldness as he? And why should not I, then, expect as favorable
a Success?

After these sudden starts of Imagination, which may be termed, perhaps, the
Ravings of a violent Fever, I began to conceive some hopes of succeeding in so
fair a Voyage: Insomuch that to take my measures aright, I shut my self up in a
solitary Country House; where having flattered my fancy with some means,
proportionated to my design, at length I set out for Heaven in this manner.

I planted my self in the middle of a great many Glasses full of Dew, tied fast
about me; upon which the Sun so violently darted his Rays, that the Heat which
attracted them, as it does the thickest Clouds, carried me up so high, that at
length I found my self above the middle Region of the Air. But seeing that
Attraction hurried me up with so much rapidity, that instead of drawing near
the Moon, as I intended, she seemed to me to be more distant, than at my first
setting out; I broke several of my Vials, until I found my weight exceed the
force of the Attraction, and that I began to descend again toward the Earth. I
was not mistaken in my opinion, for some time after I fell to the ground again;
and to reckon from the hour that I set out at, it must then have been about
midnight. Nevertheless I found the Sun to be in the Meridian, and that it was
Noon. I leave it to you to judge, in what Amazement I was: The truth is, I was
so strangely surprised, that not knowing what to think of that Miracle, I had
the insolence to imagine, that in favor of my Boldness, God had once more
nailed the Sun to the Firmament, to light so generous an Enterprise. That which
increased my Astonishment was, That I knew not the Country where I was; it
seemed to me, that having mounted straight up, I should have fallen down again
in the same place I parted from. However, in the Equipage I was in, I directed
my course toward a kind of Cottage, where I perceived some smoke; and I was
not above a Pistolshot from it, when I saw my self environed by a great number
of People, stark naked: They seemed to be exceedingly surprised at the sight of
me; for I was the first, (as I think) that they had ever seen clad in Bottles.
Nay, and to baffle all the Interpretations, that they could put upon that
Equipage, they perceived, that I hardly touched the ground as I walked; for,
indeed, they understood not, that upon the least agitation I gave my Body, the
Heat of the beams of the Noon-Sun, raised me up with my Dew; and that if I had
had Vials enough about me, it would possibly have carried me up into the Air in
their view. I had a mind to have spoken to them; but as if Fear had changed
them into Birds, immediately I lost sight of them, in an adjoining Forest.
However, I catched hold of one, whose Legs had, without doubt, betrayed his
Heart. I asked him, but with a great deal of pain, (for I was quite choked) how
far they reckoned from thence to Paris? How long Men had gone naked in France?
and why they fled from me in so great Consternation? The Man I spoke to was an
old tawny Fellow, who presently fell at my Feet, and with lifted-up Hands,
joined behind his Head, opened his Mouth and shut his Eyes: He mumbled a long
while between his Teeth, but I could not distinguish an articulate Word; so
that I took his Language for the maffling noise of a Dumb-man.

Some time after, I saw a Company of Soldiers marching, with Drums beating;
and I perceived Two detached from the rest, to come and take speech of me. When
they were come within hearing, I asked them, Where I was? You are in France,
answered they: But what Devil has put you into that Dress? And how comes it
that we know you not? Is the Fleet then arrived? Are you going to carry the
News of it to the Governor? And why have you divided your Brandy into so many
Bottles? To all this I made answer, That the Devil had not put me into that
Dress: That they knew me not; because they could not know all Men: That I knew
nothing of the Seine's carrying Ships to Paris: That I had no news for the
Marshal de l' Hospital; and that I was not loaded with Brandy. Ho, ho, said
they to me, taking me by the Arm, you are a merry Fellow indeed; come, the
Governor will make a shift to know you, no doubt on it. They led me to their
Company, where I learnt that I was in reality in France, but that it was in
New-France: So that some time after, I was presented before the Governor, who
asked me my Country, my Name and Quality; and after that I had satisfied him in
all Points, and told him the pleasant Success of my Voyage, whether he believed
it, or only pretended to do so, he had the goodness to order me a Chamber in
his Apartment. I was very happy, in meeting with a Man capable of lofty
Opinions, and who was not at all surprised, when I told him, that the Earth
must needs have turned during my Elevation; seeing that having begun to mount
about Two Leagues from Paris, I was fallen, as it were, by a perpendicular Line
in Canada.

When I was going to Bed at night, he came into my Chamber, and spoke to me to
this purpose: I should not have come to disturb your Rest, had I not thought
that one who has found out the secret, of Traveling so far in Twelve hours
space, had likewise a charm against Lassitude. But you know not, added he, what
a pleasant Quarrel I have just now had with our Fathers, upon your account?
They Will have you absolutely to be a Magician; and the greatest favor you can
expect from them, is to be reckoned only an Impostor: The truth is, that Motion
which you attribute to the Earth, is a pretty nice Paradox; and for my part
I Will frankly tell you, That that which hinders me from being of your Opinion,
is, That though you parted yesterday from Paris, yet you might have arrived to
day in this Country, without the Earth's turning: For the Sun having drawn you
up, by the means of your Bottles, ought he not to have brought you hither;
since according to Ptolemy, and the Modern Philosophers, he marches obliquely,
as you make the Earth to move? And besides, what great Probability have you to
imagine, that the Sun is immovable, when we see it go? And what appearance is
there, that the Earth turns with so great Rapidity, when we feel it firm under
our Feet? Sir, replied I to him, These are, in a manner, the Reasons that
oblige us to think so: In the first place, it is consonant to common Sense, to
think that the Sun is placed in the Center of the Universe; seeing all Bodies
in nature, standing in need of that radical Heat, it is fit he should reside in
the heart of the Kingdom, that he may be in a condition, readily to supply the
Necessities of every Part; and that the Cause of Generations, should be placed
in the middle of all Bodies, that it may act there with greater Equality and
Ease: After the same manner, as Wise Nature has placed the Genitals in Man,
the Seeds in the Center of Apples, the Kernels in the middle of their Fruits;
and in the same manner, as the Onion, under the cover of so many Coats that
encompass it, preserves that precious Bud, from which Millions of others are to
have their being, for an Apple is in it self a little Universe; the Seed,
hotter than the other parts thereof, is its Sun, which diffuses about it self
that natural Heat, which preserves its Globe: And in the Onion, the Germ is the
little Sun of that little World, which vivifies and nourishes the vegetative
Salt of that little mass. Having laid down this, then, for a ground, I say,
That the Earth standing in need of the Light, Heat, and Influence of this great
Fire, it turns round it, that it may receive in all parts alike, that Virtue
which keeps it in Being. For it would be as ridiculous to think, that that vast
luminous Body, turned about a point, that it has not the least need of; as to
imagine, that when we see a roasted Lark, that the Kitchinfire must have turned
round it. Else, were it the part of the Sun to do that drudgery, it would seem
that the Physician stood in need of the Patient; that the Strong should yield
to the Weak; the Superior serve the Inferior; and that the Ship did not sail
about the Land, but the Land about the Ship. Now if you cannot easily conceive,
how so ponderous a Body can move; Pray, tell me, are the Stars and Heavens,
which, in your Opinion, are so solid, any way lighter? Besides, it is not so
difficult for us, who are assured of the Roundness of the Earth, to infer its
motion from its Figure: But why do ye suppose the Heaven to be round, seeing
you cannot know it, and that yet, if it has not this Figure, it is impossible
it can move? I object not to you your Excentricks nor Epicycles, which you
cannot explain but very confusedly, and which are out of doors in my Systeme.
Let Us reflect only on the natural Causes of that Motion. To make good your
Hypothesis, you are forced to have recourse to Spirits or Intelligences, that
move and govern your Spheres. But for my part, without disturbing the repose of
the supreme Being, who, without doubt, has made Nature entirely perfect, and
whose Wisdom ought so to have completed her, that being perfect in one thing,
she should not have been defective in another: I say, that the Beams and
Influences of the Sun, darting Circularly upon the Earth, make it to turn, as
with a turn of the Hand, we make a Globe to move; or, which is much the same,
that the Steams which continually evaporate from that side of it, which the Sun
shines upon, being reverberated by the Cold of the middle Region, rebound upon
it, and striking obliquely, do of necessity make it whirle about in that manner.

The Explication of the other Motions is less perplexed still; for pray,
consider a little -- At these words the Viceroy interrupted me: I had rather,
said he, you would excuse your self from that trouble; for I have read some
Books of Gassendus on that subject: And hear what one of our Fathers, who
maintained your Opinion one day, answered me. Really, said he, I fancy that the
Earth does move, not for the Reasons alleged by Copernicus; but because
Hellfire, being shut up in the Center of the Earth, the damned who make a
great bustle to avoid its Flames, scramble up to the Vault, as far as they can
from them, and so make the Earth to turn, as a Turnspit makes the Wheel go
round, when he runs about in it.

We applauded that Thought, as being a pure effect of the Zeal of that good
Father: And then the Viceroy told me, That he much wondered, how the Systeme
of Ptolemy, being so improbable, should have been so universally received. Sir,
said I to him, most part of Men, who judge of all things by the Senses, have
suffered themselves to be persuaded by their Eyes; and as he who Sails along a
Shore, thinks the Ship immovable, and the Land in motion; even so Men turning
with the Earth round the Sun, have thought that it was the Sun that moved about
them. To this may be added, the unsupportable Pride of Mankind, who persuade
themselves, that Nature has only been made for them; as if it were ^ikely that
the Sun, a vast Body, Four ^undred and thirty four times bigger than ^he Earth,
had only been kindled to ripen their Medlars, and plumpen their Cabbage. ^or my
part, I am so far from complying ^ith their Insolence, that I believe the
Pla^ets are Worlds about the Sun, and that ^e fixed Stars are also Suns, which
have ^anets about them, that is to say, Worlds, which because of their
smallness, and that their borrowed light cannot reach us, are not discernable
by Men in this World: For in good earnest, how can it be imagined, that such
spacious Globes are no more but vast Deserts; and that ours, because we live in
it, has been framed for the habitation of a dozen of proud Dandyprats? How,
must it be said, because the Sun measures our Days and Years, that it has only
been made, to keep us from running our Heads against the Walls? No, no, if that
visible Deity shine upon Man, it is by accident, as the King's Flamboy by
accident lightens a Porter that walks along the Street: But, said he to me, if,
as you affirm, the fixed Stars be so many Suns, it will follow, that the World
is infinite; seeing it is probable, that the People of that World, which moves
about that fixed Star, you take for a Sun, discover above themselves other
fixed Stars, which we cannot perceive from hence, and so others in that manner
in infinitum.

Never question, replied I, but as God could create the Soul Immortal, He could
also make the World Infinite; if so it be that Eternity is nothing else, but an
illimited Duration, and an infinite, a boundless Extension: And then God
himself would be Finite, supposing the World not to be infinite, seeing he
cannot be where nothing is, and that he could not increase the greatness of the
World, without adding somewhat to his own Being, by beginning to exist, where
he did not exist before. We must believe then, that as from hence we see Saturn
and Jupiter; if we were in either of the Two, we should discover a great many
Worlds which we perceive not, and that the Universe extends so in infinitum.

IN faith, replied he, when you have said all you can, I cannot at all
comprehend that Infinitude. Good now, replied I to him, do you comprehend the
Nothing that is beyond it? Not at all. For when you think of that Nothing, you
imagine it at least to be like Wind or Air, and that is a Being: But if you
conceive not an Infinite in general, you comprehend it at least in particulars;
seeing it is not difficult to fancy to our selves beyond the Earth, Air, and
Fire which we see, other Air, and other Earth, and other Fire. Now Infinitude
is nothing else, but a boundless Series of all these. But if you ask me, How
these Worlds have been made, seeing Holy Scripture speaks only of one that God
made? My answer is, That I have no more to say: For to oblige me to give a
Reason for every thing, that comes into my Imagination, is to stop my Mouth,
and make me confess, that in things of that nature, my Reason shall always
stoop to Faith. He ingeniously acknowledged to me, that his Question was to be
censured, but bid me pursue my notion: So that I went on, and told him, That
all the other Worlds, which are not seen, or but imperfectly believed, are no
more, but the Scum that purges out of the Suns. For how could these great Fires
subsist without some matter, that served them for Fuel? Now as the Fire drives
from it the Ashes that would stifle it, or the Gold in a Crucible, separates
from the Marcasite and Dross, and is refined to the highest Standard; nay, and
as our Stomach discharges it self by vomit, of the Crudities that oppress it;
even so these Suns daily evacuate, and reject the Remains of matter, that might
incommode their Fire: But when they have wholly consumed that matter, which
entertains them; you are not to doubt, but they spread themselves abroad on all
sides, to seek for fresh Fuel, and fasten upon the Worlds, which heretofore
they have made, and particularly upon those that are nearest: Then these great
Fires, reconcocting all the Bodies, will as formerly force them out again,
Pellmell from all parts; and being by little and little purified, they will begin
to serve for Suns, to other little Worlds, which they procreate by driving them
out of their Spheres: And that without doubt, made the Pythagoreans foretell the
universal Conflagration.

This is no ridiculous Imagination, for New-France where we are, gives us a
very convincing instance of it. The vast Continent of America, is one half of
the Earth, which in spite of our Predecessors, who a Thousand times had
cruised the Ocean, was not at that time discovered: Nor, indeed, was it then in
being, no more than a great many Islands, Peninsules, and Mountains that have
since started up in our Globe; when the Sun purged out its Excrements to a
convenient distance, and sufficient Gravity, to be attracted by the Center of
our World, either in small Particles, perhaps, or, it may be also, altogether
in one lump. That is not so unreasonable, but that St. Austin would have
applauded to it, if that Country had been discovered in his Age. Seeing that
great Man, who had a very clear Wit, assures us, That in his time, the Earth
was flat like the floor of an Oven, and that it floated upon the Water, like
the half of an Orange: But if ever I have the honor to see you in France, I Will
make you observe, by means of a most excellent Celescope, that some
Obscurities, which from hence appear to be Spots, are Worlds a forming.

My Eyes that shut with this Discourse, obliged the Viceroy to withdraw. Next
Day, and the Days following, we had some Discourses to the same purpose: But
some time after, since the hurry of Affairs suspended our Philosophy, I fell
afresh upon the design of mounting up to the Moon.

So soon as she was up, I walked about musing in the Woods, how I might manage
and succeed in my Enterprise; and at length on St. John's-Eve, when they were
at Council in the Fort, whether they should assist the Wild Natives of the
Country aagainst the Iroqueans; I went all alone to the top of a little Hill,
at the back of our Habitation, where I put in Practice what you shall hear. I
had made a Machine, which I fancied might carry me up as high as I pleased, so
that nothing seeming to be wanting to it, I placed my self within, and from the
Top of a Rock, threw my self in the Air: But because I had not taken my
measures aright, I fell with a sosh in the Valley below. Bruised as I was,
however, I returned to my Chamber, without loosing courage, and with
Beef-Marrow I anointed my Body, for I was all over mortified from Head to Foot:
Then having taken a dram of Cordial Waters to strengthen my Heart, I went back
to look for my Machine; but I could not find it, for some Soldiers, that had
been sent into the Forest, to cut wood for a Bonefire, meeting with it by
chance, had carried it with them to the Fort: Where after a great deal of
guessing what it might be, when they had discovered the invention of the
Spring, some said, that a good many Fireworks should be fastened to it,
because their Force carrying them up on high, and the Machine playing its large
Wings, no Body but would take it for a Fiery Dragon. In the mean time I was
long in search of it, but found it at length in the middle of the Marketplace
of Kebeck, just as they were setting Fire to it. I was so transported with
Grief, to find the Work of my Hands in so great Peril, that I ran to the
Soldier, that was giving Fire to it, caught hold of his Arm, plucked the Match
out of his Hand, and in great rage threw my self into my Machine, that I might
undo the Fireworks, that they had stuck about it; but I came too late, for
hardly were both my Feet within, when whip, away went I up in a Cloud: The
Horror and Consternation I was in, did not so confound the faculties of my
Soul, but I have since remembered all that happened to me at that instant. For
so soon as the Flame had devoured one tire of Squibs, which were ranked by six
and six, by means of a Train, that reached every half-dozen; another tire went
off, and then another; so that the Saltpeter taking Fire, put off the danger
by increasing it. However, all the combustible matter being spent, there was a
period put to the Firework; and whilst I thought of nothing less, than to knock
my Head against the top of some Mountain, I felt, without the least stirring,
my elevation continuing; and adieu Machine, for I saw it fall down again
toward the Earth. That extraordinary Adventure puffed up my Heart with so
uncommon a Gladness; that, ravished to see my self delivered from certain
danger, I had the impudence to philosophize upon it. Whilst then with Eyes and
Thought I cast about, to find what might be the cause of it, I perceived my
flesh blown up, and still greasy with the Marrow, that I had daubed my self
over with, for the Bruises of my fall: I knew that the Moon being then in the
Wain, and that it being usual for her in that Quarter, to suck up the Marrow of
Animals; she drank up that wherewith I was anointed, with so much the more
force, that her Globe was nearer to me, and that no interposition of Clouds
weakened her Attraction.

When I had, according to the computation I made since, advanced a good deal
more, than three quarters of the space, that divided the Earth from the Moon;
all of a sudden I fell with my Heels up, and Head down, though I had made no
Trip; and indeed, I had not been sensible of it, had not I felt my Head loaded
under the weight of my Body: The truth is, I knew very well, that I was not
falling again toward our World; for though I found my self to be betwixt two
Moons, and easily observed, that the nearer I drew to the one, the farther I
removed from the other; yet I was certain, that ours was the bigger Globe of
the two: Because after one or two days Journey, the remote Refractions of the
Sun, confounding the diversity of Bodies and Climates, it appeared to me only
as a large Plate of Gold: That made me imagine, that I biased toward the
Moon; and I was confirmed in that Opinion, when I began to call to mind, that I
did not fall, till I was past three quarters of the way. For, said I to my
self, that Mass being less than ours, the Sphere of its Activity must be of
less Extent also; and by consequence, it was later before I felt the force of
its Center.

In fine, after I had been a very long while in falling, as I judged, for the
violence of my Precipitation hindered me from observing it more exactly: The
last thing I can remember is, That I found my self under a Tree, entangled with
three or four pretty large Branches, which I had broken off by my fall; and my
Face besmeared with an Apple, that had dashed against it.

By good luck that place was, as you shall know by and by -- So that you may
very well conclude, that had it not been for that Chance, if I had had a
thousand lives, they had been all lost. I have many times since reflected upon
the vulgar Opinion, That if one precipitate himself from a very high place, his
breath is out before he reach the ground; and from my adventure I conclude it
to be false, or else that the efficacious Juice of that Fruit, which squirted
into my mouth, must needs have recalled my Soul, that was not far from my
Carcass, which was still hot, and in a disposition of exerting the Functions of
Life. The truth is, so foon as I was upon the ground, my pain was gone, before
I could think what it was; and the Hunger, which I felt during my Voyage, was
fully satisfied with the sense that I had lost it.

When I was got up, I had hardly taken notice of the largest of Four great
Rivers, which by their conflux make a Lake; when the Spirit, or invisible Soul
of Plants, that breath upon that Country, refreshed my Brain with a delightful
smell: And I found that the Stones there, were neither hard nor rough; but that
they carefully softened themselves, when one trod upon them. I presently
lighted upon a Walk with five Avenues, in figure like to a Star; the Trees
whereof seemed to reach up to the Sky, a green plot of lofty Boughs: Casting
up my Eyes from the root to the top, and then making the same Survey downwards,
I was in doubt whether the Earth carried them, or they the Earth, hanging by
their Roots: Their high and stately Forehead seemed also to bend, as it were by
force, under the weight of the Celestial Globes; and one would say, that their
Sighs and outstretched Arms, wherewith they embraced the Firmament, demanded
of the Stars the bounty of their purer Influences, before they had lost any
thing of their Innocence, in the contagious Bed of the Elements. The Flowers
there on all hands, without the aid of any other Gardener but Nature, send out
so sweet (though wild) a Perfume, that it rouzes and delights the Smell: There
the incarnate of a Rose upon the Bush, and the lively Azure of a Violet under
the Rushes, captivating the Choice, make each of themselves to be judged the
Fairest: There the whole Year is a Spring; there no poisonous Plant sprouts
forth, but is as soon destroyed; there the Brooks by an agreeable murmuring,
relate their Travels to the Pebbles; there Thousands of Quiristers make the
Woods, resound with their melodious Notes; and the quavering Clubs of these
divine Musicians are so universal, that every Leaf of the Forest, seems to have
borrowed the Tongue and shape of a Nightingale; nay, and the Nymph Echo is so
delightful with their Airs, that to hear her repeat, one would say, She were
sollicitous to learn them. On the sides of that Wood, are Two Meadows, whose
continued Verdure seems an Emerauld, reaching out of sight. The various
Colors, which the Spring bestows upon the numerous little Flowers that grow
there, so delightfully confounds and mingles their Shadows; that it is hard to
be known, whether these Flowers shaken with a gentle Breeze, pursue themselves,
or fly rather from the Caresses of the Wanton Zephyrus; one would likewise take
that Meadow for an Ocean, because as the Sea, it presents no Shore to the view;
insomuch, that mine Eye fearing it might lose it self, having roamed so long,
and discovered no Coast, sent my Thoughts presently thither; and my Thoughts,
imagining it to be the end of the World, were willing to be persuaded, that
such charming places, had, perhaps, forced the Heavens to descend, and join the
Earth there. In the midst of that vast and pleasant Carpet, a rustic Fountain
bubbles up in Silver Purles, crowning its enamelled Banks with Sets of Violets,
and multitudes of other little Flowers, that seem to strive, which shall first
behold it self in that Crystal Myrroir: It is as yet in the Cradle, being but
newly Born, and its Young and smooth Face shows not the least Wrinkle. The
large Compasses it fetches, in circling within it self, demonstrate its
unwillingness to leave its native Soil: And as if it had been ashamed to be
caressed in presence of its Mother, with a Murmuring it thrust back my hand,
that would have touched it: The Beasts that came to drink there, more rational
than those of our World, seemed surprised to see it day upon the Horizon,
whilst the Sun was with the Antipodes; and durst not bend downwards upon the
Brink, for fear of falling into the Firmament.

I must confess to you, That at the sight of so many Fine things, I found my
self tickled with these agreeable Twitches, which, they say, the Embryo feels
upon the infusion of its Soul: My old Hair fell off, and gave place for thicker
and softer Locks: I perceived my Youth revived, my Face grow ruddy, my natural
Heat mingle gently again, with my radical Moisture: And in a word, I grew
younger again, by at least Fourteen Years.

I had advanced half a League, through a a Forest of Jessamines and Myrtles,
when I perceived something that stirred, lying in the Shade: It was a Youth,
whose Majestic Beauty forced me almost to Adoration. He started up to hinder
me; crying, It is not to me, but to God that you owe these Humilities. You see
one, answered I, stunned with so many Wonders, that I knew not what to admire
most; for coming from a World, which without doubt you take for a Moon here, I
thought I had arrived in another, which our Worldlings call a Moon also; and
behold I am in Paradise at the Feet of a God, who will not be Adored. Except
the quality of a God, replied he, whose Creature I only am, the rest you say is
true: This Land is the Moon, which you see from your Globe, and this place
where you are is -- Now at that time Man's Imagination was so strong, as not
being as yet corrupted, neither by Debauches, the Crudity of Aliments, nor the
alterations of Diseases, that being excited by a violent desire of coming to
this Sanctuary, and his Body becoming light, through the heat of this
Inspiration; he was carried thither in the same manner, as some Philosophers,
who having fixed their Imagination, upon the contemplation of a certain Object,
have sprung up in the Air by Ravishments, which you call Ecstasies. The Woman,
who through the infirmity of her Sex, was weaker and less hot, could not,
without doubt, have the Imagination strong enough, to make the Intension of her
Will, prevail over the Ponderousness of her Matter; but because there were very
few --

The Sympathy which still united that half to its whole, drew her toward him
as he mounted up, as the Amber attracts the Straw; the Lodestone turns toward
the North, from whence it has been taken, and drew to him that part of
himself, as the Sea draws the Rivers which proceed from it. When they arrived
in your Earth, they dwelt betwixt Mesopotamia and Arabia: Some People knew them
by the name of --, and others under that of Prometheus, whom the Poets feigned
to have stolen Fire from Heaven, by reason of his Offspring, who were endowed
with a Soul as perfect as his own: So that to inhabit your World, that Man left
this destitute; but the All-wise, would not have so blessed an Habitation, to
remain without Inhabitants: He suffered a few ages after that -- cloyed with
the company of Men, whose Innocence was corrupted, had a desire to forsake
them. This person, however, thought no retreat secure enough from the Ambition
of Men, who already Murdered one another, about the distribution of your World;
except that blessed Land, which his Grandfather had so often mentioned unto
him, and to which no Body had as yet found out the way: But his Imagination
supplied that; for seeing he had observed that -- he filled Two large Vessels
which he sealed Hermetically, and fastened them under his Armpits: So soon as
the Smoke began to rise upwards, and could not pierce through the Metal, it
forced up the Vessels on high, and with them also that Great Man. When he was
got as high as the Moon, and had cast his Eyes upon that lovely Garden, a fit
of almost supernatural Joy convinced him, that that was the place, where his
Grandfather had heretofore lived. He quickly untied the Vessels, which he had
girt like Wings about his Shoulders, and did it so luckily, that he was
scarcely Four Fathom in the Air above the Moon, when he set his Fins a going;
yet het was high enough still, to have been hurt by the fall, had it not been
for the large skirts of his Gown, which being swelled by the Wind, gently
upheld him, till he set Foot on ground. As for the two Vessels, they mounted up
to a certain place, where they have continued: And those are they, which now
adays you call the Balance.

I must now tell you, the manner how I came hither: I believe you have not
forgot my name, seeing it is not long since I told it you. You shall know then,
that I lived on the agreeable Banks of one of the most renowned Rivers of your
World; where amongst my Books, I lead a Life pleasant enough, not to be
lamented, though it slipped away fast enough. In the mean while, the more I
increased in Knowledge, the more I knew my Ignorance. Our Learned Men never put
me in mind of the famous Mada, but the thoughts of his perfect Philosophy made
me to Sigh. I was despairing of being able to attain to it, when one day, after
a long and profound Studying, I took a piece of Lodestone about two Foot
square, which I put into a Furnace; and then after it was well purged,
precipitated and dissolved, I drew the calcined Attractive of it, and reduced
it into the size of about an ordinary Bowl.

After these Preparations, I got a very light Machine of Iron made, into which
I went -- and when I was well seated in my place, I threw this Magnetic Bowl,
as high as I could, up into the Air. Now the Iron Machine, which I had
purposely made more massive in the middle than at the ends, was presently
elevated, and in a just Poise; because the middle received the greatest force
of Attraction. So then, as I arrived at the place, whither my Loadstone had
attracted me, I presently threw up my Bowl in the Air over me. But, said I,
interrupting him, How came you to heave up your Bowl so straight over your
Chariot, that it never happened to be on one side of it? That seems to me to be
no wonder at all, said he; for the Loadstone being once thrown up in the Air,
drew the Iron straight toward it; and so it was impossible, that ever I should
mount side-ways. Nay more, I can tell you, that when I held the Bowl in my
hand, I was still mounting upwards; because the Chariot flew always to the
Lodestone, which I held over it. But the effort of the Iron, to be united to
my Bowl, was so violent, that it made my Body bend double; so that I durst but
once essay that new Experiment. The truth is, it was a very surprising
Spectacle to behold; for the Steel of that flying House, which I had very
carefully Polished, reflected on all sides the light of the Sun, with so great
life and luster, that I thought my self to be all on fire. In fine, after often
Bowling and following of my Cast, I came, as you did, to an Elevation, from
which I descended toward this World; and because at that instant, I held my
Bowl very fast between my hands, my Machine, whereof the Seat pressed me hard,
that it might approach its Atractive, did not forsake me; all that now I feared
was, that I should break my Neck: But to save me from that, ever now and then,
I tossed up my Bowl; that by its atractive Virtue, it might prevent the violent
Descent of my Machine, and render my fall more easy, as indeed it happened;
for when I saw my self, within Two or three hundred fathom of the Earth, I
threw out my Bowl on all hands, level with the Chariot, sometimes on this side,
and sometimes on that, until I came to a certain Distance; and immediately
then, I tossed it up above me; so that my Machine following it, I left it, and
let my self sall on the other side, as gently as I could, upon the Sand;
insomuch that my fall was no greater, than if it had been but my own height. I
shall not describe to you the amazement I was in at the sight of the wonders of
this place, seeing it was so like the same, wherewith I just now saw you seized
--

Scarcely had I tasted it, when a thick Cloud over-cast my Soul: I saw no body
now near me; and in the whole Hemisphere, my Eyes could not discern the least
Tract of the way I had made; yet, nevertheless I fully remembered every thing
that befell me. When I reflected since upon that Miracle, I fanced that the skin
of the Fruit which I bit, had not rendered me altogether brutish; because my
Teeth piercing through it were, a little moistened by the Juice within, the
efficacy whereof had dissipated the Malignities of the Rind. I was not a little
surprised to see my self all alone, in a Country I knew not. It was to no
purpose for me, to stare and look about me; for no Creature appeared to comfort
me: At length, I resolved to march forwards, till Fortune should aford me the
company of some Beasts, or at least the means of Dying.

She favorably granted my desire; for within half a quarter of a League, I met
two huge Animals, one of which stopped before me, and the other fled swiftly to
its Den; for so I thought at least; because that some time after, I perceived
it come back again, in company of above Seven or Eight hundred of the same
kind, who beset me. When I could discern them at a near distance, I perceived
that they were proportioned and shaped like us. This adventure brought into my
mind, the old Wives Tales of my Nurse concerning Syrenes, Faunes and Satyrs:
Ever now and then they raised such furious Shouts, occasioned undoubtedly by
their Admiration, at the sight of me, that I thought I was even turned a
Monster. At length one of these Beast-like men, catching hold of me by the
Neck, just as Wolves do when they carry away Sheep, tossed me upon his back,
and brought me into their Town; where I was more amazed than before, when I
knew they were Men, that I could meet with none of them, but who marched upon
all four.

When these People saw that I was so little, (for most of them are Twelve
Cubits long,) and that I walked only upon Two Legs, they could not believe me
to be a Man: For they were of opinion, that Nature having given to men as well
as Beasts Two Legs and Two Arms, they should both make use of them alike. And,
indeed, reflecting upon that since, that situation of Body did not seem to me
altogether extravagant; when I called to mind, that whilst Children are still
under the nurture of Nature, they go upon all four, and that they rise not on
their two Legs, but by the care of their Nurses; who set them in little running
Chairs, and fasten straps to them, to hinder them from falling on all four, as
the only posture that the shape of our Body naturally inclines to rest in.

They said then, (as I had it interpreted to me since) That I was infallibly
the Female of the Queens little Animal. And therefore as such, or somewhat
else, I was carried straight to the Townhouse, where I observed by the
muttering and gestures, both of the People and Magistrates, that they were
consulting what sort of a thing I could be. When they had conferred together a
long while, a certain Burgher, who had the keeping of the strange Beasts,
besought the Mayor and Aldermen to commit me to his Custody, till the Queen
should send for me to couple me to my Male. This was granted without any
difficulty, and that Juggler carried me to his House; where he taught me to
Tumble, Vault, make Mouths, and show a Hundred odd Tricks, for which in the
Afternoons he received Money at the door, from those that came in to see me:
But Heaven pitying my Sorrows, and vexed to see the Temple of its Maker
profaned, so ordered it, that one day as I was tied to a Rope, wherewith the
Mountebank made me Leap and Skip to divert the People; I heard a Man's voice,
who asked me what I was, in Greek. I was much surprised to hear one speak in
that Country, as they do in our World. He put some Questions to me, which I
answered, and then gave him a full account of my whole design, and the success
of my Travels: He took the pains to comfort me, and, as I take it, said to me:
Well, Son, at length you suffer for the frailties of your World: There is a
Mobile here, as well as there, that can away with nothing, but what they are
accustomed to: But know, that you are but justly served; for had any one of
this Earth, had the boldness to mount up to yours, and call himself a Man, your
Sages would have destroyed him as a Monster. He then told me, That he would
acquaint the Court with my disaster; adding, that so soon as he had heard the
news that went of me, he came to see me, and was satisfied that I was a man of
the World, of which I said I was; because he had Traveled there formerly, and
sojourned in Greece, where he was called the Demon of Socrates: That after the
Death of that Philosopher, he had governed and taught Epaminondas at Thebes:
After which being gone over to the Romans, Justice had obliged him to espouse
the party of the Younger Cato: That after his Death, he had addicted himself to
Brutus: That all these great Men, having left in that World no more, but the
shadow of their Virtues, he with his Companions, had retreated to Temples and
Solitudes. In a word, added he, the People of your World became so dull and
stupid, that my Companions and I lost all the Pleasure, that formerly we had
had in instructing them: Not but that you have heard Men talk of us; for they
called us Oracles, Nymphs, Geniuses, Fairies, Houshold-Gods, Lemmes, Larves,
Lamiers, Hobgoblins, Nayades, Incubusses, Shades, Manes, Visions and
Apparitions: We abandoned your World, in the Reign of Augustus, not long after
I had appeared to Drusus the Son of Livia, who waged War in Germany, whom I
forbid to proceed any farther. It is not long since I came from thence a second
time; within these Hundred Years I had a Commission to Travel thither: I roamed
a great deal in Europe, and conversed with some, whom possibly you may have
known. One Day, amongst others, I appeared to Cardan, as he was at his Study; I
taught him a great many things, and he in acknowledgment promised me, to inform
Posterity, of whom he had those Wonders, which he intended to leave in writing.
There I saw Agrippa, the Abbot Trithemius, Doctor Faustus, La Brosse, Caesar,
and a certain Cabal of Young Men, who are commonly called Rosacrucians or
Knights of the Red-Cross, whom I taught a great many Knacks and Secrets of
Nature, which, without doubt, have made them pass for great Magicians: I knew
Campanella also; it was I that advised him, whilst he was in the Inquisition at
Rome, to put his Face and Body into the usual Postures of those, whose inside
he needed to know, that by the same frame of Body, he might excite in himself,
the thoughts which the same situation had raised in his Adversaries; because
by so doing, he might better manage their Soul, when he came to know it; and at
my desire he began a Book, which we Entitled, De Sensu Rerum. I likewise
haunted in France, La Mothe le Vayer and Gassendus; this last has written as
much like a Philosopher, as the other lived: I have known a great many more
there, whom your Age call Divines, but all that I could find in them, was a
great deal of Babble, and a great deal of Pride. In fine, since I past over
from your Country into England, to acquaint my self, with the manners of its
Inhabitants, I met with a Man, the shame of his Country; for certainly it is a
great shame for the Grandees of your States, to know the virtue which in him
has its Throne, and not to adore him: That I may give you an Abridgement of his
Panegyric, he is all Wit, all Heart, and possesses all the Qualities, of which
one alone was heretofore sufficient to make an Hero: It was Tristan the
Hermit. The Truth is, I must tell you, when I perceived so exalted a Virtue, I
mistrusted it would not be taken notice of, and therefore I endeavored to make
him accept Three Vials, the first filled with the Oil of Talk, the other with
the Powder of Projection, and the third with Aurum Potabile; but he refused
them with a more generous Disdain, than Diogenes did the Complements of
Alexander. In fine, I can add nothing to the Elogy of that Great Man, but that
he is the only Poet, the only Philosopher, and the only Freeman amongst you:
These are the considerable Persons that I conversed with; all the rest, at
least, that I know, are so far below Men, that I have seen Beasts somewhat
above them.

After all, I am not a Native neither of this Country nor yours, I was born in
the Sun; but because sometimes our World is over-stock'd with people, by reason
of the long Lives of the Inhabitants, and that there is hardly any Wars, or
Diseases amongst them: Our Magistrates, from time to time, send Colonies into
the neigbouring Worlds. For my own part, I was commanded to go to yours; being
declared Chief of the Colony that accompanied me. I came since into this World,
for the Reasons I told you; and that which makes me continue here, is, because
the Men are great lovers of Truth, have no Pedants among them; that the
Philosophers are never persuaded but by Reason, and that the Authority of a
Doctor, or of a great number, is not preferred before the Opinion of a Thresher
in a Barn, when he has right on his side. In short, none are reckoned Madmen
in this Country, but Sophisters and Orators. I asked him how they lived? he
made answer, three or four thousand Years; and thus went on:

Though the Inhabitants of the Sun, be not so numerous as those of this World;
yet the Sun is many times over stocked, because the People being of a hot
constitution, are stirring and ambitious, and digest much.

You ought not to be surprised at what I tell you; for though our Globe be very
vast, and yours little, though we die not before the end of Four thousand
Years, and you at the end of Fifty; yet know, that as there are not so many
Stones as clods of Earth, nor so many Animals as Plants, nor so many Men as
Beasts; just so there ought not to be so many Spirits as Men, by reason of the
difficulties that occur in the Generation of a perfect Creature.

I asked him, if they were Bodies as we are? He made answer, That they were
Bodies, but not like us, nor any thing else which we judged such; because we
call nothing a Body commonly, but what we can touch: That, in short, there was
nothing in Nature, but what was material; and that though they themselves were
so, yet they were forced, when they had a mind to appear to us, to take Bodies
proportionated to what our Senses are able to know; and that, without doubt,
that was the reason, why many have taken the Stories that are told of them, for
the Delusions of a weak Fancy, because they only appeared in the night time: He
told me withal, That seeing they were necessitated to piece together the
Bodies, they were to make use of in great haste, many times they had not
leisure enough, to render them the Objects of more Senses than one at a time,
sometimes of the Hearing, as the Voices of Oracles, sometimes of the Sight,, as
the Fires and Visions, sometimes of the Feeling, as the Incubusses; and that
these Bodies being but Air condensed, in such or such a manner, the Light
dispersed them by its heat, in the same manner, as it scatters a Mist.

So many fine things as he told me, gave me the curiosity to question him about
his Birth and Death; if in the Country of the Sun, the individual was
procreated by the ways of Generation, and if it died by the dissolution of its
Constitution, or the discomposure of its Organs? Your senses, replied he, bear
but too little proportion to the Explication of these Mysteries: Ye Gentlemen
imagine, that whatsoever you cannot comprehend is spiritual, or that it is not
at all; but that Consequence is absurd, and it is an argument, that there are a
Million of things, perhaps, in the Universe, that would require a Million of
different Organs in you, to understand them. For instance, I by my Senses know
the cause of the Sympathy, that is betwixt the Loadstone and the Pole, of the
ebbing and flowing of the Sea, and what becomes of the Animal after Death; you
cannot reach these high Conceptions but by Faith, because they are Secrets
above the power of your Intellects; no more than a Blind-man can judge of the
beauties of a Land-skip, the Colors of a Picture, or the streaks of a
Rainbow; or at best he will fancy them to besomewhat palpable, to be like
Eating, a Sound, or a pleasant Smell: Even so, should I attempt to explain to
you, what I perceive by the Senses which you want, you would represent it to
your self, as somewhat that may be Heard, Seen, Felt, Smelt or Tasted, and yet
it is no such thing.

He was gone on so far in his Discourse, when my Juggler perceived, that the
Company began to be weary of my Gibberish, that they understood not, and which
they took to be an inarticulated Grunting: He therefore fell to pulling my Rope
afresh, to make me leap and skip, till the Spectators having had their
Belly-fulls of Laughing, affirmed that I had almost as much Wit, as the Beasts
of their Country, and so broke up.

Thus, all the comfort I had during the misery of my hard Usage, were the
visits of this officious Spirit; for you may judge what conversation I could
have, with these that came to see me, since besides that they only took me for
an Animal, in the highest class of the Category of Bruits, I neither understood
their Language, nor they mine. For you must know, that there are but two Idioms
in use in that Country, one for the Grandees, and another for the People in
general.

That of the great ones is no more, but various inarticulate Tones, much like
to our Music, when the Words are not added to the Air: and in reality it is an
Invention, both very useful and pleasant; for when they are weary of talking,
or disdain to prostitute their Throats to that Office, they take either a Lute,
or some other Instrument, whereby they communicate their Thoughts, as well as
by their Tongue: So that sometimes Fifteen or Twenty in a Company, will handle
a point of Divinity, or discuss the difficulties of a Lawsuit, in the most
harmonious Consort, that ever tickled the Ear.

The second, which is used by the Vulgar, is performed by a shivering of the
Members, but not, perhaps, as you may imagine, for some parts of the Body
signify an entire Discourse; for example, the agitation of a Finger, a Hand,
an Ear, a Lip, an Arm, an Eye, a Cheek, every one severally will make up an
Oration, or a Period with all the parts of it: Others serve only instead of
Words, as the knitting of the Brows, the several quiverings of the Muscles, the
turning of the Hands, the stamping of the Feet, the contorsion of the Arm; so
that when they speak, as their Custom is, stark naked, their Members being used
to gesticulate their Conceptions, move so quick, that one would not think it to
be a Man that spoke, but a Body that trembled.

Every day almost the Spirit came to see me, and his rare Conversation made me
patiently bear with the rigor of my Captivity. At length, one morning I saw a
Man enter my Cabin, whom I knew not, who having a long while licked me gently,
took me up in his Teeth by the Shoulder, and with one of his Paws, wherewith he
held me up, for fear I might hurt my self, threw me upon his Back; where I
found my self so softly seated, and so much at my ease, that being afflicted to
be used like a Beast, I had not the least desire of making my escape; and
besides, these Men that go upon all four, are much swifter than we, seeing the
heaviest of them, make nothing of running down a Stagg.

In the mean time I was extremely troubled, that I had no news of my courteous
Spirit; and the first night we came to our Inn, as I was walking in the Court,
expecting till Supper should be ready, a pretty handsome young Man came smiling
in my Face, and cast his Two Forelegs about my Neck. After I had a little
considered him: How! said he in French, do not you know your Friend then? I
leave you to judge in what case I was at that time; really, my surprise was so
great, that I began to imagine, that all the Globe of the Moon, all that had
befallen me, and all that I had seen, had only been Enchantment: And that
Beast-man, who was the same that had carried me all day, continued to speak to
me in this manner; You promised me, that the good Offices I did you, should
never be forgotten, and yet it seems you have never seen me before; but
perceiving me still in amaze: In fine, said he, I am that same Demon of
Socrates, who diverted you during your Imprisonment, and who, that I may still
oblige you, took to my self a Body, on which I carried you to day: But, said I
interrupting him, how can that be, seeing that all Day you were of a very long
Stature, and now you are very short; that all day long you had a weak and
broken Voice, and now you have a clear and vigorous one; that, in short, all
day long you were a Grey-headed old Man, and are now a brisk young Blade: Is it
then that whereas in my Country, the Progress is from Life to Death; Animals
here go Retrograde from Death to Life, and by growing old become young again.

So soon as I had spoken to the Prince, said he, and received orders to bring
you to Court, I went and found you out where you were, and have brought you
hither; but the Body I acted in, was so tired out with the Journey, that all
its Organs refused me their ordinary Functions, so that I enquired the way to
the Hospital; where being come in I found the Body of a young Man, just then
expired by a very odd Accident, but yet very common in this Country -- I drew
near him, pretending to find motion in him still, and protesting to those who
were present, that he was not dead, and that what they thought to be the cause
of his Death, was no more but a bare Lethargy; so that without being perceived,
I put my Mouth to his, by which I entered as with a breath: Then down dropped my
old Carcass, and as if I had been that young Man, I rose and came to look for
you, leaving the Spectators crying a Miracle. With this they came to call us to
Supper, and I followed my Guide into a Parlour richly furnished; but where I
found nothing fit to be eaten. No Victuals appearing, when I was ready to die
of Hunger, made me ask him where the Cloth was laid: But I could not hear what
he answered, for at that instant Three or Four young Boys, Children of the
House, drew near, and with much Civility stripped me to the Shirt. This new
Ceremony so astonished me, that I durst not so much as ask my pretty Valets de
Chamber the cause of it; and I cannot tell how my Guide, who asked me what I
would begin with, could draw from me these two Words, A Potage; but hardly had
I pronounced them, when I smelt the odor of the most agreeable Soop, that ever
steamed in the rich Gluttons Nose: I was about to rise from my place, that I
might trace that delicious Scent to its source, but my Carrier hindered me:
Whither are you going, said he, we shall fetch a walk by and by; but now it is
time to Eat, make an end of your Potage, and then we'll have something else:
And where the Devil is the Potage? answered I half angry: Have you laid a wager
you will jeer me all this Day? I thought, replied he, that at the Town we came
from, you had seen your Master or some Boelse at meal, and that is the reason I
told you not, how People feed in this Country. Seeing then you are still
ignorant, you must know, that here they live on Steams. The art of Cookery is
to shut up in great Vessels, made on purpose, the Exhalations that proceed from
the meat, whilst it is a dressing; and when they have provided enough of
several sorts, and several tastes, according to the Appetite of those they
treat; they open one Vessel where that Steam is kept, and after that another;
and so on till all the Company be satisfied.

Unless you have already lived after this manner, you would never think, that
the Nose without Teeth and Gullet, can perform the office of the Mouth, in
feeding a Man; but I Will make you experience it your self. He had no sooner said
so, but I found so many agreeable and nourishing Vapors enter the Parlour, one
after another, that in less than half a quarter of an Hour I was fully
satisfied. When we were got up; This is not a matter, said he, much to be
admired at, seeing you cannot have lived so long, and not have observed, that
all sorts of Cooks, who eat less than People of another Calling, are
nevertheless much Fatter. Whence proceeds that Plumpness, do you think, unless it
be from the Steams that continually environ them, which penetrate into their
Bodies, and fatten them? Hence it is, that the People of this World enjoy a
more steady and vigorous Health, by reason that their Food hardly engenders any
Excrements, which are in a manner the original of all Diseases. You were,
perhaps, surprised, that before supper you were stripped, since it is a Custom
not practiced in your Country; but it is the fashion of this, and for this end
used, that the Animal may be the more transpirable to the Fumes. Sir, answered
I, there is a great deal of probability in what you say, and I have found
somewhat of it my self by experience; but I must frankly tell you, That not
being able to Unbrute my self so soon, I should be glad to feel something, that
my Teeth might fix upon: He promised I should, but not before next Day;
because, said he, to Eat so soon after your meal, would breed Crudities. After
we had discoursed a little longer, we went up to a Chamber to take our rest; a
Man met us on the top of the Stairs; who having attentively Eyed us, led me
into a Closet, where the floor was strowed with Orange-Flowers Three Foot
thick, and my Spririt into another, filled with Gilly-Flowers and Jessamine:
Perceiving me amazed at that Magnificence, he told me, they were the Beds of
the Country. In fine, we laid our selves down to rest, in our several Cells,
and so soon as I had stretched my self out upon my Flowers, by the light of
Thirty large Glowworms shut up in a Crystal, (being the only Candles Charon
uses,) I perceived the Three or Four Boys, who had stripped me before Supper, One
tickling my Feet, another my Thighs, the Third my Flanks, and the Fourth my
Arms, and all so delicately and daintily, that in less than a Minute I was fast
asleep.

Next Morning by Sunrising, my Spirit came into my Room, and said to me, Now
I Will be as good as my Word, you shall breakfast this Morning, more solidly than
you Supped last Night. With that I got up, and he led me by the Hand to a
place, at the back of the Garden, where one of the Children of the House stayed
for us, with a Piece in his Hand, much like to one of our Firelocks. He asked
my Guide, if I would have a dozen of Larks, because Baboons (one of which he
took me to be,) loved to feed on them? I had hardly answered, Yes, when the
Fowler discharged a Shot, and Twenty or Thirty Larks fell at our Feet ready
Roasted. This, thought I presently with my self, verifies the Proverb in our
World, of a Country where Larks fall ready Roasted; without doubt, it has been
made by some Body that came from hence. Fall too, fall too, said my Spirit,
don't spare; for they have a knack of mingling a certain Composition with their
Powder and Shot, which Kills, Plucks, Roasts, and Seasons the Fowl all at once.
I took up some of them, and eat them upon his word; and to say the Truth, In
all my Life time, I never eat any thing so delicious. Having thus Breakfasted,
we prepared to be gone, and with a Thousand odd Faces, which they use when they
would show their Love; our Landlord received a Paper from my Spirit. I asked
him, if it was a Note for the Reckoning? He replied, No, that all was paid, and
that it was a Copy of Verses. How! Verses, said I, are your Innkeepers here
curious of Rhyme then? It Is, said he, the Money of the Country, and the charge
we have been at here, has been computed to amount to Three Couplets, or Six
Verses, which I have given him. I did not fear we should outrun the Constable;
for though we should Pamper our selves for a whole Week; we could not spend a
Sonnet, and I have Four about me, besides Two Epigrams, Two Odes, and an
Eclogue. Would to God, said I, it were so in our World; for I know a good many
honest Poets there, who are ready to Starve, and who might live plentifully, if
that Money would pass in Payment. I farther asked him, If these Verses would
always serve, if one Transcribed them? He made answer, No, and so went on. When
an Author has Composed any; he carries them to the Mint, where the sworn Poets
of the Kingdom sit in Court. There these versifying Officers essay the pieces;
and if they be judged Sterling, they are rated not according to their Coin;
that is to say, That a Sonnet is not always as good as a Sonnet; but according
to the intrinsic value of the piece; so that if any one Starve, he must be a
Blockhead: For Men of Wit make always good Cheer. With Ecstasy, I was admiring
the judicious Policy of that Country, when he proceeded in this manner: There
are others who keep Publick-house, after a far different manner: When one is
about to be gone, they demand proportionably to the Charges, an Acquittance for
the other World; and when that is given them, they write down in a great
Register, which they call Doomsday's Book, much after this manner. Item, The
value of so many Verses, delivered such a Day, to such a Person, which he is to
pay upon the receipt of this Acquittance, out of his readiest Cash: And when
they find themselves in danger of Death, they cause these Registers to be Chopped
in pieces, and swallow them down; because they believe, that if they were not
thus digested, they would be good for nothing.

This Conversation was no hinderance to our Journey; for my Four-legged Porter
jogged on under me, and I rid stradling on his Back. I shall not be particular
in relating to you, all the Adventures, that happened to us on our way, till we
arrived at length at the Town, where the King holds his Residence. I was no
sooner come, but they carried me to the Palace, where the Grandees received me
with more Moderation, than the People had done, as I passed the Streets: But
both great and small concluded, That, without doubt, I was the Female of the
Queen's little Animal. My Guide was my Interpreter; and yet he himself
understood not the Riddle, and knew not what to make of that little Animal of
the Queen's; but we were soon satisfied as to that; for the King having some
time considered me, ordered it to be brought, and about half an hour after, I
saw a company of Apes, wearing Ruffs and Breeches, come in, and amongst them a
little Man, almost of my own Built, for he went on Two Legs; so soon as he
perceived me, he Accosted me with a Criado de vuestra merced. I answered his
Greeting, much in the same Terms. But alas! no sooner had they seen us talk
together, but they believed their Conjecture to be true; and so, indeed, it
seemed; for he of all the Bystanders, that past the most favorable Judgment
upon us, protested, that our Conversation, was a Chattering we kept for Joy at
our meeting again. That little Man told me, that he was an European, a Native
of old Castille: That he had found a means by the help of Birds, to mount up to
the World of the Moon, where then we were: That falling into the Queen's Hands,
she had taken him for a Monkey, because Fate would have it so: That in that
Country they cloth Apes in a Spanish Dress; and that upon his arrival, being
found in that habit, she had made no doubt, but he was of the same kind. It
could not otherwise be, replied I, but having tried all Fashions of Apparel
upon them, none were found so Ridiculous, and by consequence more becoming a
kind of Animals, which are only entertained for Pleasure and Diversion. That
shows you little understand the Dignity of our Nation, answered he, for whom
the Universe breeds Men, only to be our Slaves, and Nature produces nothing but
objects of Mirth and Laughter. He then entreated me to tell him, how I durst be
so bold, as to Scale the Moon with the Machine I told him of? I answered, That
it was because he had carried a way the Birds, which I intended to have made
use of. He smiled at this Raillery; and about a quarter of an hour after, the
King commanded the Keeper of the Monkeys to carry us back, with express Orders
to make the Spaniard and me lie together, that we might procreate a breed of
Apes in his Kingdom. The King's Pleasure was punctually obeyed; at which I was
very glad, for the satisfaction I had, of having a Mate to converse with,
during the solitude of my Brutification. One Day my Male (for I was taken for
the Female) told me, That the true reason, which had obliged him to travel all
over the Earth, and at length to abandon it for the Moon, was, that he could
not find so much as one Country, where even Imagination was at liberty. Look
ye, said he, how the Wittiest thing you can say, unless you wear a Cornered
Cap, if it thwart the Principles of the Doctors of the Robe, you are an Idiot,
a Fool, and something worse, perhaps. I was about to have been put into the
Inquisition at home, for maintaining to the Pedants Teeth, That there was a
Vacuum, and that I knew no one matter in the World, more Ponderous than
another. I asked him, what probable Arguments he had, to confirm so new an
Opinion? To evince that, answered he, you must suppose that there is but one
Element; for though we see Water, Earth, Air and Fire distinct, yet are they
never found to be so perfectly pure, but that there still remains some Mixture.
For example, When you behold Fire, it is not Fire but Air much extended; the
Air is but Water much dilated; Water is but liquified Earth, and the Earth it
self, but condensed Water; and thus if you weigh Matter seriously, you will find
it is but one, which like an excellent Comedian here below acts all Parts, in
all sorts of Dresses: Otherwise we must admit as many Elements, as there are
kinds of Bodies: And if you ask me why Fire burns, and Water cools, since it is
but one and the same matter, I answer, That that matter acts by Sympathy,
according to the Disposition it is in, at the time when it acts. Fire which is
nothing but Earth also, more dilated than is fit for the constitution of Air,
strives to change into it self, by Sympathy, what ever it meets with: Thus the
heat of Coals, being the most subtle Fire, and most proper to penetrate a
Body, at first slides through the pores of our Skin; and because it is a new
matter that fills us, it makes us exhale in Sweat; that Sweat dilated by the
Fire is converted to a Steam, and becomes Air; that Air being farther rarefied
by the heat of the Antiperistasis, or of the Neighboring Stars, is called
Fire, and the Earth abandoned by the Cold and Humidity, which were Ligaments to
the whole, falls to the ground: Water, on the other hand, though it no ways
differ from the matter of Fire, but in that it is closer, burns us not; because
that being dense by Sympathy, it closes up the Bodies it meets with, and the
Cold we feel is no more, but the effect of our Flesh contracting it self,
because of the Vicinity of Earth or Water, which constrains it toa Resemblance.
Hence it is, that those who are troubled with a Dropsy, convert all their
nourishment into Water; and the Choleric convert all the Blood, that is formed
in their Liver, into Choler. It being then supposed, that there is but one
Element; it is most certain, that all Bodies, according to their several
qualities, incline equally toward the Center of the Earth.

But you will ask me, Why then does Iron, Metal, Earth and Wood, descend more
swiftly to the Center than a Sponge, if it be not that it is full of Air, which
naturally tends upwards? That is not at all the Reason, and thus I make it out:
Though a Rock fall with greater Rapidity than a Feather, both of them have the
same inclination for the Journey; but a Cannon Bullet, for instance, where the
Earth pierced through, would precipitate with greater haste to the Center
thereof, than a Bladder full of Wind; and the reason is, because that mass of
Metal, is a great deal of Earth contracted into a little space, and that Wind a
very little Earth in a large space: For all the parts of Matter, being so
closely joined together in the Iron, increase their force by their Union;
because being thus compacted, they are many that Fight against a few, seeing a
parcel of Air equal to the Bullet in Bigness, is not equal in Quantity.

Not to insist on a long Deduction of Arguments to prove this, tell me in good
earnest, How a Pike, a Sword or a Dagger wound us? If it be not, because the
Steel, being a matter, wherein the parts are more continuous, and more closely
knit together, than your Flesh is, whose Pores and Softness show, that it
contains but very little Matter, within a great extent of Place; and that the
point of the Steel that pricks us, being almost an innumerable number of
Particles of matter, against a very little Flesh, it forces it to yield to the
stronger, in the same manner as a Squadron in close order, will easily break
through a more open Battallion; for why does a Bit of red hot Iron, burn more
than a Log of Wood all on Fire? Unless it be, that in the Iron, there is more
Fire in a small space, seeing it adheres, to all the parts of the Metal, than
in the Wood which being very Spongy, by consequence contains a great deal of
Vacuity; and that Vacuity, being but a Privation of Being, cannot receive the
form of Fire. But, you will object, you suppose a Vacuum, as if you had proved
it, and that is begging of the question: Well then I Will prove it, and though
that difficulty be the Sister of the Gordian knot, yet my Arms are strong
enough to become its Alexander.

Let that vulgar Beast, then, who does not think it self a Man, had it not been
told so, answer me if it can: Suppose now there be but one Matter, as I think I
have sufficiently peoved; whence comes it, that according to its Appetite, it
enlarges or contracts its self; whence is it, that a piece of Earth, by being
Condensed becomes a Stone? Is it that the parts of that Stone are placed one
with another, in such a manner, that wherever that grain of Sand is settled,
even there, or in the same point, another grain of Sand is Lodged? That cannot
be, no not according to their own Principles, seeing there is no Penetration of
Bodies: But that matter must have crowded together, and if you will, abridged
it self, so that it has filled some place which was empty before. To say, that
it is incomprehensible, that there should be a Nothing in the World, that we
are in part made up of Nothing: Why not, pray? Is not the whold World wrapped up
in Nothing? Since you yield me this point, then confess ingeniously, that it is
as rational, that the World should have a Nothing within it, as Nothing about
it.

I well perceive you will put the question to me, Why Water compressed in a
Vessel by the Frost should break it, if it be not to hinder a Vacuity? But I
answer, That that only happens, because the Air overhead, which as well as
Earth and Water, tends to the Center, meeting with an empty Tun by the way,
takes up his Lodging there: If it find the pores of that Vessel, that is to say,
the ways that lead to that void place, too narrow, too long, and too crooked,
with impatience it breaks through and arrives at its Tun.

But not to trifle away time, in answering all their objections, I dare be bold
to say, That if there were no Vacuity, there could be no Motion; or else a
Penetration of Bodies must be admitted; for it would be a little too ridiculous
to think, that when a Gnat pushes back a parcel of Air with its Wings, that
parcel drives another before it, that other another still; and that so the
stirring of the little Toe of a Flea, should raise a bunch upon the Back of the
Universe. When they are at a stand, they have recourse to Rarefaction: But in
good earnest, How can it be when a Body is rarefied, that one Particle of the
Mass does recede from another Particle, without leaving an empty Space betwixt
them; must not the two Bodies, which are just separated, have been at the same
time in the same place of this; and that so they must have all three penetrated
each other? I expect you will ask me, why through a Reed, a Syringe or a Pump,
Water is forced to ascend contrary to its inclination? To which I answer, That
that is by violence, and that it is not the fear of a Vacuity, that turns it out
of the right way; but that being linked to the Air by an imperceptible Chain,
it rises when the Air, to which it is joined, is raised.

That Is no such knotty Difficulty, when one knows the perfect Circle, and the
delicate Concatenation of the Elements: For if you attentively consider the
Slime, which joines the Earth and Water together in Marriage, you will find that
it is neither Earth nor Water; but the Mediator betwixt these Two Enemies. In
the same manner, the Water and Air reciprocally send a Mist, that dives into
the Humors of both, to negotiate a Peace betwixt them; and the Air is
reconciled to the Fire, by means of an interposing Exhalation which Unites them.

I believe he would have proceeded in his Discourse, had they not brought us
our Victuals; and seeing we were a hungry, I stopped my Ears to his discourse,
and opened my Stomach to the Food they gave us.

I remember another time, when we were upon our Philosophy, for neither of us
took pleasure to Discourse of mean things: I am vexed, said he, to see a Wit of
your stamp, infected with the Errors of the Vulgar. You must know then, in
spite of the Pedantry of Aristotle, with which your Schools in France still
ring, That every thing is in every thing; that is to say, for instance, That in
the Water there is Fire, in the Fire Water, in the Air Earth, and in the Earth
Air: Though that Opinion makes Scholars open their Eyes as big as Sawcers, yet
it is easier to prove it, than persuade it. For I ask them, in the first place,
if Water does not breed Fish: If they deny it, let them dig a Pit, fill it with
mere Element, and to prevent all blind Objections, let them if they please,
strain it through a Strainer, and I Will oblige my self, in case they find no
Fish therein, within a certain time, to drink up all the Water they have poured
into it: But if they find Fish, as I make no doubt on it; it is a convincing
Argument, that there is both Salt and Fire there. Consequentially now, to find
Water in Fire; I take it to be no difficult Task. For let them choose Fire, even
that which is most abstracted from Matter, as Comets are, there is a great deal
in them still; seeing if that Unctuous Humor, whereof they are engendered,
being reduced to a Sulphur, by the heat of the Antiperistasis which kindles
them, did not find a curb of its Violence in the humid Cold, that qualifies and
resists it, it would spend it self in a trice like Lightning. Now that there is
Air in the Earth, they will not deny it; or otherwise they have never heard of
the terrible Earthquakes, that have so often shaken the Mountains of Sicily:
Besides, the Earth is full of Pores, even to the least grains of Sand that
compass it. Nevertheless, no Man has as yet said, that these Hollows were
filled with Vacuity: It will not be taken amiss then, I hope, if the Air takes
up its quarters there. It remains to be proved, that there is Earth in the Air;
but I think it scarcely worth my pains, seeing you are convinced of it, as
often as you see, such numberless Legions of Atoms fall upon your heads, as
even stiffle Arithmetic.

But let us pass from simple to compound Bodies, they will furnish me with much
more frequent Subjects; and to demonstrate that all things are in all things,
not that they change into one another, as your Peripateticks Juggle, (for I
will maintain to their Teeth, that the Principles mingle, separate, and mingle
again in such a manner, that that has been made Water by the Wise Creator of
the World, will always be Water:) I shall suppose no Maxim, as they do, but
what I prove.

And therefore take a Billet, or any other combustible stuff, and set Fire to
it, they will say when it is in a Flame, That what was Wood is now become Fire;
but I maintain the contrary, and that there is no more Fire in it, when it is
all in Flame, than before it was kindled; but that which before was hid in the
Billet, and by the Humidity and Cold hindered from acting; being now assisted
by the Stronger, has rallied its forces against the Phlegm that choked it,
and commanding the Field of Battle, that was possessed by its Enemy, triumphs
over his Jailer, and appears without Fetters. Don't you see how the Water flees
out at the two ends of the Billet, hot and smoking from the Fight it was
engaged in. That flame which you see rise on high, is the purer Fire,
unpestered from the Matter, and by consequence the readiest to return home to
it self: Nevertheless it Unites it self, by tapering into a Piramide, till it
rise to a certain height, that it may pierce through the thick Humidity of the
Air, which resists it; but as in mounting it disengages it self by little and
little, from the violent company of its Landlords; so it diffuses it self,
because then it meets with nothing that thwarts its passage, which negligence,
though, is many times the cause of a second Captivity: For marching
stragglingly, it wanders sometimes into a Cloud, and if it meet there with a
Party of its own, sufficient to make head against a Vapor; they Engage,
Grumble, Thunder and Roar, and the Death of Innocents is many times the effect
of the animated Rage, of those inanimated Things. If when it finds it self
pestered, among those Crudities of the middle Region, it is not strong enough
to make a defense; it yields to its Enemy upon discretion, which by its weight,
constrains it to fall again to the Earth: And this Wretch, enclosed in a drop
of Rain, may, perhaps, fall at the Foot of an Oak, whose Animal Fire will
invite the poor Straggler, to take a Lodging with him; and thus you have it in
the same condition again, as it was a few Days before.

But let us trace the Fortune of the other Elements, that composed that Billet.
The Air retreats to its own Quarters also, though blended with Vapors; because
the Fire all in a rage, drove them briskly out Pell-mell together. Now you have
it serving the Winds for a Tennis-ball, furnishing Breath to Animals, filling
up the Vacuities that Nature has left; and, it may be, also wrapped up in a drop
of Dew, suckling the thirsty Leaves of that Tree, whither our Fire retreated:
The Water driven from its Throne by the Flame, being by the heat elevated to
the Nursery of the Meteors, will distill again in Rain upon our Oak, as soon as
upon another; and the Earth being turned to Ashes, and then cured of its
Sterility, either by the nourishing Heat of a Dunghill, on which it has been
thrown, or by the vegetative Salt of some neighboring Plants, or by the
teeming Waters of some Rivers, may happen also to be near this Oak, which by
the heat of its Germ, will attract it, and convert it into a part of its bulk.

In this manner, these Four Elements undergo the same Destiny, and return to
the same State, which they quitted but a few days before: So that it may be
said, that all that is necessary for the composition of a Tree, is in a Man; and
in a Tree, all that is necessary for making of a Man. In fine, according to this
way, all things will be found in all things; but we want a Prometheus, to pluck
us out of the Bosom of Nature, and render us sensible, which I am willing to
call the First Matter.

These were the things, I think, with which we past the time; for that little
Spaniard had a quaint Wit. Our conversation, however, was only in the Night
time; because from Six a clock in the morning until night, Crowds of the People
that came to stare at us in our Lodging, would have disturbed us: For some
threw us Stones, others Nuts, and others Grass; there was no talk, but of the
Kings Beasts; we had our Victuals daily at set hours, and the King and Queen
took the pains often to feel my Belly, to see if I did not begin to swell, for
they had an extraordinary desire to have a Race of these little Animals. I
cannot tell, whether it was that I minded their Gestures and Tones, more than
my Male did: But I learnt sooner than he, to understand their Language, and to
smatter a little in it, which made us to be looked upon, in another guess manner
than formerly; and the news thereupon flew presently all over the Kingdom, that
two Wild Men had been found, who were less than other Men, by reason of the bad
Food we had had in the Deserts; and who through a defect of their Parents Seed,
had not the fore Legs strong enough to support their Bodies.

This belief would have taken rooting, by being spread, had it not been for the
Learned Men of the Country, who opposed it, saying, That it was horrid Impiety
to believe, not only Beasts, but Monsters to be of their kind. It would be far
more probable, (added the calmer Sort) that our Domestic Beasts, should
participate of the privilege of Humanity, and by consequence of Immortality,
as being bred in our Country, than a Monstrous Beast, that talks of being born
I know not where, in the Moon; and then observe the difference betwixt us and
them. We walk upon Four Feet, because God would not trust so precious a thing,
upon weaker Supporters, and he was afraid least marching otherwise, some
Mischance might befall Man; and therefore he took the pains, to rest him upon
four Pillars, that he might not fall, but disdaining to have a hand in the
Fabric of these two Brutes, he left them to the Caprice of Nature, who not
concerning her self with the loss of so small a matter, supported them only by
Two Feet.

Birds themselves, said they, have not had so hard measure as they; for they
have got Feathers, at least to supply the weakness of their Legs, and to cast
themselves in the Air, when we pursue them; whereas Nature, depriving these
Monsters of Two Legs, has disabled them from scaping our Justice.

Besides, consider a little how they have the Head raised toward Heaven, it is
because God would punish them with scarcity of all things, that he has so
placed them; for that supplicant Posture, shows that they complain to Heaven of
him that Created them, and that they beg Permission to make their best of our
Leavings. But we, on the contrary, have the Head bending downwards, to behold
the Blessings, whereof we are the Masters, and as if there were nothing in
Heaven, that our happy condition needed Envy.

I heard such Discourses, or the like, daily at my Lodge; and at length they so
curbed the minds of the people, as to that point, that it was decreed, That at
best, I should only pass for a Parrot without Feathers; for they confirmed
those, who were already persuaded, in that I had but two Legs no more than a
Bird, which was the cause that I was put into a Cage, by express orders from
the Privy Council.

There the Queen's Bird-keeper, taking the pains daily to teach me to Whistle,
as they do Stares or Singing-Birds here, I was really happy in that I wanted
not Food: In the mean while, with the Sonnets the Spectators stunned me, I
learnt to speak as they did; so that when I was got to be so much Master of the
Idiom, as to express most of my thoughts, I told them the finest of my
Conceits. The Quaintness of my Sayings, was already the entertainment of all
Societies, and my Wit was so much esteemed, that the Council was obliged to
Publish an Edict, forbidding all People to believe, that I was endowed with
Reason; with express Commands to all Persons, of what Quality or Condition
soever, not to imagine, but that whatever I did, though never so wittily,
proceeded only from Instinct.

Nevertheless, the decision of what I was, divided the Town into Two Factions.
The party that stood for me, increased daily; and at length in spite of the
Anathema, whereby they endeavored to scare the multitude: They who held for
me, demanded a Convention of the States, for determining that Controversy. It
was long before they could agree, in the Choice of those who should have a
Vote; but the Arbitrators pacified the heat, by making the number of both
parties equal, who ordered that I should be brought unto the Assembly, as I
was: But I was treated there with all imaginable Severity. My Examiners,
amongst other things, put questions of Philosophy to me; I ingenuously told
them, all that my Tutor had heretofore taught me, but they easily refuted me by
more convincing Arguments: So that having nothing to answer for my self, my
last refuge was to the Principles of Aristotle, which stood me in as little
stead, as his Sophisms did; for in two Words, they let me see the falsity of
them. That same Aristotle, said they, whose Learning you brag so much of, did
without doubt accommodate Principles to his Philosophy; instead of
accommodating his Philosophy to Principles; and besides he ought to have proved
them, at least to be more rational, than those of the other Sects, you
mentioned to us: Wherefore the good Man will not take it ill, we hope, if we
bid him God b'w'. In fine, when they perceived that I did nothing but bawl,
that they were not more knowing than Aristotle, and that I was forbid to
dispute against those who denied his Principles: They all unanimously
concluded, That I was not a Man, but, perhaps, a kind of Estriage, seeing I
carried my Head upright like them, that I walked on two Legs; and that, in
short, but for a little Down, I was every way like one of them, so that the
Bird-keeper was ordered to have me back to my Cage. I spent my time pretty
pleasantly there, for because I had correctly learned their Language, the whole
Court took pleasure to make me prattle. The Queen's Maids, among the rest,
slipped always some Boon into my Basket; and the gentilest of them all, having
conceived some kindness for me, was so transported with Joy, when in private I
entertained her, with the manners and divertisements of the People of our
World, and especially our Bells, and other Instruments of Music, that she
protested to me, with Tears in her Eyes, That if ever I found my self in a
condition to fly back again to our World, she would follow me with all her
Heart.

One Morning early, having started out of my Sleep, I found her Taboring upon
the grates of my Cage: Take good heart, said she to me, yesterday in Council, a
War was resolved upon, against the King (...) I hope that during the hurry of
Preparations, whilst our Monarch and his Subjects are absent, I may find an
occasion to make your escape. How, a War, said I interruping her, have the
Princes of this World, then, any quarrels amongst themselves, as those of ours
have? Good now, let me know their way of Fighting.

When the Arbitrators, replied she, who are freely chosen by the two Parties,
have appointed the time for raising Forces for their March, the number of
Combatants, the day and place of Battle, and all with so great equality, that
there is not one Man more in one Army, than in the other: All the maimed
Soldiers on the one side, are listed in one Company; and when they come to
engage, the Mareshalls de Camp, take care to expose them to the maimed of the
other side: The Giants are matched with Colosses, the Fencers with those that
can handle their Weapons, the Valiant with the Stout, the Weak with the Infirm,
the Sick with the Indisposed, the Sturdy with the Strong; and if any undertake
to strike at another, than the Enemy he is matched with, unless he can make it
out, that it was by mistake, he is Condemned for a Coward. When the Battle is
over, they take an account of the Wounded, the Dead and the Prisoners, for
Run-aways they have none; and if the loss be equal on both sides, they draw
Cuts, who shall be Proclaimed Victorious.

But though a Kingdom has defeated the Enemy in open War, yet there is hardly
any thing got by it; for there are other smaller Armies of Learned and Witty
Men, on whose Disputations the Triumph or Servitude of States wholly depends.

One Learned Man grapples with another, one Wit with another, and one Judicious
Man with another Judicious Man: Now the Triumph which a State gains in this
manner, is reckoned as good as three Victories by open force. After the
Proclamation of Victory, the Assembly is broken up, and the Victorious People,
either choose the Enemies King to be theirs, or confirm their own.

I could not forbear to Laugh, at this scrupulous way of giving Battle; and for
an Example of much stronger Politics, I alleged the Customs of our Europe,
where the Monarch would be sure, not to let slip any favorable occasion of
gaining the day; but mind what she said as to that.

Tell me, pray, if your Princes use not a pretext of Right, when they levy
Arms: No doubt, answered I, and of the Justice of their Cause too. Why then,
replied she, do they not choose Impartial and Unsuspected Arbitrators to compose
their Differences? And if it be found, that the one has as much Right as the
other, let things continue as they were; or let them play a game at Picket, for
the Town or Province that is in dispute.

But why all these Circumstances, replied I, in your way of Fighting? Is it not
enough, that both Armies are equal in the number of Men? Your Judgment is Weak,
answered she. Would you think in Conscience, that if you had the better of your
Enemy, Hand to Hand, in an open Field, you had fairly overcome him, if you had
had on a Coat of Mail, and he none; if he had had but a Dagger, and you a Tuck;
and in a Word, if he had had but one Arm, and you both yours? Nevertheless,
what Equality soever you may recommend to your Gladiators, they never fight on
even terms; for the one will be a tall Man, and the other Short; the one
skilful at his Weapon, and the other a Man that never handled a Sword; the one
will be strong, and the other Weak: And though these Disproportions were not,
but that the one were as skillful and strong as the other; yet still they might
not be rightly matched; for one, perhaps, may have more Courage than the other,
who being rash and hotheaded, inconcerned in danger, as not foreseeing it, of
a bilious Temper, a more contracted Heart, with all the qualities that
constitute Courage, (as if that, as well as a Sword, were not a Weapon which
his Adversary has not:) He makes nothing of falling desperately, upon
terrifying and killing this poor Man, who foresees the danger; has his Heat
choked in Phlegm, and a Heart too wide to close in the Spirits in such a
posture, as is necessary for thawing that Ice, which is called Cowardice. And
now you praise that Man, for having killed his Enemy at odds, and praising him
for his Boldness, you praise him for a Sin against nature; seeing such Boldness
tends to its destruction. And this puts me in mind to tell ye, that some Years
ago, application was made to the Council of War, for a more circumspect and
conscientious Rule to be made, as to the way of Fighting. The Philosopher who
gave the advice, if I mistake it not, spoke in this manner.

You imagine, Gentlemen, that you have very equally balanced the advantages of
two Enemies, when you have chosen both Tall Men, both skillful, and both
courageous: But that is not enough, seeing after all, the Conqueror must have
the better on it, either through his Skill, Strength, or good Fortune. If it be
by Skill, without doubt he has taken his Adversary on the blind side, which he
did not expect; or struck him sooner than was likely, or faining to make his
Pass on one side, he has attacked him on the other: Nevertheless all this is
Cunning, Cheating, and Treachery, and none of these make a brave Man: If he
has triumphed by Force, would you judge his Enemy overcome, because he has
been overpowered? No; doubtless, no more than you will say, that a Man has lost
the Victory, when overwhelmed by a Mountain, it was not in his power to gain
it: Even so, the other was not overcome, because he was not in a suitable
Disposition, at that nick of time, to resist the violences of his Adversary. If
Chance has given him the better of his Enemy, Fortune ought then to be
Crowned, since he has contributed nothing to it; and, in fine, the vanquished
is no more to be blamed, than he who at Dice having thrown Seventeen, is beat
by another that throws three Sixes.

They confessed he was in the right; but that it was impossible, according to
humane Appearances, to remedy it; and that it was better, to submit to a small
inconvenience, than to open a door to a hundred of greater Importance.

She entertained me no longer at that time, because she was afraid to be found
alone with me so early; not that Impudicity is a Crime in that Country: On the
contrary, except Malefactors Convicted, all Men have power over all Women; and
in the same manner, a Woman may bring her Action against a Man for refusing
her: But she durst not keep me company publicly, because the Members of
Council, at their last meeting, had said, That it was chiefly the Women who
gave it out that I was a Man, that under that pretext they might cover the
violent desire they had of enjoying Beasts, and of committing with me sins
against Nature, without a blush; which was the reason, that for a long time, I
neither saw her, nor any other of her Sex.

In the mean time, some must needs have revived the Disputes, about the
Definition of my Being; for whilst I was thinking of nothing else, but of dying
in my Cage, I was once more brought out to have another Audience. I was then
questioned, in presence of a great many Courtiers, upon some points of Natural
Philosophy; and, as I take it, my Answers gave some kind of Satisfaction; for
the President declared to me at large, his thoughts concerning the structure of
the World. They seemed to me very ingenious; and had he not traced it to its
Original, which he maintained to be Eternal, I should have thought his
Philosophy more rational than our own: But as soon as I heard him maintain a
Foppery, so contrary to our Faith, I broke with him; at which he did but laugh;
and that obliged me to tell him, That since they were thereabouts with it, I
began again to think, that their World was but a Moon. But then all cried,
Don't you see here Earth, Rivers, Seas? what is all that then? No matter, said
I, Aristotle assures us it is but a Moon; and if you had said the contrary in
the Schools, where I have been bred, you would have been hissed at. At this
they all burst out in laughter; you need not ask, if it was their Ignorance,
that made them do so; for in the mean time I was carried back to my Cage.

But some more passionate Doctors, being informed, that I had the boldness to
affirm, That the Moon, from whence I came, was a World; and that their World
was no more but a Moon, thought it might give them a very just pretext, to have
me condemned to the Water; for that is their way of rooting out Heretics. For
that end, they went in a Body, and complained to the King, who promised them
Justice; and ordered me once more to be brought to the Bar.

Now was I the third time Un-caged; and then the most Ancient spoke, and
pleaded against me. I do not well remember his Speech; because I was too much
frighted, to receive the tones of his Voice without disorder; and because also
in declaiming, he made use of an Instrument, which stunned me with its noise:
It was a Speaking-Trumpet, which he had chosen on purpose, that by its Martial
Sound he might rouse them to my death; and by that Emotion of their Spirits,
hinder Reason from performing its Office: As it happens in our Armies, where
the noise of Drums and Trumpets, hinders the Soldiers from minding the
importance of their Lives. When he had done, I rose up to defend my Cause; but
I was excused from it, by an Accident that will surprise you. Just as I had
opened my Mouth, a Man, who with much ado had pressed through the Crowd, fell
at the King's Feet, and a long while rouled himself upon his Back in his
presence. This practice did not at all surprise me, because I knew it to be the
posture they put themselves into, when they have a mind to be heard in public:
I only stopped my own Harangue, and gave Ear to his.

Just Judges, said he, listen to me; you cannot Condemn that Man, that Monkey
or Parrot, for saying, That the Moon, from whence he comes, is a World; for if
he be a Man, though he were not come from the Moon, since all Men are free, is
not he free also, to imagine what he pleases? How, can you constrain him not to
have Visions, as well as you? You may very well force him to say, That the Moon
is not a World, but he will not believe it for all that; for to believe a
thing, some possibilities enclining more to the Yea, than to the Nay, must
offer to ones Imagination: And unless you furnish him with that Probability, or
his own mind hit upon it, he may very well tell you, that he believes, but
still remain an Infidel.

I am now to prove, that he ought not to be condemned, if you list him in the
Catalogue of Beasts.

For suppose him to be an Animal without Reason, would it be rational in you to
Condemn him, for offending against it? He has said, that the Moon is a World.
Now Beasts act only by the instinct of Nature: it is Nature then that says so,
and not he: To think that wise Nature, who has made the World, and the Moon
knows not her self what it is; and that ye who have no more Knowledge, but what
ye derive from her, should more certainly know it, would be very Ridiculous.
But if Passion should make you renounce your Principles, and you should
suppose, that Nature does not guide Beasts; blush, at least, to think on it,
that the Caprices of a Beast should so discompose you. Really, Gentlemen,
should you meet with a Man come to the Years of Discretion, who made it his
business to inspect the Government of Pismires, giving a blow to one that had
overthrown its Companion, imprisoning another that had robbed its Neighbor of
a grain of Corn, and inditing a third, for leaving its Eggs; would you not
think him a mad Man, to be employed in things so far below him, and to pretend
to give Laws to Animals, that never had Reason? How will you then, most
Venerable Assembly, justify your selves, for being so concerned at the
Caprices of that little Animal? Just Judges, I have no more to say.

When he had made an end, all the Hall rung again with a kind of Musical
Applause; and after all the Opinions had been canvased, during the space of a
large quarter of an hour, the King gave Sentence:

That for the future, I should be reputed to be a Man, accordingly set at
liberty; and that the Punishment of being Drowned, should be converted into a
public Disgrace (the most honorable way of satisfying the Law in that
Country) whereby I should be obliged to retract openly, what I had maintained,
in saying, That the Moon was a World, because of the Scandal, that the novelty
of that opinion, might give to weak Brethren.

This Sentence being pronounced, I was taken away out of the Palace, richly
Clothed; but in derision, carried in a magnificent Chariot, as on a Tribunal;
which four Princes in Harness drew, and in all the public places of the Town,
I was forced to make this Declaration:

Good People, I declare to you, That this Moon here is not a Moon, but a World;
and that that World below is not a World, but a Moon: This the Council thinks
fit you should believe. After I had Proclaimed this, in the five great places
of the Town; my Advocate came and reached me his Hand to help me down. I was in
great amaze, when after I had Eyed him, I found him to be my Spirit; we were an
hour in embracing one another: Come lodge with me, said he, for if you return
to Court, after a Public Disgrace, you will not be well looked upon: Nay more,
I must tell you, that you would have been still amongst the Apes yonder, as
well as the Spaniard your Companion; if I had not in all Companies published
the vigor and force of your Wit, and gained from your Enemies, the protection
of the great Men, in your favors. I ceased not to thank him all the way, till
we came to his Lodgings; there he entertained me till Supper-time, with all the
Engines he had set a work to prevail with my Enemies. Notwithstanding, the most
specious pretexts they had used for riding the Mobile, to desist from so unjust
a Prosecution: But as they came to acquaint us, that Supper was upon the Table,
he told me, that to bear me company that evening, he had invited Two Professors
of the University of the Town to Sup with him: I Will make them, said he, fall
upon the Philosophy, which they teach in this World, and by that means you
shall see my Landlord's Son: He Is as Witty a Youth as ever I met with; he would
prove another Socrates, if he could use his Parts aright, and not bury in Vice
the Graces wherewith God continually visits him, by affecting a Libertinism, as
he does, out of a Chimerical Ostentation and Affectation of the name of a Wit.
I have taken Lodgings here, that I may lay hold on all Opportunities of
Instructing him: He said no more, that he might give me the Liberty to speak,
if I had a mind to it; and then made a sign, that they should strip me of my
disgraceful Ornaments, in which I still glistered.

The Two Professors, whom we expected, entered, just as I was undrest, and we
went to sit down to Table, where the Cloth was laid, and where we found the
Youth, he had mentioned to me, fallen to already. They made him a low
Reverence, and treated him with as much respect, as a Slave does his Lord. I
asked my Spirit the reason of that, who made me answer, that it was because of
his Age; seeing in that World, the Aged rendered all kind of Respect and
Difference to the Young; and which is far more, that the Parents obeyed their
Children, so soon as by the Judgment of the Senate of Philosophers, they had
attained to the Years of Discretion. You are amazed, continued he, at a Custom
so contrary to that of your Country; but it is not all repugnant to Reason: For
say, in your Conscience, when a brisk young Man is at his Prime in Imagining,
Judging, and Acting, is not he fitter to govern a Family, than a Decrepit piece
of Threescore Years, dull and doting, whose Imagination is frozen under the
Snow of Sixty Winters, who follows no other Guide, but what you call, the
Experience of happy Successes; and yet are no more, but the bare effects of
Chance, against all the Rules and Economy of humane Prudence? And as for
Judgment, he has but little of that neither, though the people of your World
make it the Portion of Old Age: But to undeceive them, they must know, That
that which is called Prudence in an Old Man, is no more but a panick
Apprehension, and a mad Fear of acting any thing, where there is danger: So
that when he does not run a Risk, wherein a Young Man has lost himself; it is
not that he foresaw the Catastrophe, but because he had not Fire enough to
kindle those noble Flashes, which make us dare: Whereas the Boldness of that
Young Man, was as a pledge of the good Success of his design; because the same
Ardour that speeds and facilitates the execution, thrust him upon the
undertaking. As for Execution, I should wrong your Judgment; if I endeavored
to convince it by proofs: You know that Youth alone is proper for Action; and
were you ont fully persuaded of this, tell me, pray, when you respect a Man of
Courage, is it not because he can revenge you on your Enemies or Oppressors?
And does any thing, but mere Habit, make you consider him, when a Battalion of
Seventy Januarys has frozen his Blood, and chilled all the noble Heats that
youth is warmed with? When you yield to the Stronger, is it not that he should
be obliged to you for a Victory, which you can Dispute him? Why then should you
submit to him, when Laziness has softened his Muscles, weakened his Arteries,
evaporated his Spirits, and sucked the Marrow out of his Bones? If you adore a
Woman, is it not because of her Beauty? Why should you then continue your
Cringes, when Old Age has made her a Ghost, which only represents a hideous
Picture of Death? In short, When you loved a Witty Man, it was because by the
Quickness of his Apprehension, he unravelled an intricate Affair, seasoned the
choicest Companies with his quaint Sayings, and sounded the depth of Sciences
with a single Thought; and do you still honor him, when his worn Organs
disappoint his weak Noddle, when he is become dull and uneasy in Company, and
when he looks like an aged Fairy rather than a rational Man? Conclude then from
thence, Son, that it is fitter Young Men should govern Families, than Old; and
the rather, that according to your own Principles, Hercules, Achilles,
Epaminondas, Alexander, and Caesar, of whom most part died under Forty Years
of Age, could have merited no Honors, as being too Young in your account,
though their Youth was the only cause of their Famous Actions; which a more
advanced Age would have rendered ineffectual, as wanting that Heat and
Promptitude, that rendered them so highly successful. But you will tell me, that
all the Laws of your World, do carefully enjoin the Respect that is due to Old
Men: That Is true; but it is as true also, that all who made Laws, have been Old
Men, who feared that Young Men might justly have dispossessed them of the
Authority they had usurped --

You owe nothing to your mortal Architector, but your Body only; your Soul
comes from Heaven, and Chance might have made your Father your Son, as now you
are his. Nay, are you sure he has not hindered you from Inheriting a Crown?
Your Spirit left Heaven, perhaps with a design to animate the King of the
Romans, in the Womb of the Emperess; it casually encountered the Embryo of you
by the way, and it may be to shorten its journey, went and lodged there: No,
no, God would never have razed your name out of the List of Mankind, though
your Father had died a Child. But who knows, whether you might not have been at
this day the work of some valiant Captain, that would have associated you to
his Glory, as well as to his Estate. So that, perhaps, you are no more indebted
to your Father, for the life he has given you, than you would be to a Pirate
who had put you in Chains, because he feeds you: Nay, grant he had begot you a
Prince, or King; a Present loses its merit, when it is made without the Option
of him who receives it. Caesar was killed, and so was Cassius too: In the mean
time Cassius was obliged to the Slave, from whom he begged his Death, but so
was not Caesar to his Murderers, who forced it upon him. Did your Father
consult your Will and Pleasure, when he Embraced your Mother? Did he ask you,
if you thought fit to see that Age, or to wait for another; if you would be
satisfied to be the Son of a Sot, or if you had the Ambition to spring from a
Brave Man? Alas, you whom alone the business concerned, were the only Person
not consulted in the case. May be then, had you been shut up any where else,
than in the Womb of Nature's Ideas, and had your Birth been in your own
Opinion, you would have said to the Parca, my dear Lady, take another Spindle
in your Hand: I have lain very long in the Bed of Nothing, and I had rather
continue an Hundred years still without a Being, than to Be to day, that I may
repent of it to morrow: However, Be you must, it was to no purpose for you to
whimper and squall, to be back again, at the long and darksome House they drew
you out of, they made as if they believed you cried for the Teat.

These are the Reasons, at least some of them, my Son, why Parents bear so much
respect to their Children: I know very well, that I have inclined to the
Childrens side, more than in justice I ought; and that in favor of them, I
have spoken a little against my Conscience. But since I was willing to repress
the Pride of some Parents, who insult over the weakness of their little Ones; I
have been forced to do as they do, who to make a crooked Tree straight, bend it
to the contrary side, that betwixt two Conversions it may become even: Thus I
have made Fathers restore to their Children what they have taken from them, by
taking from them a great deal that belonged to them; that so another time they
may be content with their own. I know very well also, that by this Apology I
have offended all Old men: But let them remember, that they were Children
before they were Fathers, and Young before they were Old; and that I must needs
have spoken a great deal to their advantage, seeing they were not found in a
Parsleybed: But, in fine, fall back, fall edge, though my Enemies draw up
against my Friends, it will go well enough still with me; for I have obliged
all men, and only disobliged but one half.

With that he held his tongue, and our Landlord's Son spoke in this manner:
Give me leave, said he to him, since by your care I am informed of the
Original, History, Customs, and Philosophy of the World, of this little Man; to
add something to what you have said; and to prove that Children are not obliged
to Parents for their Generation, because their Parents were obliged in
Conscience to procreate them.

The strictest Philosophy of their World acknowledges that, it is better to
dye, since to dye, one must have lived, than not to have had a Being. Now
seeing, by not giving a Being to that Nothing, I leave it in a state worse than
Death, I am more guilty in not producing, than in killing it. In the mean time,
my little Man, thou would think thou had committed an unpardonable
Parracide, should thou have cut thy Sons throat: It would indeed be an
enormous Crime, but it is far more execrable, not to give a Being to that which
is capable of receiving it: For that Child whom thou deprivest of life for
ever, has had the satisfaction of having enjoyed it for some time. Besides, we
know that it is but deprived of it, but for some ages; but these forty poor
little Nothings, which thou might have made forty good Soldiers for the
King, thou art so malicious as to deny them Life, and let them corrupt in
thy Reins, to the danger of an Apoplexy, which will stifle thee.

This Philosophy did not at all please me, which made me three or four times
shake my Head; but our Preceptor held his tongue, because Supper was mad to be
gone.

We laid our selves along, then, upon very soft Quilts, covered with large
Carpets; and a young man that waited on us, taking the oldest of our
Philosophers, led him into a little arlour apart, where my Spirit called to
him, to come back to us, as soon as he had supped.

This humor of eating separately, gave me the curiosity of asking the Cause of
it: He Will not relish, said he, the steam of Meat, nor yet of Herbs, unless they
die of themselves, because he thinks they are sensible of Pain. I wonder not so
much, replied I, that he abstains from Flesh, and all things that have had a
sensitive Life: For in our World the Pythagoreans, and even some holy
Anchorites, have followed that Rule; but not to dare, for instance, cut a
Cabbage, for fear of hurting it; that seems to me altogether ridiculous. And
for my part, answered my Spirit, I find a great deal of probability in his
Opinion.

For tell me, Is not that Cabbage you speak of, a Being existent in Nature, as
well as you? Is not she the common Mother of you both? Nay it would even seem
that she has taken more care of the Vegetable, than of the Rational, since she
has referred the Generation of a Man to the Caprices of his Father, who may,
according as he has a mind to it, beget him, or not beget him: A rigor
wherewith she has not treated the Cabbage; for instead of remitting it to the
discretion of the Father, to generate the Son, as if she had been more fearful,
least the Race of Cabbage should perish, than that of Man; she forces them,
whether they will or no, to give a Being to another, and not so as Men, who
engender not, but according to their Whimseys; and who, during their whole
life, cannot procreate above a Score; whereas Cabbages can produce many
Thousands a Head. Yet the Opinion that Nature is kinder to Mankind, than to
Cabbage-kind, tickles and makes us laugh: But seeing she is incapable of
Passion, she can neither love, nor hate any thing; and were she susceptible of
Love, she would rather bestow her affection upon this Cabbage, which you grant
cannot offend her, than upon that Man who would destroy her, if it lay in his
power. And moreover, Man cannot be born Innocent, being a Part of the first
Offender: But we know very well, that the first Cabbage did not offend its
Creator. If it be said, that we are made after the Image of the Supreme Being,
and so is not the Cabbage; grant that to be true; yet by polluting our Soul,
wherein we resembled Him, we have effaced that Likeness, seeing nothing is more
contrary to God than Sin. If then our Soul be no longer his Image, we resemble
him no more in our Feet, Hands, Mouth, Forehead and Ears, than a Cabbage in its
Leaves, Flowers, Stalk, Pith, and Head: Do not you really think, that if this
poor Plant could speak, when one cuts it, it would not say, Dear Brother Man,
what have I done to thee that deserves Death? I never grow but in Gardens, and
am never to be found in desert places, where I might live in Security: I
disdain all other company but thine; and scarcely am I sowed in thy Garden,
when to show thee my Goodwill, I blow, stretch out my Arms to thee; offer thee
my Children in Grain; and as a requital for my civility, thou causest my Head
to be chopped off. Thus would a Cabbage discourse, if it could speak. Well, and
because it cannot complain, may we therefore justly do it all the Wrong which
it cannot hinder? If I find a Wretch bound Hand and Foot, may I lawfully kill
him, because he cannot defend himself; so far from that, that his Weakness
would aggravate my Cruelty? And though this wretched Creature be poor, and
destitute of all the advantages which we have, yet it deserves not Death; and
when of all the Benefits of a Being, it has only that of Increase, we ought
not cruelly to snatch that away from it. To massacre a Man, is not so great
Sin, as to cut and kill a Cabbage, because one day the Man will rise again, but
the Cabbage has no other Life to hope for: By putting to death a Cabbage, you
annihilate it; but in killing a Man, you make him only change his Habitation:
Nay, I Will go farther with you still, since God does equally cherish all his
Works, and has equally divided his Benefits betwixt Us, and Plants, it is but
just we should have an equal Esteem for Them, as for our Selves. It is true, we
were born first, but in the Family of God there is no Birthright. If then the
Cabbage share not with us in the inheritance of Immortality, without doubt,
that Want was made up by some other Advantage, that may make amends for the
short ness of its Being; may be by an universal Intellect, or a perfect
Knowledge of all things in their Causes; and it is for that Reason, that the
wise Mover of all things, has not shaped for it Organs like ours, which are
proper only for a simple Reasoning, not only weak, but many times fallacious
too; but others, more ingeniously framed, stronger, and more numerous, which
serve to manage its Speculative Exercises. You Will ask me, perhaps, when ever
any Cabbage, imparted those lofty Conceptions to us? But tell me, again, who
ever discovered to us certain Beings, which we allow to be above us; to whom,
we bear no Analogy, nor Proportion, and whose Existence, it is as hard for us
to comprehend, as the Understanding and Ways, whereby a Cabbage expresses its
self to its like, though not to us, because our Senses are too dull to
penetrate so far.

Moses, the greatest of Philosophers, who drew the Knowledge of Nature, from
the Fountainhead, Nature her self, hinted this truth to us, when he spoke of
the Tree of Knowledge; and without doubt, he intended to intimate to us, under
that Figure, that Plants, in Exclusion to Mankind, possess perfect Philosophy.
Remember, then, O thou Proudest of Animals I that though a Cabbage which thou
cuttest, says not a Word, yet it pays it at Thinking; but the poor Vegetable,
has no fit Organs to howl as you do, nor yet to frisk it about, and weep: Yet,
it has those that are proper to complain of the Wrong you do it, and to draw a
Judgment from Heaven upon you for the Injustice. But if you still demand of
me, how I come to know, that Cabbage and Coleworts conceive such pretty
Thoughts? Then will I ask you, how come you to know that they do not? And that
some amongst them, when they shut up at Night, may not Compliment one another,
as you do, saying: Good Night, Master Cole-Curled-Pate; your most humble
Servant, good Master Cabbage-Round-Head.

So far was he gone on in his Discourse, when the young Lad, who had led out
our Philosopher, led him in again; What, Supped already? cried my Spirit to
him. He answered, yes, almost: The Physiognomist having permitted him to take a
little more with us. Our young Landlord stayed not, till I should ask him the
meaning of that Mystery; I perceive, said he, you wonder at this way of Living;
know then, that in your World, the Government of Health is too much neglected,
and that our Method is not to be despised.

In all Houses, there is a Physiognomist entertained by the Public, who in
some manner, resembles your Physicians, save that he only prescribes to the
Healthful, and judges of the different manner, how we are to be Treated, only
according to the Proportion, Figure, and Symetry of our Members; by the
Features of the Face, the Complexion, the Softness of the Skin, the Agility of
the Body, the Sound of the Voice, and the Color, Strength, and Hardness of the
Hair. Did not you just now mind a Man, of a pretty low Stature, why eyed you;
he was the Physiognomist of the House: Assure your self, that according as he
observed your Constitution, he has diversified the Exhalation of your Supper:
Mark the Quilt on which you lie, how distant it is from our Couches; without
doubt, he judged your Constitution to be far different from ours; since he
feared, that the Odor which evaporates from those little Pipkins, that stand
under our Noses, might reach you, or that yours might steam to us; at Night,
you will see him choose the Flowers for your Bed, with the same Circumspection.
During all this Discourse, I made Signs to my Landlord, that he would try, if
he could oblige the Philosophers, to fall upon some head of the Science, which
they professed. He was too much my Friend, not to start an Occasion upon the
Spot: But not to trouble the Reader, with the Discourse, and Entreaties, that
were previous to the Treaty, wherein Jest and Earnest were so wittily
interwoven, that it can hardly be imitated; I Will only tell you, that the
Doctor, who came last, after many things, spoke as follows:

It remains to be proved, that there are infinite Worlds, in an infinite World:
Fancy to your self then the Universe, as a great Animal, and that the Stars,
which are Worlds, are in this great Animal, as other great Animals, that serve
reciprocally for Worlds to other People. Such as we, our Horses, etc. That we
in our turns, are likewise Worlds to certain other Animals, incomparably less
than our selves, such as Nits, Lice, Hand-worms, etc. And that these are on
Earth, to others more imperceptible ones; in the same manner, as every one of
us, appears to be a great World, to these little People. Perhaps, our Flesh,
Blood, and Spirits, are nothing else, but a Contexture of little Animals that
correspond, lend us Motion from theirs, and blindly suffer themselves to be
guided by our Will, which is their Coachman; or otherwise conduct us, and all
Conspiring together, produce that Action which we call Life. For tell me, pray,
is it a hard thing to be believed, that a Louse takes your Body for a World;
and that when any one of them, travels from one of your Ears to the other, his
Companions say, that he has traveled the Earth, from end to end, or that he
has run from one Pole to the other? Yes, without doubt, those little People,
take your Hair for the Forests of their Country; the Pores full of Liquor, for
Fountains; Buboes and Pimples, for Lakes and Ponds; Boils, for Seas; and
Defluxions, for Deluges: And when you Comb your self, forwards, and backwards,
they take that Agitation, for the Flowing and Ebbing of the Ocean. Does not
Itching make good what I say? What is the little Worm that causes it, but one
of these little Animals, which has broken off from civil Society, that it may
set up for a Tyrant in its Country? If you ask me, why are they bigger than
other imperceptible Creatures? I ask you, why are Elephants bigger than we? And
the Irish-men, than Spaniards? As to the Blisters, and Scurff, which you know
not the Cause of; they must either happen by the Corruption of their Enemies,
which these little Blades have killed, or which the Plague has caused by the
scarcity of Food, for which the Seditious worried one another, and left
Mountains of Dead Carcases rotting in the Field; or because the Tyrant, having
driven away on all Hands his Companions, who by their Bodies, stopped up the
Pores of ours, has made way out for the waterish Matter, which being
extravasated, and out of the Sphere of the Circulation of our Blood, is
corrupted. It may be asked, perhaps, why a Nit, or Hand-worm, produces so many
disorders? But that is easily conceived; for as one Revolt begets another, so
these little People, egged on by the bad Example of their Seditious Companions,
aspire severally to Sovereign Command; and occasion every where, War,
Slaughter, and Famine. But you will say, some are far less subject to Itching,
than others; and, nevertheless, all are equally inhabited by these little
Animals, since you say, they are the Cause of our Life. That Is true; for we
observe, that Phlegmatic People, are not so much given to scratching as the
Choleric; because the People sympathizing with the Climate they inhabit, are
slower in a cold Body, than those others that are heated by the temper of their
Region, who frisk and stir, and cannot rest in a place: Thus a Choleric Man,
is more delicate than a Phlegmatic; because being animated in many more Parts,
and the Soul, being ^he Action of these little Beasts, he is capable of
Feeling, in all places where those Cattle stir. Whereas, the Phlegmatic Man,
wanting sufficient Heat to put that stirring Mobile in Action, is sensible but
in a few places; and to prove more plainly that universal Vermicularity, you
need but consider, when you are wounded, how the Blood runs to the Sore: Your
Doctors say, that it is guided by provident Nature, who would succor the parts
debilitated; which might make us conclude, that, besides the Soul and Mind,
there were a third intellectual Substance, that had distinct Organs and
Functions: And therefore, it seems to me far more Rational, to say, That these
little Animals, finding themselves attacked, send to demand Assistance from
their Neighbors, and that Recruits flocking in from all Parts, and the Country
being too little to contain so many, they either die of Hunger, or are stifled
in the Press. That Mortality happens when the Boil is ripe; for as an Argument,
that these Animals at that time are stifled, the Flesh becomes insensible: Now,
if Blood-letting, which is many times ordered to divert the Fluxion, do any
good, it is because, much being lost by the Orifice, which these little Animals
labored to stop, they refuse their Allies Assistance, having no more Forces,
than is enough to defend themselves at home.

Thus he concluded, and when the second Philosopher, perceived by all our
Looks, that we longed to hear him speak in his turn:

Men, said he, seeing you are curious to instruct this little Animal, (our
like) in somewhat of the Science which we profess, I am now dictating a
Treatise, which I wish he might see, because of the Light it gives to the
Understanding of our Natural Philosophy; it is an Explication of the Original
of the World: But seeing I am in haste to set my Bellows at work, (for to
Morrow, without delay, the Town departs;) I hope you will excuse my want of time,
and I promise to satisfy you, as soon as the Town is arrived, at the place
whither it is to go.

At these words, the Landlord's Son called his Father, to know what it was a
Clock? who having answered him, that it was past Eight, he asked him in a great
Rage, Why he did not give him notice at Seven, according as he had commanded
him, that he knew well enough, the Houses were to be gone to Morrow; and that
the City Walls were already upon their Journey? Son, replied the good Man,
since you sat down to Table, there is an Order published, That no House shall
budg before next day: That Is all one, answered the young Man; you ought blindly
to obey, not to examine my Orders, and only remember what I commanded you.
Quick, go fetch me your Effigies: So soon as it was brought, he took hold on it
by the Arm, and Whipped it a whole quarter of an Hour: Away you never be good,
continued he, as a Punishment for your disobedience; it is my Will and Pleasure,
that this day you serve for a Laughing Stock to all People; and therefore I
command you, not to walk but upon two Legs, till Night. The Poor Man went out
in a very mournful Condition, and the Young Man excused to us his Passion.

I had much ado, though I bit my Lip, to forbear Laughing at so pleasant a
Punishment; and therefore to take me off of this odd piece of Pedantick
Discipline, which, without doubt, would have made me burst out at last; I
prayed my Philosopher to tell me, what he meant by that Journey of the Town, he
talked of, and if the Houses and Walls Traveled? Dear Stranger, answered he,
we have some Ambulatory Towns, and some Sedentary; the Ambulatory, as for
instance, this wherein now we are, are Built in this manner: The Architector,
as you see, builds every Palace of a very light sort of Timber; supported by
four Wheels underneath; in the thickness of one of the Walls, he places ten
large pair of Bellows, whose Snouts pass in a Horizontal Line, through the
upper Story, from one Pinnacle to the other; so that when Towns are to be
removed, from one place to another, (for according to the Seasons they change
the Air) every one spreads a great many large Sails, upon one side of the
House, before the Noses of the Bellows; then having wound up a Spring, to make
them play, in less then Eight days time, their Houses by the continual Puffs,
which these Windy Monsters blow, are driven, if one pleases, an Hundred Leagues
and more. For those which we call Sendentary, they are almost like to your
Towers; save that they are of Timber, and that they have a Great and Strong
Skrew, or Vice in the Middle, reaching from the Top to the Bottom; whereby they
may be hoisted up, or let down as People please. Now the Ground underneath, is
dugg as deep as the House is high; and it is so ordered, that so soon as the
Frosts begin to chill the Air, they may sink their Houses down under Ground,
where they keep themselves secure from the Severity of the Weather: But as soon
as the gentle Breathings of the Spring, begin to soften and qualify the Air;
they raise them above Ground again, by means of the great Skrew I told you of.
I prayed him, since he had showed me so much goodness, and that the Town was
not to part till next day, that he would tell me somewhat of that Original of
the World, which he had mentioned not long before; and I promise you, said I,
that in requital, so soon as I am got back to the Moon, from whence my
Governor (pointing to my Spirit) will tell you that I am come, I Will spread
your Renown there, by relating the rare things you shall tell me: I perceive
you Laugh at that promise, because you do not believe, that the Moon, I speak
of, is a World, and that I am an Inhabitant of it; but I can assure you also,
that the People of that World, who take this only for a Moon, will Laugh at me,
when I tell them that your Moon is a World, and that there are Fields, and
Inhabitants in it: He answered only with a smile, and spoke in this manner:

Since in Ascending to the Original of this great ALL, we are forced to run
into three or four Absurdities; it is but reasonable we should follow the way,
wherein we may be least apt to stumble. I say then, that the first Obstacle
that stops us short, is the Eternity of the World; and the minds of men, not
being able enough to conceive it, and being no more able to imagine, that this
great Universe, so lovely and so well ordered, could have made it self, they
have had their recourse to Creation: But like to him that would leap into a
River, for fear of being wet with Rain, they save themselves out of the
Clutches of a Dwarf, by running into the Arms of a Giant; and yet they are not
safe for all that: For that Eternity which they deny the World, because they
cannot comprehend it, they attribute it to God, as if he stood in need of that
Present, and as if it were easier to imagine it, in the one than in the other;
for tell me, pray, was it ever yet conceived in Nature, how Something can be
made of Nothing? Alas! betwixt Nothing and an Atome only, there are such
infinite Disproportions, that the sharpest Wit could never dive into them;
therefore to get out of this inextricable Labyrinth, you must admit of a Matter
Eternal with God: But you will say to me, grant I should allow you that Eternal
Matter; how could that Chaos dispose and order it self? That Is the thing I am
about to explain to you.

My little Animal, after you have mentally divided every little Visible Body,
into an infinite many little invisible Bodies; you must imagine, That the
infinite Universe consists only of these Atoms, which are most solid, most
incorruptible, and most simple; whose Figures are partly Cubical, partly
Parallelograms, partly Angular, partly Round, partly Sharp-pointed, partly
Pyramidal, partly Six-cornered, and partly Oval; which act all severally,
according to their Various Figures: And to show that it is so, put a very round
Ivory Bowl upon a very smooth place, and with the least touch you give, it will
be half a quarter of an hour before it rest: Now I say, that if it were
perfectly round, as some of the Atoms I speak of are, and the Surface on which
it is put perfectly smooth, it would never rest. If Art then be capable of
inclining a Body to a perpetual Motion, why may we not believe that Nature can
do it? It Is the same with the other Figures, of which the Square require a
perpetual Rest, others an oblique Motion, others a half Motion, as Trepidation;
and the Round, whose Nature is to move, joining a Pyramidal, makes that,
perhaps, which we call Fire; because not only Fire is in continual Agitation,
but also because it easily penetrates: Besides, the Fire has different
effects, according to the opening and quality of the Angles, when the round
Figure is joined; for Example, The Fire of Pepper is another thing, than the
Fire of Sugar, the Fire of Sugar differs from that of Cinnamon; that of
Cinnamon, from that of the Clove; and this from the Fire of a Faggot. Now the
Fire, which is the Architect of the parts and whole of the Universe, has
driven together, and Congregated into an Oak, the quantity of Figures which are
necessary for the Composition of that Oak: But you will say, how could Hazard
congregate into one place, all the Figures that are necessary for the
production of that Oak? I answer, That it is no wonder that Matter so disposed,
should form an Oak; but the wonder would have been greater, if the Matter being
so disposed, the Oak had not been produced, had there been a few less of some
Figures, it would have been an Elm, a Poplar, a Willow; and fewer of 'em still,
it would have been the Sensitive Plant, an Oyster, a Worm, a Fly, a Frog, a
Sparrow, an Ape, a Man. If three Dice being flung upon a Table, there happen a
Raffle of two, or all, a three, a four, and a five, or two sixes, and a third
in the bottom, would you say, O strange! that each Die should turn up such a
chance, when there were so many others. A Sequence of three has happened, O
strange! Two sixes turned up, and the bottom of the third, O strange! I am sure
that being a man of Sense, you will never make such Exclamations; for since there
is but a certain quantity of Numbers upon the Dice, it is impossible but some of
them must turn up; and you wonder, after that, how matter shuffled together
Pell-Mell, as Chance pleases, should make a Man, seeing so many things were
necessary for the Construction of his Being. You know not then, that this
Matter tending to the Fabric of a Man, has been a Million of times stopped in
it is Progress, for forming sometimes a Stone, sometimes Lead, sometimes Coral,
sometimes a Flower, sometimes a Comet; and all because of more or less Figures,
that were required for the framing of a Man: So that it is no greater wonder,
if amongst infinite Matters, which incessantly change and stir, some have hit
upon the construction of the few Animals, Vegetables, and Minerals which we
see, than if in a Hundred Casts of the Dice, one should throw a Raffle: Nay,
indeed, it is impossible, that in this hurling of things, nothing should be
produced; and yet this will be always admired by a Block-head, who little knows
how small a matter, would have made it to have been otherwise. When the great
River of (...) makes a Mill to Grind, guides the Wheels of a Clock, and the
Brook of (...) only runs, and sometimes absconds, you will not say, that that
River has a great deal of Wit, because you know that it has met with things,
disposed for producing such rare Feats; for had not the Mill stood in the way,
it would not have ground the Corn; had it not met the Clock, it would not have
marked the Hours: and if the little Rivulet I speak of, had met with the same
Opportunities, it would have wrought the very same Miracles. Just so it is with
the Fire that moves of it self; for finding Organs fit for the Act of
Reasoning, it Reasons; when it finds only such, as are proper for Sensation, it
Sensates; and when such as are fit for Vegetation, it Vegetates. And to prove
it is so, put out but the Eyes of a Man, the Fire of whose Soul makes him to
see, and he will cease to see; just as our great Clock will leave off to make
the Hours, if the Movements of it be broken.

In fine, these Primary and indivisible Atoms, make a Circle, whereon without
difficulty move the most perplexed Difficulties of Natural Philosophy, not so
much as even the very Operation of the Senses, which no Body hitherto has been
able to conceive, but I will easily explain by these little Bodies. Let us
begin with the Sight. It deserves, as being the most incomprehensible, our
first Essay.

It is performed then, as I imagine, when the Tunicles of the Eye, whose Pores
resemble those of Glass, transmitting that fiery Dust, which is called Visual
Rays, the same is stopped by some opacous Matter, which makes it recoil; and
then, meeting in its retreat the Image of the Object, that forced it back, and
that Image, being but an infinite number of little Bodies, exhaled in an equal
Superfice, from the Object beheld; it pursues it to our Eye: You Will not fail to
Object, I know, that Glass is an Opacous Body, and very Compact; and that
nevertheless, instead of reflecting other Bodies, it lets them pass through:
But I answer, that the Pores of Glass, are shaped in the same Figure, as those
Atoms are which pass through it; and as a Wheat-Sieve is not proper for
Sifting of Oats, nor an Oat-Sieve to Sift Wheat; so a Box of Deal-Board, though
it be thin, and lets a sound go through it, is impenetrable to the Sight; and a
piece of Crystal, though transparent, and pervious to the Eye, is not
penetrable to the Touch. I could not here forbear to interrupt him: A great
Poet and Philosopher of our World, said I, has, after Epicurus and Democritus,
spoken of these little Bodies, in the same manner almost as you do; and
therefore, you don't at all surprise me, by that Discourse: Only, tell me, I
pray, as you proceed, how, according to your Principles, you will explain to me,
the manner of drawing your Picture in a Looking-Glass, That Is very easy,
replied he, for imagine with your self, that those Fires of our Eyes, having
passed through the Glass, and meeting behind it an Opacous Body, that
reverberates them, they come back the way they went; and finding those little
Bodies, marching in equal Superfices upon the Glass, they repel them to our
Eyes; and our Imagination, hotter than the other Faculties of our Soul,
attracts the more subtle, wherewith it draws our Picture in little.

It is as easy to conceive the Act of Hearing, and for Brevities sake, let us
only consider it in the Harmony of a Lute, touched by the Hand of a Master.
You Will ask me, How can it be, that I perceive at so great a distance, a thing
which I do not see? Does there a Sponge go out of my Ears, that drinks up that
Music, and brings it back with it again? Or does the Player, beget in my Head
another little Musician, with another little Lute, who has Orders like an
Echo, to sing over to me the same Airs? No; But that Miracle proceeds from
this, that the String touched, striking those little Bodies, of which the Air
is composed, drives it gently into my Brain, with those little Corporeal
Nothings, that sweetly pierce into it; and according as the String is
stretched, the Sound is high, because it more vigorously drives the Atoms; and
the Organ being thus penetrated, furnishes the Fancy, wherewith to make a
Representation; if too little, then our Memory, not having as yet finished its
Image, we are forced to repeat the same sound to it again; to the end it may
take enough of Materials, which, for Instance, the Measures of a Saraband,
furnish it with, for finishing the Picture of that Saraband; but that
Operation, is nothing near so wonderful, as those others, which by the help of
the same Organ, excite us sometimes to Joy, sometimes to Anger. --

And this happens, when in that motion, these little Bodies, meet with other
little Bodies within us, moving in the same manner, or whose Figure, renders
them susceptible of the same Agitation; for then these New-comers, stir up
their Landlords to move as they do; and thus, when a violent Air meets with the
Fire of our Blood, it inclines it to the same Motion, and animates it to a
Sally, which is the thing we call Heat of Courage; if the Sound be softer, and
have only force enough to raise a less Flame, in greater Agitation, by leading
it along the Nerves, Membranes, and through the interstices of our Flesh, it
excites that Tickling which is called Joy: And so it happens, in the Ebullition
of the other Passions, according as these little Bodies, are more or less
violently tossed upon us, according to the Motion they receive, by the
rencounter of other Agitations, and according as they find Dispositions in us
for motion. So much for Hearing.

Now, I think the Demonstration of Touching, will be every whit as easy; if we
conceive, that out of all palpable Matter, there is a perpetual Emission of
little Bodies, and that the more we touch them, the more evaporate; because, we
press them out of the Subject it self, as Water out of a Sponge, when we squeez
it. The Hard, make a report to the Organ, of their Hardness; the Soft, of their
Softness; the Rough, etc. And that this is so, we are not so quaint in Feeling
with Hands used to Labor, because of the Thickness of the Skin, which being
neither porous, nor animated, with difficulty transmits the Evaporations of
Matter. Some, perhaps, may desire to know, where the Organ of Touching has its
Residence. For my part, I think it is spread over all the Surface of the Body,
seeing in all parts it feels: Yet I imagine, that the nearer the Member,
wherewith we touch, be to the Head, the sooner we distinguish; which Experience
convinces us of, when with shut Eyes we handle any thing, for then we'll more
easily guess what it is; and if on the contrary, we feel it with our hinder
Feet, it will be harder for us to know it: And the Reason is, because our Skin
being all over perforated, our Nerves, which are of no compacter Matter, lose
by the way a great many of those little Atoms, through the little Holes of
their Contexture, before they reach the Brain, which is their Journeys end: It
remains, that I speak of the Smelling and Tasting.

Pray tell me, when I taste a Fruit, is it not because the Heat of my Mouth
melts it? Confess to me then, that there being Salts in a Pear, and that they
being separated by Dissolution, into little Bodies of a different Figure, from
those which make the Taste of an Apple; they must needs pierce our Palate, in
a very different manner: Just so as the thrust of a Pike, that passes through
me, is not like the Wound which a Pistol-Bullet makes me feel, with a sudden
start; and as that Pistol-Bullet, makes me suffer another sort of Pain, than
that of a Slug of Steel.

I have nothing to say, as to the Smelling, seeing the Philosophers themselves
confess, that it is performed by a continual Emission of little Bodies.

Now, upon the same Principle, will I explain to you, the Creation, Harmony,
and Influence of the Celestial Globes, with the immutable Variety of Meteors.

He was about to proceed; but the Old Landlord coming in, made our Philosopher
think of withdrawing: He brought in Christals full of Glowworms, to light the
Parlour; but seeing those little fiery Insects, lose much of their Light, when
they are not fresh gathered, these which were ten days old, had hardly any at
all. My Spirit stayed not, till the Company should complain of it, but went up
to his Chamber, and came immediately back again, with two Bowls of Fire so
Sparkling, that all wondered he burnt not his Fingers. These incombustible
Tapers, said he, will serve us better than your Week of Worms. They are Rays of
the Sun, which I have purged from their Heat; otherwise, the corrosive
qualities of their Fire, would have dazzled, and offended your Eyes; I have
fixed their Light, and enclosed it within these transparent Bowls. That ought
not to afford you any great Cause of Admiration; for it is not harder for me,
who am a Native of the Sun, to condense his Beams, which are the Dust of that
World, than it is for you, to gather the Atoms of the pulverized Earth of this
World. Thereupon our Landlord sent a Servant, to wait upon the Philosophers
home, it being then Night, with a dozen Globes of Glowworms hanging at his
four Legs. As for my Preceptor, and my self, we went to rest, by order of the
Phisiognomist. He laid me that Night in a Chamber of Violets and Lillies,
ordered me to be tickled after the usual manner; and next Morning about Nine a
Clock, my Spirit came in, and told me, that he was come from Court, where (...)
One of the Queens Maids of Honor had sent for him, and that she had enquired
after me, protesting that she still persisted in her Design, to be as good as
her Word; that is, that with all her Heart she would follow me, if I would take
her along with me to the other World; which exceedingly pleased me, said he,
when I understood, that the chief Motive, which inclined her to the Voyage, was
to become Christian: And therefore, I have promised to forward her Design, what
lies in me; and for that end, to invent a Machine, that may hold three or four,
wherein you may mount to day, both together, if you think fit. I Will go
seriously set about the performance of my Undertaking; and in the mean time, to
entertain you, during my Absence, I leave you here a Book, which heretofore I
brought with me from my Native Country; the Title of it is, The States and
Empires of the Sun, with an Addition of the History of the Spark. I also give
you this, which I esteem much more, it is the great Work of the Philosophers,
composed by one of the greatest Wits of the Sun. He proves in it, that all
things are true, and shows the way of uniting Physically, the Truths of every
Contradiction; as, for Example, That White is Black, and Black White; that one
may be, and not be at the same time; that there may be a Mountain without a
Valley; that nothing is something, and that all things that are, are not; but
observe, that he proves all these unheard of Paradoxes, without any Captious or
Sophistical Argument. When you are weary of Reading, you may Walk, or Converse
with our Landlord's Son, he has a very Charming Wit; but that which I dislike
in him is, that he is a little Atheistical. If he chance to Scandalize you, or
by any Argument shake your Faith, fail not immediately to come and propose it
to me, and I Will clear the Difficulties of it; any other, but I, would enjoin
you to break Company with him; but since he is extremely proud and conceited, I
am certain, he would take your flight for a Defeat, and would believe your
Faith to be grounded on no Reason, if you refused to hear his. Having said so,
he left me; and no sooner was his back turned, but I fell to consider
attentively my Books and their Boxes, that is to say, their Covers, which seemed
to me to be wonderfully Rich; the one was cut of a single Diamond, incomparably
more resplendent than ours; the second looked like a prodigious great Pearl,
cloven in two. My Spirit had translated those Books into the Language of that
World; but because I have none of their Print, I Will now explain to you the
Fashion of these two Volumes.

As I opened the Box, I found within somewhat of Metal, almost like to our
Clocks, full of I know not what little Springs, and imperceptible Engines: It
was a Book, indeed; but a Strange and Wonderful Book, that had neither Leaves
nor Letters: In fine, it was a Book, made wholly for the Ears, and not the
Eyes. So that when any Body has a mind to read in it, he winds up that Machine,
with a great many little Strings; then he turns the Hand to the Chapter which
he desires to hear, and straight, as from the Mouth of a Man, or a Musical
Instrument, proceed all the distinct and different Sounds, which the Lunar
Grandees make use of, for expressing their Thoughts, instead of Language.

When I since reflected on this Miraculous Invention, I no longer wondered, that
the Young Men of that Country, were more knowing at Sixteen, or Eighteen years
Old, than the Gray-Beards of our Climate; for knowing how to Read as soon as
Speak, they are never without Lectures, in their Chambers, their Walks, the
Town, or Traveling; they may have in their Pockets, or at their Girdles,
Thirty of these Books, where they need but wind up a Spring, to hear a whole
Chapter, and so more, if they have a mind to hear the Book quite through; so
that you never want the Company of all the great Men, Living and Dead, who
entertain you with Living Voices. This Present employed me about an hour; and
then hanging them to my Ears, like a pair of Pendants, I went a Walking; but I
was hardly at End of the Street, when I met a Multitude of People very
Melancholy.

Four of them carried upon their Shoulders, a kind of a Hearse, covered with
Black: I asked a Spectator, what that Procession, like to a Funeral in my
Country, meant? He made me answer, that that naughty (...) called so by the
People, because of a knock he had received upon the Right Knee; who being
convicted of Envy and Ingratitude, died the day before; and that Twenty Years
ago, the Parliament had Condemned him to die in his Bed, and then to be
interred after his Death. I fell a Laughing at that Answer. And he asking me,
why? You amaze me, said I, that that which is counted a Blessing in our World,
as a long Life, a peaceable Death, and an Honorable Burial, should pass here
for an exemplary Punishment. What, do you take a Burial, for a precious thing
then, replied that Man? And, in good earnest, can you conceive any thing more
Horrid, than a Corpse crawling with Worms, at the discretion of Toads, which
feed on his Cheeks; the Plague it self Clothed with the Body of a Man? Good
God! The very thought of having, even when I am Dead, my Face wrapped up in a
Shroud, and a Pike-depth of Earth upon my Mouth, makes me I can hardly fetch
breath. The Wretch whom you see carried here, besides the disgrace of being
thrown into a Pit, has been Condemned, to be attended by an Hundred and Fifty
of his Friends; who are strictly charged, as a Punishment for their having
loved an envious and ungrateful Person, to appear with a sad Countenance at his
Funeral; and had it not been that the Judges took some compassion of him,
imputing his Crimes partly to his want of Wit, they would have been commanded
to Weep there also. All are Burnt here, except Malefactors: And, indeed, it is
a most rational and decent Custom: For we believe, that the Fire having
separated the pure from the impure, the Heat by Sympathy reassembles the
natural Heat, which made the Soul, and gives it force to mount up, till it
arrive at some Star, the Country of certain people, more immaterial and
intellectual than us; because their Temper ought to suit with, and participate
of the Globe which they inhabit.

However, this is not our neatest way of Burying neither; for when any one of
our Philosophers comes to an Age, wherein he finds his Wit begin to decay, and
the Ice of his years, to numm the Motions of his Soul, he invites all his
Friends to a sumptuous Banquet; then having declared to them the Reasons, that
move him to bid farewell to Nature, and the little hopes he has, of adding any
thing more to his worthy Actions, they show him Favor; that is to say, they
suffer him to Dye, or otherwise are severe to him, and command him to Live.
When then, by plurality of Voices, they have put his Life into his own Hands,
he acquaints his dearest Friends with the day and place. These purge, and for
Four and Twenty hours abstain from Eating; then being come to the House of the
Sage, and having Sacrificed to the Sun, they enter the Chamber, where the
generous Philosopher waits for them on a Bed of State; every one embraces him,
and when it comes to his turn, whom he loves best, having kissed him
affectionately, leaning upon his Bosom, and joining Mouth to Mouth, with his
right hand he sheaths a Dagger in his Heart. The Loving Friend parts not his
Lips from his Friends Lips, till he find him expired; and then pulling out the
Steel, and putting his Mouth close to the Wound, he sucks down his Blood, till
a Second succeed him, then a Third, Fourth, and so all the Company: Four or
Five Hours after, every one has a Young Wench, of Sixteen or Seventeen Years of
Age, brought to him; and during Three or Four days, whilst they are tasting the
Pleasures of Love, they seed on nothing but the Flesh of the Deceased, which
they eat raw; to the end that if from an Hundred Embracements any thing Spring,
they may be assured it is their old Friend Revived.

I interrupted this Discourse, saying to him that told me all, That this Manner
of Acting much resembled the ways of some People of our World; and so pursued
my Walk, which was so long, that when I came back, Dinner had been ready Two
Hours. They asked me, why I came so late? It is not my Fault, said I to the
Cook, who complained: I asked what it was a Clock several times in the Street,
but they made me no answer, but by opening their Mouths, shutting their Teeth,
and turning their Faces awry.

How, cried all the Company, did not you know by that, that they showed you
what it was a Clock? Faith, said I, they might have held their great Noses in
the Sun long enough, before I had understood what they meant. It Is a Commodity,
said they, that saves them the Trouble of a Watch; for with their Teeth they
make so true a Dial, that when they would tell any Body the Hour of the day,
they do no more but open their Lips, and the shadow of that Nose, falling upon
their Teeth, like the Gnomon of a Sun-Dial, makes the precise time. Now that
you may know the reason, why all People in this Country have great Noses;
as soon as a Woman is brought to Bed, the Midwife carries the Child to the
Master of the Seminary; and exactly at the years end, the Skillful being
assembled, if his Nose prove shorter than the standing Measure, which an
Alderman keeps, he is judged to be a Flat Nose, and delivered over to be gelt.
You Will ask me, no doubt, the Reason of that Barbarous Custom, and how it comes
to pass, that we, amongst whom Virginity is a Crime, should enjoin Continence
by force; but know, that we do so, because after Thirty Ages experience we have
observed, that a great Nose is the mark of a Witty, Courteous, Assable,
Generous and Liberal Man; and that a little Nose is a Sign of the contrary:
Wherefore of Flat Noses we make Eunuchs, because the Republic had rather have
no Children at all, than Children like them. He was still a speaking, when I
saw a man come in stark Naked; I presently sat down and put on my Hat to show
him Honor, for these are the greatest Marks of Respect, that can be showed to
any in that Country. The Kingdom, said he, desires you would give the
Magistrates notice, before you return to your own World; because a
Mathematician has just now undertaken before the Council, that provided when
you are returned home, you would make a certain Machine, that he will teach you
how to do; he will attract your Globe, and join it to this. Good now, (said I to
my Landlord, when the other was gone) tell me why that Messenger carried at his
Girdle, Privy Members of Brass; a thing I have often seen, whilst I was in my
Cage, but durst not ask the Reason, because I was always environed by the
Queens Maids of Honor, whom I feared to offend, if in their presence I had
talked of such a foul Subject? He made me this answer: The Females here, no
more than the Males, are not so ungrateful, as to blush at the sight of that
which Forged them; and Virgins are not ashamed to love upon us, in Memory of
Mother Nature, the only thing that represents her best. Know then, that the
Scarf wherewith that Man is Honored, and which for a Medal has the Bauble of a
Man hanging at it, is the Badg of a Gentleman, and the Mark to distinguish the
Cavalier from the Clown. This seemed to me, to be so extravagant a Paradox,
that I could not forbear Laughing. I look upon that, replied I, to be a very
extraordinary Custom, for in our World, to wear a Sword is the Badg of a
Gentleman. But, my dear little Man, cried my Host without startling, what, are
the great Men of your World Mad then; to make ostentation of an Instrument,
that is the mark of a Hang man, made only to destroy us; and in a word, the
sworn Enemy of all that has Life? And on the contrary, to hide a Member,
without which, we had been ranked among the things that are not; the Prometheus
of every Animal, and the indefatigable Repairer of the Frailties of Nature?
Unhappy Country! where the Marks of Generation are Ignominious, and those of
Destruction Honorable: In the mean time, you call that Member the shameful
Privy-Parts, as if any thing were more Glorious, than to give Life, or any
thing more disgraceful, than to take it away. During all this Discourse, we
went on with our Dinner; and as soon as we rose from Table, we went to take the
Air in the Garden; where taking Occasion to speak of the Generation, and
Conception of things, he said to me, You must know, that the Earth, converting
it self into a Tree, from a Tree into a Hog, and from a Hog into a Man, is an
Argument, that all things in Nature, aspire to be Men; since that is the most
perfect Being, as being a Quintessence, and the best devised Mixture in the
World; which alone unites the Animal and Rational Life into one. None but a
Pedant will deny me this, when we see that a Plumb-Tree, by the Heat of its
Germ, as by a Mouth, sucks in and digests the Earth that is about it; that a Hog
devours the Fruit of this Tree, and converts it into the Substance of it self;
and that a Man feeding on that Hog, reconcocts that dead Flesh, unites it to
himself, and makes that Animal to revive under a more Noble Species. So the Man
whom you see, perhaps threescore years ago, was no more but a Tuft of Grass in
my Garden; which is the more probable, that the Opinion of the Pythagorean
Metamorphosis, which so many Great Men maintain, in all likelihood has only
reached us, to engage us into an Enquiry after the truth of it; as, in reality,
we have found that Matter, and all that has a Vegetative or Sensitive Life,
when once it has attained to the period of its Perfection, wheels about again,
and descends into its Inanity, that it may return upon the Stage, and Act the
same Parts over and over. I went down extremely satisfied to the Garden, and
was beginning to rehearse to my Companion, what our Master had taught me; when
the Physiognomist came to conduct us to Supper, and afterward to Rest.

Next Morning, so soon as I awoke, I went to call up my Antagonist. It is, said
I, accosting him, as great a Miracle to find a great Wit, like yours, buried in
Sleep, as to see Fire, without Heat and Action: He bore with this ugly
Compliment; but, (cried he, with a Choleric kind of Love) will you never leave
these Fabulous Terms? Know, that these Names defame the Name of a Philosopher;
and that seeing the wise Man sees nothing in the World, but what he conceives,
and judges may be conceived, he ought to abhor all those Expressions of
Prodigies, and extraordinary Events of Nature, which Block heads have invented,
to excuse the Weakness of their Understanding.

I thought my self then obliged in Conscience, to endeavor to undeceive him;
and therefore, said I, though you be very stiff and obstinate in your Opinions,
yet I have plainly seen supernatural Things happen. Say you so, continued he;
you little know, that the force of Imagination, is able to cure all the
Diseases, which you attribute to supernatural Causes, by reason of a certain
natural Balsam, that contains Qualities quite contrary to the qualities of the
Diseases that attack us; which happens, when our Imagination informed by Pain,
searches in that place for the specific Remedy, which it applies to the
Poiso^. That Is the reason, why an able Physician (...) your World, advises the
Patient to make use of an Ignorant Doctor, whom he esteems to be very knowing,
rather than of a very Skilful Physician, whom he may imagine to be Ignorant;
because he fancies, that our Imagination laboring to recover our Health,
provided it be assisted by Remedies, is able to cure us; but that the strongest
Medicines are too weak, when not applied by Imagination. Do you think it
strange, that the first Men of your World lived so many Ages, without the least
Knowledge of Physic? No. And what might have been the Cause of that, in your
judgment; unless, their Nature was as yet in its force, and that natural
Balsam in vigor, before they were spoilt by the Drugs, wherewith Physicians
consume you; it being enough then for the recovery of ones Health, earnestly to
wish for it, and to imagine himself cured? So that their vigorous Fancies,
plunging into that vital Oil, extracted the Elixir of it, and applying Actives
to Passives, in almost the twinkling of an Eye, they found themselves as sound
as before: Which, notwithstanding the Depravation of Nature, happens even at
this day, though somewhat rarely; and is by the Multitude called a Miracle: For
my part, I believe not a jot on it, and have this to say for my self, that it is
easier for all these Doctors to be mistaken, than that the other may not easily
come to pass: For I put the Question to them; A Patient recovered out of a
Fever, heartily desired, during his sickness, as it is like, that he might be
cured, and, may be, made Vows for that effect; so that of necessity he must
either have dyed, continued sick, or recovered: Had he died, then would it have
been said, kind Heaven has put an end to his Pains; Nay, and that according to
his Prayers, he was now cured of all Diseases, praised be the Lord: Had his
Sickness continued, one would have said, he wanted Faith; but because he is
cured, it is a Miracle forsooth. Is it not far more likely, that his Fancy being
excited by violent Desires, has done its Duty, and wrought the Cure? For grant
he has escaped, what then? must it needs be a Miracle? How many have we seen,
pray, and after many solemn Vows and Protestations, go to pot with all their
fair Promises and Resolutions.

But, at least, replied I, to him, if what you say of that Balsam be true, it
is a mark of the Rationality of our Soul; seeing without the help of our
Reason, or the Concurrence of our Will, she Acts of her self; as if being
without us, she applied the Active to the Passive. Now, if being separated from
us she is Rational, it necessarily follows, that she is Spiritual; and if you
acknowledge her to be Spiritual, I conclude she is immortal; seeing Death
happens to Animals, only by the changing of Forms, of which Matter alone is
capable. The Young Man at that, decently sitting down upon his Bed, and making
me also to sit, discoursed, as I remember, in this manner: As for the Soul of
Beasts, which is Corporeal, I do not wonder they Die; seeing the best Harmony
of the four Qualities may be dissolved, the greatest force of Blood quelled,
and the loveliest Proportion of Organs disconcerted; but I wonder very much,
that our intellectual, incorporeal, and immortal Soul, should be constrained to
dislodge, and leave us by the same Cause, that makes an Ox to perish. Has she
covenanted with our Body, that as soon as he should receive a prick with a
Sword in the Heart, a Bullet in the Brain, or a Musket Shot through the Chest,
she should pack up and be gone; -- and if that Soul were Spiritual, and of her
self so Rational, that being separated from our Mass, she understood as well as
when Clothed with a Body; why cannot Blind Men, born with all the fair
advantages of that intellectual Soul, imagine what it is to see? Is it, because
they are not as yet deprived of Sight, by the Death of all their Senses? How! I
cannot then make use of my Right Hand, because I have a Left. -- And in fine,
to make a just comparison, which will overthrow all that you have said; I shall
only allege to you a Painter, who cannot work without his Pencil: And I Will
tell you, that it is just so with the Soul, when she wants the use of the
Senses. O yes, but added he -- In the mean time, they will have this Soul, which
can only act imperfectly, because of the loss of one of her Tools, in the
course of Life, to be able then to work to Perfection, when after our death,
she has lost them all. If they tell me, over and over again, that she needs
not these Instruments, for performing her Functions, I Will tell them even so,
That then all the Blind about the Streets, ought to be Whipped at a Carts-Arse,
for playing the Counterfeits, in pretending not to See a bit. He would have
gone on in such impertinent Arguments, had not I stopped his Mouth, by desiring
him to forbear, as he did for fear of a quarrel; for he perceived I began to be
in a heat: So that he departed, and left me admiring the People of that World,
amongst whom even the meanest have Naturally so much Wit; whereas those of ours
have so little, and yet so dearly bought. At length my Love for my Country,
took me off of the desire and thoughts I had of staying there, I minded nothing
now but to be gone; but I saw so much impossibility in the matter, that it made
me quite peevish and melancholic. My Spirit observed it, and having asked me,
What was the reason, that my Humor was so much altered? I frankly told him the
Cause of my Melancholy; but he made me such fair Promises concerning my Return,
that I relied wholly upon him. I acquainted the Council with my design; who
sent for me, and made me take an Oath, that I should relate in our World, all
that I had seen in that. My Pass ports then were expeded, and my Spirit having
made necessary Provisions for so long a Voyage, asked me, What part of my
Country I desired to light in? I told him, that since most of the Rich Youths
of Paris, once in their life time, made a Journey to Rome; imagining atter
that, that there remained no more worth the doing or seeing, I prayed him to be
so good as to let me imitate them: But withal, said I, in what Machine shall we
perform the Voyage, and what Orders do you think the Mathematician, who talked
the other day of joining this Globe to ours, will give me? As to the
Mathematician, said he, let that be no hinderance to you; for he is a Man who
promises much, and performs little or nothing. And as to the Machine, that is to
carry you back, it shall be the same which brought you to Court. How, said I,
will the Air become as solid as the Earth, to bear your steps? I cannot believe
that: And it is strange, replied he, that you should believe, and not believe.
Pray why should the Witches of your World, who march in the Air, and conduct
whole Armies of Hail, Snow, Rain, and other Meteors, from one Province into
another, have more Power than we? Pray have a little better opinion of me, than
to think I would impose upon you. The truth is, said I, I have received so many
good Offices from you, as well as Socrates, and the rest, for whom you have so
great kindness, that I dare trust my self in your hands, as now I do, resigning
my self heartily up to you. I had no sooner said the word, but he rose like a
Whirlwind, and holding me between his Arms, without the least Uneasiness, he
made me pass that vast space, which Astronomers reckon betwixt the Moon and us,
in a day and a halfs time; which convinced me, that they tell a Lie, who say
that a Millstone would be Three Hundred Threescore, and I know not how many
years more, in falling from Heaven, since I was so short a while, in dropping
down from the Globe of the Moon upon this. At length, about the beginning of
the Second day, I perceived I was drawing near our World; since I could already
distinguish Europe from Africa, and both from Asia, when I smelt Brimstone,
which I saw steaming out of a very high Mountain, that incommoded me so much
that I fainted away upon it. I cannot tell what befell me afterward; but coming
to my self again, I found I was amongst Briers on the side of a Hill, amidst
some Shepherds, who spoke Italian. I knew not what was become of my Spirit, and
I asked the Shepherds if they had not seen him. At that word they made the sign
of the Cross, and looked upon me, as if I had been a Devil my self: But when I
told them that I was a Christian, and that I begged the Charity of them, that
they would lead me to some place, where I might take a little rest; they
conducted me into a Village, about a Mile off; where no sooner was I come, but
all the Dogs of the place, from the least Cur, to the biggest Mastiff, flew
upon me, and had torn me to pieces, if I had not found a House, wherein I saved
my self: But that hindered them not to continue their Barking and Bawling, so
that the Master of the House began to look upon me with an Evil Eye; and really
I think, as people are very apprehensive, when Accidents which they look upon
to be ominous happen, that man could have delivered me up as a Prey to these
accursed Beasts, had not I be thought my self, that that which madded them so
much at me, was the World from whence I came; because being accustomed to bark
at the Moon, they smelt I was come from thence, by the scent of my Clothes,
which stuck to me, as a Sea-smell hangs about those, who have been long on
Shipboard, for sometime after they come ashore. To Air my self then, I lay
three or four hours in the Sun, upon a Terrass-walk; and being afterward come
down, the Dogs, who smelt no more that influence which had made me their Enemy,
left barking, and peaceably went to their several homes. Next day I parted for
Rome, where I saw the ruins of the Triumphs of some great Men, as well as of
Ages: I admired those lovely Relics; and the Repairs of some of them made by
the Modern. At length, having stayed there a fortnight in Company of Monsieur
de Cyrano my Cousin, who advanced me Money for my Return, I went to Civita
vecchia, and embarked in a Galley that carried me to Marseilles. During all
this Voyage, my mind run upon nothing, but the Wonders of the last I made. At
that time I began the Memoires of it; and after my return, put them into as
good order, as Sickness, which confines me to Bed, would permit. But
foreseeing, that it will put an end to all my Studies, and Travels; that I may
be as good as my word to the Council of that World; I have begged of Monsieur
le Bret, my dearest and most constant Friend, that he would publish them, with
the History of the Republic of the Sun, that of the Spark, and some other
Pieces of my Composing, if those who have Stolen them from us, restore them to
him, as I earnestly adjure them to do.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 17. line ult. read Telescope. p. 39. l. 18. add long. p. 58. l. 5. r.
were. p. 65. l. 2. r. ends. p. 99. l. 14. r. who. p. 100. l. 21. r. an.

THE Comical History, OF THE STATES and EMPIRES OF THE WORLD OF THE SUN.

Written in French by Cyrano Bergerac. And now Englished by A. Lovell. A. M.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Rhodes, next door to Swan-Tavern, near Bride-Lane in
Fleet Street, 1687.

THE HISTORY OF THE WORLD OF THE SUN.
OUR Ship at length arrived in the Harbor of Toulon, where the Passengers
being immediately put ashore, and having thanked the Winds and Stars, for the
Prosperity of our Voyage, we mutually embraced, and took our leave one of
another. For my part, seeing in the World of the Moon, whence I came, a Song
goes for Money, no that I had quite forgot the use of it; the hunest Master
thought himself sufficiently paid for my passage, by the Honor he had of
carrying on Board a Man who had dropped from Heaven: So that nothing hindered our
Progress to a Friends House of mine near Thoulouse. I was impatient of seeing
him, in hopes that I might fill him with Joy, by the Relation of my Adventures.
I shall not trouble you with an account of all that happened to me upon the
Road; I tired my self, and took rest; I felt hunger and thirst, and drank and
eat amidst a Pack of twenty or thirty Hounds, that belonged to him. Though I
was much disfigured, lean and Sunburned, he knew me for all that; being
transported with Joy, he flew about my Neck, and having in an Ecstasy of
Content kissed me above an hundred times, he pulled me into his House, where so
soon as Tears had given way to Words: We live now, at length, cried he, and
shall live, in spite of all the Accidents, wherewith Fortune has tossed our
Life. But, Good God! It was a false report then, that you were burnt in Canada,
in that great Firework, whereof you were the Inventor? And nevertheless, two or
three Persons of Credit, amongst those who brought me the sad Tidings, swore to
me that they had seen and touched that Bird of Wood, wherein you were hurried
away. They told me, that it was your Misfortune to go into it at the very
instant they put Fire to it; and that the rapid Force of the Squibs, that burnt
all round it, carried you so high, that the Spectators lost sight of you: So
that, as they protested, you were to that degree consumed, that the Machine
falling down again, very little of your Ashes were to befound. These Ashes.
Sir, then, answered I, were the Ashes of (...) Machine it self; for the Fire
did not (...) hurt. The Fireworks were fastened on the outside, and by
consequence their Heat would not incommode me.

Now you must know, that so soon as the Saltpeter was spent, the impetuous
force of the Fireworks being no longer able to bear up the Machine, it fell to
the Ground. I saw it fall; and when I thought to have tumbled down headlong
with it, I was very much surprised to find, that I mounted up toward the Moon.
But I must explain to you the Cause of an effect, which you may look upon as a
Miracle.

The Day when that Accident happened, I had, because of some bruises, rubbed my
Body all over with Marrow: Now the Moon being then in the Wain, at which time
she attracts Marrow, she sucked up so greedily that wherewith I had anointed my
Flesh, especially when my box was got above the middle Region, where no Clouds
interposed to weaken her Influence, that my Body followed the Attraction; and I
protest she continued to suck me up so long, that at length I arrived at that
World, which here they call the Moon.

Then I told him in full all the particulars of my Voyage, and Monsieur de
Colignac, ravished to hear things so extraordinary, adjured me to put them in
Writing. I, who love Repose, declined it as long as I could, by reason of the
visits that such a Publication in all probability world procure me; but being
out of Countenance at the Reproach, wherewith he constantly baited me, that I
made slight of his Entreaties; I resolved at length to give him that
satisfaction. I put Pen to Paper then, and he being more impatiently tickled
with my glory, than his own; no sooner had I made an end of a Sheet, but he
hastened with it to Thoulouse, there to give it vent in the most ingenious
Assemblies. Seeing he had the Reputation of one of the wittiest Men of the Age,
my Praises, of which he was the indefatigable Herald, made me known of all Men.
The Engravers, without ever having seen me, had already engraven my Picture;
and the Hawkers stunned the whole City, crying about the Streets till they were
hoarse again, Who Will buy the Picture of the Author of the States and Empires of
the Moon. Amongst those who read my Book, there were a great many Ignorants
that were likewise meddling. These that they might act the Wits of the highest
flight, applauded as others did, clapped at every Word, for fear of being
mistaken, and ravished with delight, cried, It Is good! even where they
understood not a tittle: But Superstition disguized into Remorse, which has
very sharp Teeth under a Fool's Coat, so knaw'd the Heart of them, that they
chose rather to renounce the Reputation of a Philosopher, which, indeed, was a
Habit that did not at all become them, than to answer for it at the day of
Judgment.

Here, then, is the Reverse of the Medal, he is the best Man now that can
retract first. The work they had so much esteemed, is no more now but a
Hodge-podge of ridiculous Tales, a heap of incoherent Shreds, a Fardel of idle
stories, to wheedle young Children to Bed with; and some who hardly understood
the Grammar of it, condemned the Author to Bedlam.

This clashing of Opinions betwixt the Wisemen and Fools, increased its
Reputation. Shortly afterward Manuscript-copies of it were sold privately; all
the World, and what is out of the World also, that is to say, all from the
Gentleman to the Monk, brought up the piece: nay, and the Women came in for a
share too; every Family was divided, and the Interests of that quarrel went so
far, that the whole City broke into two, the Lunar and Antilunar Factions.

Thus was the War carried on by Skirmishings, when one Morning I perceived nine
or ten Beards of the long Robe enter Colignac's Chamber, who presently spoke to
him to this purpose. "Sir, you know that there is not one of us here, who is
not your Allie, Kinsman or Friend, and that by consequence no Disgrace can
befall you, but what must reflect upon us: Nevertheless we are informed from
good hands, that you entertain a Sorcerer in your House: A Sorcerer, cried
Colignac? Good God! Name him to me, and I Will deliver him up into your Hands;
but you must have a care it be not a Calumny. How, Sir, said one of the most
venerable, interrupting him, is there any Parliament more skilled in Wizards
than ours? In a word, Dear Nephew, that we may hold you no longer in suspense,
the Sorcerer whom we accuse, is the Author of the States and Empires of the
Moon: He cannot deny, having confessed what he has done, but that he is the
greatest Magician in Europe. How is it possible to mount up to the Moon,
without the help of --? I dare not name the Beast; for in short, tell me, what
went he about to do in the Moon? A pretty question, said another interrupting;
he went to be present at a meeting that possibly was kept there that day: And
indeed, you see he was acquainted with the Demon of Socrates. Are you surprised
then, that the Devil, as he says, brought him back again into this World? But
however it be, look ye, so many Moons, so many Progresses and Voyages through
the Air, are good for nothing; I say nothing at all; and betwixt you and me,
(at these words he put his Mouth to the others Ear) I never knew a Sorcerer but
had Commerce with the Moon. After these good Counsels they held their peace;
and Colignac stood so amazed at their Common Extravagance, that he could not
speak one word: Which a grave Coxcomb, who had said nothing as yet, perceiving.
"Look you, says he, Cousin, we know where the matter pinches; the Magician is a
person whom you love, but be not startled, for your sake favor shall be shown
him; only deliver him fairly over to us, and in consideration of you we engage
our Honor, to have him burnt without Scandal.

Colignac, at these words, though he held his sides, could not hold, but burst
out into a fit of Laughter, which did not a little offend the Gentlemen his
Kinsmen; insomuch that he had no power to make answer to any point of their
Harangue, but by haaaa's or hoooo's; which so scandalized his worthy Relations,
that they departed with shame enough to carry back with them to Thoulouse. When
they were gone, I drew Colignac into his Closet, where so soon as I had shut
the Door, Count, said I, to him, These long-bearded Ambassadors I don't like,
they seem to me to be blazing Stars; I Am afraid the noise they have made, may
be the clap of the Thunderbolt that is ready to fall. Though their Accusation
be ridiculous, and, perhaps, an effect of their Stupidity: yet I shall be no
less a dead Man, though a dozen Men of Sense, who may see me roasted, should
say that my Judges are Sots; all the Arguments they might use to prove my
Innocence would not bring me to life again; and my Ashes would be every jot as
cold in a Grave, as in the open Air. And therefore, with Submission to your
better Judgment, I should joyfully consent to a Temptation which suggests to
me, not to leave them any thing in this Province but my Picture: For it would
make me stark-staring mad, to die for a thing which I don't believe. Colignac
had hardly the Patience to hear me out. However, at first he did but railly me;
but when he saw that I was in earnest: Ha! god's death, cried he, before they touch
a hair of your Head, I my self, my Friends, Vassals, and all that respect me,
shall perish first. My House cannot be Fired without Cannon; it stands
advantagiously, and is well flanked: But I Am a Fool, continued he, to caution
my self against the thunder of Parchment: It Is sometimes more to be feared,
replied I, than the Thunder of the second Region of the Air.

From that time forward we talked of nothing but diverting our selves. One day
we hunted, another we walked and took the Air; sometimes we received Visits, and
sometimes we rendered them: In a word we always changed our Recreations, before
they became tiresome.

The Marquess of Cussan, a Man who understands the World, was commonly with us,
and we with him; and to render the places of our abode the more agreeable by
vicissitude, we went from Colignac to Cussan, and returned from Cussan to
Colignac. The innocent Pleasures which refresh the Body, made but the least
part of ours. We wanted none of those that the mind can find in Study and
Conversation; and our Libraries uniting like our minds, brought all the Learned
into our Society. We mingled reading with Conversation; Conversation with good
Cheer, that with Fishing, Hunting, or Walking; and in a word, I may say, we
enjoyed our selves, and whatever Nature has produced for the Pleasure of Life,
and used our Reason only to limit our Desires. In the mean time, to the
prejudice of my repose, my Reputation spread it self in the Neighboring
Villages, nay and in the Towns and Cities of the Province; all Men being
invited by the current Report, made a pretext of coming to see the Lord, that
they might see the Sorcerer. When I went abroad, not only Women and Children,
but the Men also stared at me, as if I had been the Beast. Especially, the
Pastor of Colignac, who, whether out of Malice or Ignorance, was in secret my
greatest Enemy. That Man being in appearance simple, and of a low and plain
Spirit, which made him very pleasant in a kind of natural Bluntness, was in
reality a very wicked Fellow: He was revengeful even to Fury; a Backbitter
somewhat more than a Norman; and so great a Barretter, that the love of
Wrangling and going to law was his predominate Passion. Having been a long time
at Law with his Lord, whom he hated the more, as that he had found him firm
against all his Attacks, he feared his Resentment, and that he might avoid it,
had offered to exchange his Living: But whether he had changed his Design, or
had only deserred it to be revenged on Colignac in my Person, during the time
that he continued in his place, he strove to persuade the contrary; though the
frequent Journeys he made to Thoulouse gave grounds to suspect it. There he
told a Thousand ridiculous stories of my Enchantments; and the Suggestions of
that malicious Man, concurring with the Voice of the simple and ignorant
People, made my Name accursed in that place: They talked no otherwise of me
than of a new Agrippa; and we had Information, that a Process was even
commenced against me, at the suit of the Curate, who had been Tutor to his
Children. This we had Notice of from several Persons, who concerned themselves
in the Affairs of Colignac and the Marquess. And although the blockish Humor of
an entire Country, was to us a Subject of Amazement and Laughter; nevertheless
I was startled at it in private, when I more nearly considered, the troublesome
Consequences that such an Error might produce. My good Genius, without doubt,
gave me the Alarm; it enlightened my Reason with these noti^, to let me see the
Precipice into which I was ready to tumble; and not thinking it enough thus
tacitly to advise me, it resolved to declare more expressly in my Favors. A
most troublesome Night having succeeded one of the pleasantest Days that we had
spent at Colignac, I arose by Break of Day; and to dispell the Clouds and
Cares, that still dulled and discomposed my Mind, I went into the Garden, where
Verdure, Flowers and Fruits, Art and Nature, charmed the Soul through the Eyes;
when at the same instant I perceived the Marquess, walking by himself, with a
slow Pace, and pensive Countenance, in a large Alley, which divided the Garden
into two. I was much surprised to see him, contrary to Custom, so early; that
made me hasten up to him, that I might ask him the reason of it. He made me
answer, that some troublesome Dreams, wherewith he had been disordered, was the
Cause, that contrary to Custom, he was come so early to cure by Day, an Evil he
had contracted in the Night. I confessed to him, that a like Misfortune had
hindered me from sleeping, and was about to tell him the Particulars thereof;
but just as I was opening my Mouth, we perceived at the Corner of a railed
Walk, which crossed into ours, Colignac coming in great haste. So soon as he
saw us at a distance, Gentlemen, cried he, take here one who has just escaped
from the most dreadful Visions, that are able to turn the Brains of a mortal
Man. I could hardly take time to put on my Doublet, before I came down to give
you an account of my Adventure; but finding neither of you in your Chambers, I
hastened to the Garden, supposing you might be there. The Truth is, the poor
Gentleman was almost out of Breath. So soon as he had taken a little Breath, we
entreated him to ease himself of a matter, which, though many times very
slight, nevertheless weighs heavy. I design to do so, replied he; but let us
first sit down. An Arbor of Jessamine offered us very pat both Seats and Shade:
We entered it, and every one being placed, Colignae thus continued: You must
know, that after two or three disturbed Sleeps, I fell about Daybreak into a
Slumber, wherein I dreamed, that my dear Guest there, was in the middle,
betwixt the Marquess and me, and that we embraced him straightly, when a black
Monster, consisting wholly of Heads, came all of a sudden to snatch him from
us: Nay, I fancied, he was about to throw him into a great Fire, kindled hard
by; for already he held him suspended over the Flames: But a Virgin, like one
of the Muses, whom they call Euterpe, fell upon her Knees before a Lady, whom
she adjured to save him (that Lady had the Presence and Marks which Painters
use to give in representing of Nature.) Hardly had she heard out the Prayers of
her Waiting-maid, when all amated; Alas! cried she, he is one of our Friends.
Immediately thereupon she put to her Mouth a kind of a long Pipe, like a
Sackbut, and blew so long through it, under the Feet of my dear Guest, that she
made him mount up to Heaven, and protected him from the Cruelties of the
Monster with an hundred Heads. I fancied that I cried a long time after him,
and adjur'd him not to be gone without me; when an infinite number of little
round Angels, who called themselves the Children of the Morning, carried me to
the same Country whither he seemed to fly, and showed me things which I shall
not relate, because I look upon them as ridiculous. We besought him, that he
would tell us them however. I imagined my self, continued he, to be in the Sun,
and that the Sun was a World. I had been still in the same Mistake, had not the
neighing of my Horse awakned me, and convinced me that I was a Bed. When the
Marquess perceived that Colignac had made an end: Well, then, said he, Monsieur
Dyrcona, what was your Dream? As for mine, answered I, though it be no vulgar
Dream, yet I lay no stress upon it. I am a bilious Melancholic, and that is the
reason that all my life time I have dreamt of nothing but of Caves and Fire. In
the prime of my Youth, I fancied in my Sleep, that I was become light, and took
a flight up to the Clouds, that I might avoid the Rage of a Company of
Murderers that pursued me; but that after a long and vigorous Attempt, some
Wall always withstood me, though I had surmounted a great many others, at the
Foot whereof, tired out with Struggling and Labor, I never failed to be stopped;
or otherwise, if I imagined that I took my Flight right upwards, though I
seemed for a long time to have swum in the Skies, yet I still found my self
near the Earth; and contrary to all reason, though I thought my self neither
weary nor heavy, yet I was still within reach of my Enemies, who stretched
forth their Hands to catch me by the Foot, and pull me to them. Since I knew
any thing, I never had any other Dreams but such as this, unless last night;
when having, according to my Custom, flown a long while, and often escaped from
my Persecutors, I thought at length, that I lost fight of them; and that in an
open and clear Sky, my Body eased of all Heaviness, I pursued my Voyage into a
Palace where Light and Heat are hatched. I had, without doubt, observed a great
many other things; but that my Agitation to fly, brought me so near the Beds
side, that I fell upon the Floor on my naked Belly, with Eyes full open. This,
Gentlemen, is the short and long of my Dream, which I only look upon as an
Effect of those two Qualities, that are predominant in my Constitution: for
though this be a little different from those which I commonly have, in that I
flew up to Heaven without falling back; yet I only ascribe that Alteration to
my Blood, dilated by the Pleasures of our Yesterday's Diversions, which has
dissipated my Melancholy; and by buoying of it up, cleared it from that
Weightiness which made me tumble down again: But after all, that is a very
conjectural Science. IN Faith, continued Cussan, you are in the right on it,
it is a Hodge-podge of all the things we have thought on when awake, a monstrous
Chimera, a Muster of confused Idea's, which the Fancy, that during Sleep, is
not guided by Reason, presents to us, without Order; out of which nevertheless
we think to squeeze the true Meaning, and draw from Dreams, as from Oracles,
the Knowledge of things future; but I vow, I could never find any other
Conformity betwixt them; but that Dreams, like Oracles, cannot be understood:
However, judge of the worth of all the rest, by mine which is not at all
extraordinary. I dreamt that I was very sad, and that I met with Dyrcona in all
places, who called for our Assistance. But without beating my Brains any more,
about the Explication of these dark Riddles, I Will tell ye their Mystical Sense
in two Words; and that is, in troth, that our Dreams at Colignac are very bad,
and that if you will take my Advice, we'll go and have better at Cussan. Let Us
go, then, said the Count to me, since this Man is so uneasy here. We resolved
to be gone the same day; and I prayed them to set out before, because I was
willing, seeing (as they had agreed upon it) we were to be there a Month, to
have some Books carried along with me: They condescended, and immediately after
Breakfast got on Horseback. In the mean time, I packed up some Volumes, which
I imagined not to be in the Library of Cussan, put them upon a Mule, and about
three in the Afternoon set out upon a very good Pad. However, I went but a
Foot-pace, that I might attend my little Library, and at more leisure enrich my
mind with the Liberalities of my sight. But listen to an Adventure, that will
certainly surprise you.

I was got forwards on my Journey above four Leagues, when I found my self in a
Country which I was certain I had seen somewhere else before: The truth is, I
solicited my Memory so much to tell me, how I came to know that Landscape, that
the presence of the Objects, reviving past Images, I remembered that that was
exactly the place, which the Night before I had seen in a Dream. That odd
rencounter would have busied my thoughts longer than it did, had I not been
diverted by a strange Apparition. A Spirit, (at least I took it for one)
meeting me in the middle of the way, took hold of my Horse by the Bridle. This
Phantome was of a prodigious Shape, and what I could guess by the little I saw
of his Eyes, had a surly and stern Look. I cannot tell, though, whether he was
handsome or ugly; for a long Gown made of the Leaves of a Church plain
Song-Book, covered him to the Fingers-ends, and his Face was hid under a thing
like a Horn-Book, wherein was written the in Principio. The first Words that
the Phantome uttered, were with great amazement Satanus Diabolus, I conjure
thee by the Great and Living God, -- at these Words he stuck, but still
repeating the Great and Living God, and with a wild and skared Look, casting
about for his Pastor to blow into him the rest; when he found, that to what
side soever he looked, his Pastor was not to be seen, he fell into such a
dreadful shaking Fit, that by his extraordinary chattering and diddering, one
half of his Teeth dropped out, and two Thirds of the Musick-notes, under which he
lurkt, flew about like Thistle Down. He came back, however, toward me, and
with a Look that seemed neither soft nor surly, by which I perceived he was in
doubt what course was best for him to take, whether to be rough or mild: O!
well then, said he, Satanus Diabolus, by the Blood I conjure thee in the Name
of God, and of Mass-John, let me do my Business: For if thou stirrest either
Hand or Foot; Devil take -- thy Guts are out. I had a lash at him with the
Bridle Reins; but being almost choked with laughter, I had little strength to
do any thing: Besides that, about half a hundred Country People, came out from
behind a Hedge, walking upon their Knees, and tearing their Throats with Kyrie
Eleisons. When they were got near enough, four of the strongest of the Rout,
having first plunged their Hands into a Holy Water-pot, which was purposely
carried by the Priest's Man, caught hold of me by the Neck. No sooner was I
arrested, but in comes Mass John, who devoutly pulling out his Stole, bound me
fast with it; and presently after, a flock of Women and Children, who in spite
of all the Resistance I could make, sowed me up in a great Sheet; wherein I was
so dexterously swadled, that nothing was to be seen of me but the Head. In this
Equipage they carried me to Thoulouse; as if they had been carrying me to my
Grave: By and by cried one, Had not this been done, we should have had a
Famine, because, when they met me, I was certainly going to lay a Spell upon
the Corn; and then I heard another complaining, that the Scab did not begin
amongst his Sheep, till of a Sunday, when the People were coming from Vespers,
I clapped him on the Shoulder. But in spite of all my Disasters, I could hardly
forbear to laugh, when I heard a young Country Girl, with a dreadful Tone, cry
after her Sweetheart, alias the Phantome, who had seized my Horse. (For you
must know, that the Youngster had got on the Back of him, and spurred him
briskly, as if he had been his own already,) Wretch, bauled out his Duckling,
What art blind then? Does n't see that the Magician's Horse is blacker than
Coal, and that it is the Devil in Person carrying thee away to a meeting of
Witches? Our Amorous Clown terrified at that, tumbled backwards over the Beasts
Tail; so that my Horse was set at Liberty. They consulted whether or not they
should seize my Mule, and agreed in the Affirmative; but having unript the
Pack, and at the opening of the first Book hitting Descarteses Physics, when
they saw the Circles whereby that Philosopher distinguishes the Motions of the
several Planets, all of them with one voice roared out, that they were the
Conjuring Lines, I used to draw for raising of Beelzebub. He that held it in
his Hands, seized with a panick fear, let it fall; and by mischance, it opened
at a Page, where the Virtues of the Lodestone are explained: I say, by
mischance; because, in the place I speak of, there is a Cut of that Metallic
Stone, where the little Bodies, that are let loose from the whole, to fasten to
the Iron, are represented like Arms. No sooner had one of the Rascals perceived
it, but I heard him scream out, that that was the Toad which was found in the
Manger of his Cousin Dick's Stable, when his Horses died. At that Word, they
who seemed to be in the greatest heat, clapped their Hands into their Bosoms or
Pockets. Mass John cried with open Mouth, that they should take special care
not to touch any thing; that all these were Books of downright Conjuring, and
the Mule a Satan. The Rabble thus frightened, let the Mule depart in Peace.
Nevertheless, I saw Joan the Parson's Maid drive him toward her Master's
Stable, for fear he might get into the Churchyard, and there pollute the Grass
of the departed.

It was full Seven of the Clock at Night, when we arrived at a Town, where for
my Refreshment I was dragged to Goal: For the Reader would not believe me, if I
said that they Buried me alive in a Hole: And nevertheless it is true, that
with one turn I surveyed the whole extent of it. In a Word, there was no Body
that saw me in that place, but would have taken me for a bit of Wax-Candle,
lighted under a Cupping-Glass. At first, when my Jailer turned me into that
Cave: If you give me, said I to him, this Stone Garment for a Doublet, it is
too big; but if it be for a Tomb, it is too little. The days here are only to be
reckoned by Nights; of my five Senses, I retain only the use of two, Smelling
and Feeling; the one, to make me sensible of the stink of my Prison; and the
other, to render it palpable to me. In reality, I protest to you, I should
think I were damned, if I knew not that no Innocent Person goes to Hell.

At that word Innocent, the Jailer burst out into Laughter. Nay, Faith, said
he, you are one of our right Birds then, for I never yet kept any under my Key,
but such Gentlemen as these. After some other Compliments of that Nature; the
good Man took the pains to search me, I know not on what design; but because of
the Diligence he used, I conjecture it was for what I had. The pains he took in
searching being all in vain, because during the Battle of Diabolus, I had
conveyed my Gold into my Stockings; when after a most exact Anatomy, he found
his hands as empty as before; both of us were within an Ace of Death, I for
fear, and he for grief. S'ounds, cried he, foaming at the Mouth, at first sight
I knew he was a Sorcerer, he is as poor as the Devil. Go, go, Comrade, continued
he, mind the Affairs of your Conscience in time. He had no sooner said so, but
that I heard the knell of a bunch of Keys, amongst which, he looked for those of
my Dungeon. His back was turned; and therefore for fear he might take his
revenge for the misfortune of his Visit, I cunningly pulled three Pistoles out
of their Nest, saying to him, Master Housekeeper, there is a Pistole, pray send
me a bit of somewhat, for I have not eat these eleven hours past. He took it
very favorably, and protested he was troubled at my Misfortune. When I
perceived he was a little mollified; come, here is another, continued I, as an
Acknowledgment of the Trouble, I am ashamed to give you: At once he opened his
Ear, Heart, and Hand; and I added, making them up three, instead of two, that
by the third I begged of him to let one of his Men come and keep me Company,
because the unfortunate ought to dread Solitude.

Being ravished at my Prodigalities, he promised me all things, embraced my
Legs, railed against the Justice; told me, that he well perceived I had
Enemies, but that I should come off with Honor: that I should take good Heart;
and that in the mean time, he engaged himself before three days were over, to
have my Cuffs washed for me. I thanked him very seriously for his Courtesy; and
my dear Friend having hung about my Neck, till he had almost strangled me, went
his way, bolting and double bolting the Door.

I remained alone, and very Melancholic, lying round upon a little old Straw,
reduced almost into Dust. However, it was not yet so small, but that above half
a hundred Rats were still a grinding of it. The Vault, Walls, and Floor, were
made up of six Grave-Stones, that having Death over, under and about me, I
might not question my Enterrment. The cold Slime of Snails, and the roapy Venom
of Toads, dropped upon my Face; the Fleas there had Teeth longer than their
Bodies; I found my self tormented with the Stone, which was not the less
painful, because it was External. In a word, I fancy that I wanted no more but
a Wife, and a Pot-sheard to make me a real Job.

I had, however, overcome all the Hardships of two very irksom Hours, when the
noise of a Gross of Keys, with the rattling of the Bolts of my Door, diverted me
from minding my Pains. After the jingling noise, by a little Lamp-light, I
perceived a sturdy Clown. He unl^ded an earthen Dish between my Legs: And
there, there, said he, be not disturbed, there is a good Cabage Soop for ye; and
were it -- but indeed it is my Mistress's own Soop; and faith and troth, as the
saying is, there is not one drop of the Fat taken off on it. Having said so, he
dives his four Fingers and Thumb to the very bottom of the Dish, to envite me
to do the like. I followed my Copy, for fear of discouraging him; and he with a
joyful glance of an Eye, S'diggers, cried he, you are an honest Brother. They
zay you have got Ill-willers: S'lid they are Traitors; yes Dad, they are very
Traitors: Well, would they would come here and see. Ay, ay, it is so; he goes first
that leads the Dance. This blunt Simplicity brought a fit of Laughter two or
three times up to my very Throat. However I was so happy as to check it: I
perceived, that Fortune, by means of this Rogue, seemed to offer me an occasion
of Liberty; and therefore it extremely concerned me to gain his Favor; for
otherwise to escape, it was impossible. The Architector that built my Prison,
having made my Entries into it, did not bethink himself of making one Outlet.
These Considerations were the Cause, that to sound him, I spoke to him to this
purpose, My good Friend, thou art a poor man, is n't that true? Alas! Sir,
answered the Clown, had you been ^th the cunning Man, you could not have hit
righter. Here then, said I, take that Pistole.

I found his hand to shake so, when I put the Pistole into it, that scarcely
could he shut it. That beginning seemed to me to be a little ominous: However, I
quickly perceived by the heartiness of his Thanks, that he only trembled for
Joy; and that made me go on: But were thou a man, that would be concerned in
the accomplishment of a Vow which I have made, besides the Salvation of thy
Soul, thou might be as sure of twenty Pistoles, as thou art of thine own
Hat: For thou must know, that it is not as yet a full quarter of an Hour, in a
word, a moment before thou came, that an Angel appeared to me, and promised
to make the Justice of my Cause appear, provided I went to morrow to our Lady's
Church of this Town, and had a Mass said at the high Altar there. I pretended
to excuse my self upon the account of my close Imprisonment; but the Angel made
Answer, That a man should come, sent from the Jailer, to keep me company, whom
I should but command in his name to carry me to Church, and bring me back again
to Prison; that I should enjoin him Secrecy, and to obey without gainsaying,
upon pain of dying within the Year; and if he questioned the Truth of what I
said, I should give him this token that he had been touched for the Evil. Now
the Reader must know, that I had seen through a hole of his Shirt, a piece of
the King's Gold, which suggested to me the whole Series of this Apparition.
Yea, verily then, said he, good Sir, I shall even do what the Angel has
commanded me; but it must be at nine of the Clock in the Morning, because at
that time our Master will be at Thoulouse, about the making up of a Match
betwixt his Son, and the Master of the last Work's Daughter. Do You mind me, Sir,
the Hangman has a Name, as well as a Crab-louse: They talk as if she should
have from her Father, as many Crowns in Portion, as might make up a King's
Ransom. In short, she is Fair and Rich; but such Wind-falls seldom fall in the
way of a poor Young Man. Alas! Good Sir, -- would have you know -- I failed
not here to interrupt him; for I foresaw by the beginning of this Digression,
that I should be balted by a long tale of a Tub. Our Plot being very cautiously
laid betwixt us, the Clown took leave of me; and failed not next Morning to
come at the prefixed hour, and untomb me. I left my Clothes in the Prison, and
dressed my self in Rags; for least I might be known, we had so ordered it the
Night before. So soon as we were abroad in the open Air, I forgot not to tell
him down his twenty Pistoles. He looked and stared upon them very wistfully.
They are good Gold and of full weight, upon my Word, said I to him. Ha, Sir,
replied he, that is not the thing I mind; but I Am thinking that great Ralph's
House is to be sold, with a Close and Vineyard. I can have it for two hundred
Francks, it will require eight days time to make up the Bargain; and I would
beg of you, good Sir, if it be your Will and Pleasure, so to order the matter,
that till great Ralph have told and received your Pistoles, and locked them safe
up in his Chest, they may not turn into Shells. I could not but laugh at the
simplicity of the Knave. In the mean time, we jogged on toward the Church,
where at length we arrived. Shortly after high Mass began; but so soon as I saw
my Keeper rise in his turn to go to the offering, I skipped at three leaps out
of the Church, and at as many more whipped into a little Bye-Street or Alley. I
had a great many thoughts in my head at that instant; but that which I followed
was to get to Thoulouse, which was but half a League distant from the place,
with Design to take Post there. I got to the Suburbs in very good time; but I
was so ashamed to be stared at by all the People that saw me, that I was quite
out of Countenance: That which made them stare, was my Dress; for I being but a
Novice in the begging Trade, had marshalled my Clouts about me so odly, that
with a Gate that suited not at all with my Habit, I seemed to be one in
Disguise, rather than a Beggar; besides that, I made great haste, looked down,
and asked nothing. At length, considering that this general Observation of the
People threatened me with some dangerous Issue, I overcame my Bashfulness. So
soon as I perceived any one that looked at me, I stretched him out my Hand: Nay,
I even importuned the Charity of those that did not in the least mind me. But
reflect a little, and wonder how many times by using too great Circumspection,
about the Designs wherein Fortune will have some share, we spoil them by
provoking that haughty Goddess. I make this Observation, upon Occasion of the
Accident that befell me; for perceiving a Man in the Dress of an ordinary
Citizen, with his Back toward me, Sir, said I, pulling him by the Cloak, if
there be any Bowels of pity -- I had not brought forth the word that was to
come next, when the Man turned about his Head. Good God! What was he? Nay, Good
God! What was I? That very Man was my Jailer; we stood both amazed with
Admiration to see one another in the place we did. His Eyes were wholly fixed
on me, and I had nothing in view but him. In fine, a common Interest, though
very different, recovered us out of the Ecstasy wherein both of us were
plunged. Ha! Wretch that I am, cried the Jailer, must I then be caught? That
Word of a double meaning put into my mind the Stratagem you shall hear. Stop
Thief, Gentlemen, stop Thief, cried I, as loud as I could baul: This Rogue has
stole the Jewels of the Countess of Mouseaux; I have been a year in search of
him. Gentlemen, continued I, all in a heat, a hundred Pistoles for him that
shall take him. No sooner had I let fly these Words, but a Troop of the Rabble
fell upon the poor amazed Wretch. The Surprise that my impudence had cast him
into, being heightened by the Imagination he had, that without a Body, like
unto that of the Saints in Glory, which might pass entire through the Walls of
my Dungeon, I could not have made my escape, so transported him, that he was
for a long time besides himself. He came to himself again, however, at length;
and the first Words he used to undeceive the Mobile, were, That they should
have a care they did not commit a mistake; that he was a man of Honor and
Reputation. Without doubt he was about to discover the whole Mystery: But a
dozen of Coster-mongers, Lackeys and Chair-men, being desirous to serve me for
my Money, stopped his Mouth with Fisty-cuffs; and in as much as they fancied,
that their Reward should be proportioned to the degree of Insolence, wherewith
they insulted over the Weakness of the poor stunned Man, every one came running
in to have a touch at him, either with Hand or Foot. Here Is your Man of Honor,
cried the Riff-raff, and yet he could not forbear to say, so soon as he knew
the Gentleman, that he was caught. The Cream of the Jest was, that my Jailer
being in his Holy Days Clothes, was ashamed to confess himself to be the
Hang-man's Churchwarden; nay, he was afraid that by discovering himself to be
what he was, he might but increase the number of his Blows. For my own part,
whilst the scuffle was at the length I took my flight. I trusted my safety to
my Legs, which would have soon set me at Liberty: But as the Devil would have
it, the People beginning of new all to stare at me, I found my self in as bad a
pickle again as at first. If the Spectacle of an hundred Rags, which like a
Brawl of little Beggars danced about me, did excite the Curiofity of any gaping
Lout to stare at me; I was afraid that he might read in my Forehead, that I
was one that had broken Prison. If any one passing by me, put his Hand out
under his Cloak, I fancied him to be a Sergeant, who stretched out his Arm to
lay hold on me. If I observed another scampering along the Streets, without
casting an Eye on me, I persuaded my self that he feigned not to see me, to the
end he might snap me behind. If I perceived a Shopkeeper enter his Shop, now,
said I, he is gone to fetch out his Constables Staff. If I came into a place
where there was any extraordinary Concourse of People, so many Men, thought I,
could not be got together there without some Design. If another place was
empty, here they lie in wait for me. Did I meet with a stop, now, thought I,
they have barocado'd the Streets to shut me in. In a word, Fear perverting my
Reason, every Man seemed to me to be an Officer, every Word, Stop, and every
noise, the insupportable Rattling of the Bolts of my last Prison. Being thus
beset with panick Fear, I resolved to play the Beggar again, that so I might
pass the rest of the City, till I got to the Post House: But fearing lest my
Voice might betray me, I thought best to Counterfeit the Dumbman. I advanced
then toward those whom I pereived to Eye me. I pointed with my Finger under my
Chin, then over my Mouth, and gaping made an unarticulate Cry, to give them to
understand by this Action, that a poor Dumb man begged their Charity. Sometimes
I had a compassionate Shrug of the Shoulders for an Alms; by and by I felt a
small Bribe slipped into my Fist; and anon again I could hear the good Women
mutter, that perhaps I might have been in that manner Mortifyed for the Faith
in Turkey. In short, I learnt that the begging Trade is a great Book, that
Instructs us in the manners of People at a cheaper rate, than all the long
Voyages of Columbus and Magellan can.

That Stratagem however, could not as yet prevail over the Head-strongness of
my Destiny, nor overcome the ill nature thereof: But what other Invention could
I betake my self unto? For to cross so great a City as Thoulouse is, where my
Garb had made me known even to the Herring-wives, having more shaggy Rags
dandling about me, than the erran test Tatterdemallion in the World, was it not
very likely that I should immediately be taken notice of and known? And that
the only charm against that danger was to personate the Beggar, whose part is
Acted under all Shapes? And then granting this Trick had not been projected
with all necessary Circumspection, I fancy still that amongst so many fatal
Junctures, it was a sign of a very good Judgment, not to run stark mad.

I was setting forward on my Journey then, when all of a sudden I found my self
obliged to turn back again; For my venerable Jailer, and about of a dozen of
Officers of his Acquaintance, who had rescued him out of the Hands of the
Rabble, setting out upon the Hunt, and scowring all the Town to find me, fell
unluckily in my way. So soon as with Eagles Eyes they perceived me, you may
imagine, that they run, and I run, with all the Speed we could. I was so nimbly
pursued, that sometimes my Liberty fell upon its Neek, the Breath of the
Tyrants who sought to oppress it: But it seemed that the Air, which they pushed
forwards running after me, drove me on before them. At length kind Heavens or
Fear rather carried me four or five Lanes on Head of them. Then it was that my
Hunters lost the scent, and I the view and shameful Noise of that troublesome
Chase. Certainly he, that has not escaped such like Agonies, I speak by
Experience, can hardly measure the Joy wherewith I was transported, when I
found my self out of their Clutches. However, seeing my Safety required all my
skill, I resolved avaritiously to Husband the time which they spent in dogging
of me. I besmeared my Face, rubbed my Hair with Dust, stripped off my Doublet,
let fall my Breeches, threw my Hat in a Cellar; and then having spread my
Handkerchief upon the Street, with four little Stones on the Corners, as they
do who are infected with the Plague, I laid my self down upon my Belly over
against it, and with a lamentable Tone fell a Groaning most languishingly.
Hardly was I placed in this manner, when I heard the cry of the wheezing
Rabble, long before I heard the sound of their Feet; but I had still Judgment
enough to keep my self in the same posture, in hopes that I might not be known;
and I was not mistaken, for all taking me for one Infected, they passed by me
in great haste, stopping their Noses, and most of them throwing a Double upon
my Handkerchief.

The storm being thus over, I slipped into an Ally, put on my Cloths again, and
once more trusted my self to Fortune; But I had run so long that she was weary
of following me. No body could think otherwise; for having scuddled over so
many public Places and Quarters of the Town, tript along and turned so many
Streets, that lofty Goddess, unaccustomed to march so fast, to put a stop to my
Carriere, suffered me blindly to fall into the Hands of the Officers that
pursued me. At our meeting they thundered out so loud an Hue and Cry, that I was
quite stunned with the Noise. They thought they wanted Arms enough to hold me,
and therefore employed their Teeth, not believing they had me sure enough; one
dragged me by the Hair, another by the Collar, whilst the less passionate
rifled me; and had better luck than my Jailer at the first search, for they
found the rest of my Gold.

Whilst these Charitable Physicians were taken up in curing the Dropsy of my
Purse, a great Hubbub arose; all the place resouned with these Words, kill,
kill; and at the same time I saw drawn Swords. The Gentlemen who dragged me
along, cried that they were the Officers of the City Magistrates, who had a
mind to take their Prisoner from them. But take heed, said they to me, tugging
me along with greater Force, that you do not fall into their Hands, for if so,
you will be condemned within four and twenty Hours, and then the King cannot save
you. At length, however, they themselves being afraid of the Rout, that began
to come up with them, left me so universally, that I remained all alone in the
middle of the Street, whilst the Aggressors in the mean time, butchered all
they met with. I leave it to you to judge, whether or not I betook my self to
my Heels, having cause to be equally afraid of both. In a trice I was got at a
distance from the Hurry; but just as I was asking the way to the Post House, a
torrent of People that fled from the Scuffle broke into my Street; being unable
to resist the Crowd, I followed it; and being vexed to run so long, I gained at
length a little dark Gate, into which I threw my self pell-mell with those that
fled. We shut it upon our selves; and then when we had all taken Breath:
Comrades, said one of the Gang, if you will take my advice, let us pass the two
Wickets, and make for the Court. These dreadful Words struck me with so
surprising a Grief, that I thought to have fallen dead upon the place. Alas! I
perceived immediately, but too late, that instead of saving my self, as I
thought in a Sanctuary, I had cast my self into Prison; so impossible it is to
avoid the Influence of ones Watchful Stars. I looked upon that Man more
attentively, and knew him to be one of the Officers, who had so long given me
the Chase: I fell into a cold Sweat, and looked Pale as if I had been ready to
faint away. They who saw me in so weak a Condition, being moved with
Compassion, called for Water; every one drew nigh to assist me; and by
mischance that accursed Officer was one of the first: He had no sooner beheld
me, but that he knew me. He made a Sign to his Companions, and at the same time
I was saluted with an I Arrest you Prisoner in Name of the King. They needed
not go far to enrol my Name.

I remained in the Cage till Night, where every Turn Key one after another, by
an exact Dissection of the Parts of my Face, drew my Picture upon the Cloth of
his Memory.

At seven a Clock at Night the jingling o^ a Bunch of Keys gave the signal of
Retreat* They asked me if I would be carried to a Chamber of a Pistole; I
answered with a nod of the Head. Money then, replie^ the Guide. I knew very
well I was in a place where I must pocket a great many such Snubs: And
therefore I prayed him, i^ case he could not be so Courteous, as to giv^ me
Credit till next Morning, that he would tell the Jailer from me, he should
restor^ me the Money that had been taken from me. Ho, ho! I faith, answered the
Villai^ our Master is a Man of Heart, he gives nothing back. Do ye think then
that for the sake of your pretty Nose. -- along, along, t^ the Dungeon. Having
said so, he shew'^ me the way by a lusty Thump with his Bunch of Keys; the
weight whereof made me tumble and slide from the top to the bottom of a dark
Ascent, till I knocked against a Door that stopped me: Nor, indeed, had I known
it to be a Door, but for the rap I gave against it: For I had not now my Eyes,
they remained at the Stairs-Head under the Figure of a Candle, which my
Hangman Guide held in his Hand fourscore steps above me. At length that Tiger
of a Man being come down Pian Piano, unlocked thirty great Locks, pulled out as
many Bars; and the Wicket being only half opened, with a joult of his Knee he
ingulfed me in that Pit, whereof I had not time to observe the Horror, so
suddenly he pulled the Door after him. I stood in mire up to the Knees. If I
had a mind to get to the side, I fell in up to the middle. The terrible
clucking of the Toads that crawled in the Vessel, made me wish my self Deaf; I
felt Asks creeping by my Thighs, Serpents twisting about my Neck; and one I
espied by the somber light of his sparkling Eyes, from a Mouth black with
Venom, darting a forked Tongue, whose brisk Agitation made it look like a
Thunderbolt, set on Fire by its Eyes.

I cannot express the rest; it passes all belief; and besides, I dare not
reflect upon the same; so afraid I am, that the Assurance I think my self in,
of being freed from my Prison, should be no more but a Dream, out of which I am
ready to awake. The Gnomon had marked Ten of the Clock upon the Dial of the
great Tower, before any Body came to knock at my Tomb: But about that time,
when bitter Grief and Sorrow began already to press my Heart, and discompose
that just Harmony wherein consists Life, I heard a voice that bid me take hold
of the Pole that was presented unto me. Having a long time felt about in the
dark to find it, at length I met with one end thereof; with extraordinary
motion I took hold on it, and my Jailer pulling the other end toward him;
angled me out of the middle of that Mire. I began to suspect that the
Countenance of my Affairs was changed, for he showed me great Civility, spoke
to me bare-headed, and told me that five or six Persons of Quality waited in
the Court to see me. Amongst the rest, not so much as that wild Beast who shut
me up in the Den, which I have described to you, but had the Impudence to
accost me, with one Knee on the Ground, having kissed my Hand, he beat off a
great many Snails that stuck to my Hair with one of his Paws, and with the
other a great cluster of Leeches, wherewith my Face was Vizor-masked.

Having performed this rare piece of Civility; at least, Good Sir, said he to
me, you will think on the Care and Pains that great Nicolas has taken about you:
God's Death, do you mind me, when it was done for the King, it is not for you to
upbraid him for it, I trow. Being madded at the Impudence of the Rascal, I made
him a Sign that I should think on it. Through a Thousand dreadful turnings, at
length I came into the Light, and afterward into the Court, where as soon as I
entered it, two Men caught hold on me, whom at first I could not know, by reason
they fastened about my Neck at the same time, and joined their Faces close to
mine. It was a pretty while before I could guess who they were; but the
Transports of their Friendship intermitting a little, I knew my dear Colignac,
and the brave Marquess. Colignac had his Arm in a Scarf, and Cussan was the
first that came out of his Ecstasy. Alas! said he, we had never suspected such
a disaster, had it not been for your Horse and Mule, who that Night came to my
Gate: Their Girths, Cruppers, and all were broken, and that made us presage
some Misfortune was befallen you. We presently got on Horseback, and had not
rid two or three Leagues toward Colignac, when all the Country alarmed at that
Accident, told us the particular Circumstances thereof. We presently galloped
'to the Town, where you were in Prison; but being there informed of your
escape, upon the rumor that went, that you had taken your course toward
Thoulouse, with what men we had, we posted thither in all haste. The first man
we asked news of you; told us that you were retaken, at the same time we
spurred our Horses toward this Prison; but others assured us, that you had
vanished out of the Hands of the Sergeants: And as we still went on, the Towns
people were telling one another, how you were become invisible. At length
having made further and further inquiry, we came to know that after you had
been taken, lost, and retaken, I know not how many times, you were carried to
Prison, in the great Tower. We waylaid your Officers, and by good-Fortune,
through more apparent than real, met, attacked, beat and put them to Flight;
but we could not learn, even of the Wounded whom we took, what was become of
you; until this Morning word was brought us, that you your self had blindly
secured your self in Prison. Colignac is wounded in several places, but very
slightly. After all, we have just now taken order, that you be lodged in the
fairest Chamber that is here: Seeing you love an open Air, we have caused to be
furnished a little Appartment for you alone in the top of the great Tower, the
Terrass whereof will serve you for a Balcony; your eyes, at least will be at
Liberty, in spite of the Body they are fastened to. Ha! my Dear Dyrcona, cried
the Count speaking next; we were unfortunate we did not take you along with us,
when we parted from Colignac: My Heart by an unaccountable Sadness, that I
could give no reason for, presaged some terrible Disaster; but it matters not,
I have Friends, thou art Innocent, and let the worst come to the worst, I know
what it is to dye Gloriously. One thing only puts me in despair. The Villain on
whom I resolved to try the first stroke of my Revenge, (you well conceive I
speak of my Curate) is now out of condition of feeling it; the wretch is dead,
and I Will tell you the particulars of his death: He was running with his Man to
drive your Horse into his Stable, when the Nagg with a fidelity heightened
perhaps, by the secret notices of his Instinct, falling into a sudden Fury,
began to winse and kick; but with so much rage and success, that with three
kicks of his heels he made Vacant the Benefice of that Bufflehead. Without
doubt you cannot conceive the Reasons of that Fools hatred, but I Will discover
them to you: Know then that I may trace the matter a little backward, that that
Godly man, a Norman by Nation, and a litigious Knave by Trade, who for the
Money of Pilgrims officiated in a forsaken Chapel, commenced an Action of
Devolution against the Curate of Colignac; and maugre all my endeavors to
maintain the Possessor in his right, so wheadled the Judges, that at length in
spite of us, he was made our Pastor.

At the end of the first year, he went to Law with me also, pretending that I
should pay him Tithes: It was to no purpose to tell him, that time out of mind
my Lands were free; he went on still with his Suit, which he lost. But during
the Process, he started so many Cases, that Twenty other Suits have sprung from
them, which now are at a stand; thanks to the good Horse whose Foot was harder
than Mass-Johns Head. This is all that I can conjecture of the Vertigo of our
Pastor. But it is wonderful with how much foresight he managed his Rage: I am
lately assured, that having got into his Head the accursed design of your
Imprisonment, he had secretly exchanged his Living of Colignac, for another
Living in his own Country, whither he intended to retreat so soon as you should
be taken: Nay his own Man has said, that seeing your Horse near his Stable, he
had heard him mutter, That the Beast would carry him into a place, where they
could not reach him.

After this Discourse, Colignac admonished me to mistrust the Offers and Visit,
that perhaps might be rendered me by a very powerful Person, whom he named; that
it was by his Credit, that Mass-John had gained the Cause of Devolution; and
that that Person of Quality, had solicited the Affair for him in recompense of
the Services, which that good Priest had rendered his Son, when he bore a small
Office in the College. Now, continued Colignac, seeing it is very hard to be
at Law without Rancor, and without a tincture of Enmity, that remains indelible
in the mind; though we have been made Friends, he has ever since sought
occasions secretly to cross me: But it matters not, I have more Relations of
the long Robe than he has, and a great many Friends, or if it come to the
worst, we can procure the King to interpose his Authority in the Affair.

When Colignac had made an end, they both endeavored to Comfort me; but it was
by such tender Testimonies of Sorrow, that my own Grief was thereby increased.

In the mean while my Jailer came back, and told us that the Chamber was ready.
Come let us go see it, answered Cussan; and with that he went first, and we
followed him: I found it in very good Order: I want nothing, said I to them,
unless it be a few Books. Colignac promised to fend me next day, as many as I
should give him a Catalogue of. When we had well considered and found by the
height of my Tower, the largeness of the Ditches that environed it, and by all
the Circumstances of my Apartment, that to escape was an enterprise above
humane reach; my Friends looking on one another, and then casting their Eyes on
me, fell a weeping. But as if all of a sudden our Grief had softened the Anger
of Heaven, an unexpected Joy took possession of my Soul; Joy brought Hope, and
Hope secret Illuminations, wherewith my Reason was so dazzled, that with an
unvoluntary Transport, which seemed ridiculous to my self: Go, said I to them,
go expect me at Colignac; I shall be there within these three days; and send me
all the Mathematical Instruments wherewith I usually work: In short, you will find
in a large Box, a great many pieces of Crystal cut into several Figures, be
sure not to forget them; however, it will be sooner done, if I set down what
things I need in a Memorandum.

They took the Note I gave them, being unable to dive into my design; and then
departed.

From the time they were gone, I did nothing but ruminate upon the Execution of
the things I had premeditated, and I was thinking on them next day, when all
that I had set down in my Catalogue was brought me from them: One of Colignac's
Valets de Chamber told me, that his Master had not been seen since the day
before; and that they could not tell, what was become of him. I was not at all
troubled at that Accident, because it presently came into my mind that possibly
he might be gone to Court to solicit my Liberty: And therefore without being
surprised at it, I put hand to work; for the space of eight days, I hewed,
plained and glewed, at length I framed the Machine, that I am about to describe
to you.

It was a large very light Box, that shut tight and close; of about six Foot
high, and three Foot Square. This Box had a hole in it below; and over the
Cover, which had likewise a hole in it, I placed a Vessel of Crystal, bored
through in the same manner, made in a Globular Figure, but very large, the
Orifice whereof joined exactly to and was enchaced, in the hole I had made in
the head.

The Vessel was purposely made with many Angles, and in form of an Icosaedron,
to the end that every Facet being unequal and concave, my Boul might produce the
effect of a Burning-Glass.

The Jailer, and his Turn-keys never came up to my Chamber, but they found me
employed in this work; but they were not at all surprised at it, because of the
many Mechanic Knacks which they met with in my Chamber, whereof I told them I
was the Inventor: Amongst others there was a Wind-Clock, an Artificial Eye,
wherewith one might see by night; and a Sphere wherein all the Stars followed
the regular motion that they have in the Heavens: By these things they were
persuaded, that the Machine I was a making, was a Curiosity of the like Nature;
and besides the Money wherewith Colignac greased their fists, made them go fair
and soft. Now it was about nine in the Morning; my Keeper was gone down, and
the Sky was hazy, when I placed this Machine on the top of my Tower, that is to
say, on the openest place of my Terrass walk: It shut so close, that a grain of
Air could not enter it, except by the two openings; and I had placed a little
very light Board within for my self to sit upon.

Things being ordered in this manner, I shut my self in, and waited there
almost an hour, expecting what it might please Fortune to do with me.

When the Sun breaking out from under the Clouds, began to shine upon my
Machine, that transparent Icosaedron, which through its Facets received the
Treasures of the Sun, diffused by it is Orifice the light of them into my Cell;
and seeing that splendour grew fainter, because of the Beams that could not
reach me, without many Refractions, that tempered vigor of light converted my
Case into a little Purple Firmament, enameled with Gold.

With ecstasy I admired the Beauty of such a mixture of Colors; when all of a
sudden I found my Bowels to move in the same manner, as one finds them that is
tossed in a swing.

I was about to open my Wicket, to know the cause of that emotion; but as I was
stretching out my Hand, through the hole of the Floor of my Box, I perceived my
Tower already very low beneath me; and my little Castle in the Air, pushing my
Feet upwards, in a trice showed me Thoulouse sinking into the Earth. That
Prodigy surprised me; not at all by reason of so sudden a soaring, but because
of that dreadful transport of Humane Reason, at the Success of a design, which
even frightened me in the Project. The rest did not at all Startle me; for I
foresaw very well, that the Vacuity that would happen in the Icosaedron, by
reason of the Sunbeams, united by the concave Glasses, would, to fill up the
space, attract a great abundance of Air, whereby my Box would be carried up;
and that proportionably as I mounted, the rushing wind that should force it
through the Hole, could not rise to the roof, but that furiously penetrating
the Machine, it must needs force it up on high. Though my design was very
cautiously projected, yet I was mistaken in one circumstance; because I was not
confident enough of my Glasses. I had prepared round my Box a little Sail,
easy to be turned, with a Line that passed through the Orifice of the Vessel;
and which I held by the end; I had fancied to my self, that when I should be in
the Air, I might thus make use of as much wind, as might serve to convey me to
Colignac: But in the twinkling of an Eye, the Sun which beat perpendicularly,
and obliquely upon the Burning-Glasses of the Icosaedron, hoisted me up so
high, that I lost sight of Thoulouse. That made me let go my sheet, and soon
after I perceived through one of the Glasses, which I had put in the four sides
of the Machine, my Sail flying in the Air, and tossed to and fro by a
Whirlwind that had got within it.

I remember, that in less than an hour I was got above the Middle Region; and I
soon perceived it, because I saw it hail and rain below me: It may be asked,
perhaps, whence then came that wind (without which my Box could not mount) in a
story in the Sky exempt from Meteors; but provided I may have a hearing, I Will
answer that Objection. I have told you, that the Sun which beat vigorously upon
my Concave Glasses, uniting his Rays in the middle of the Vessel, by his heat
drove out the Air it was full of through the upper Conduit; and that so the
Vessel being void, Nature, which abhors Vacuity, made it suck in, by the
opening below, other Air to fill it again: If it lost much, it regained as
much; and so one is not to wonder, that in a Region above the middle where the
winds are, I continued to mount up; because the Ether became wind, by the
furious Rapidity wherewith it forced in to hinder a Vacuity, and by consequence
ought incessantly push up my Machine.

I felt little or no Hunger, except when I passed that Middle Region of the
Air; for in reality the coldness of the Climate, made me see it at a distance:
I say at a distance, because a Bottle of Spirits which I carried always about
me, whereof I now and then took a dram, kept it from approaching me.

During the rest of my Voyage, I felt not the least touch of it; on the
contrary the more I advanced toward that enflamed World, the stronger I found
my self. I selt my Face to be a little hotter and more gay than ordinary; my
Hands appeared to be of an agreeable Vermilion Color, and I know not what
Gladness mingled with my Blood, which put me beyond my self.

I remember, that reflecting once on this Adventure, I reasoned thus with my
self. Hunger without doubt cannot reach me, because that pain being but an
Instinct of Nature, which prompts Animals to repair by Nourishment, what they
lose of their Substance: At present when she finds, that the Sun by his pure,
continual and neighboring Irradiation, stocks me with more natural Heat than I
lose; she gives me no more that Desire, which would be useless. Nevertheless I
objected against those Reasons, that seeing the Temperament which makes Life,
consisted not only in natural Heat, but also in radical Moisture, on which that
heat is to feed, as the Flame in the Oil of a Lamp: The sole Rays of that vital
Fire, could not make Life; unless they encountered some unctuous Matter that
should fix them. But I presently overcame that difficulty, when I had observed,
that in our Bodies the radical Moisture and natural Heat are but one, and the
self same thing; for that which is called Moisture, whether in Animals or in
the Sun, that great Soul of the World, is but a flux of Sparkles; more
continuous because of their Mobility; and that which we name Heat, a Concourse
of Atoms of Fire, which appear looser because of their interruption; but
though the radical Moisture and natural Heat were two distinct things, yet it
is certain, that the Moisture would not be necessary for living so near the
Sun; for seeing that Humidity in living Creatures, serves only to detain the
heat, which would exhale too fast, and could not be restored so soon; I was in
no danger of wanting it, in a Region whereof these little Bodies of Flame which
constitute Life, more of it was united to my Being, then separated from it.

There Is another thing that may be wondered at; and that is, why the approaches
of that burning Globe consumed me not, for I was already got almost within the
full Activity of its sphere; but I have a reason at hand for that. To speak
properly, it is not the Fire it self that burns, but a grosser matter, tossed
to and fro by the dartings out of it is moveable Nature; and that Powder of
little Sparks, which I call Fire, moveable of it self, owes, possibly, all it is
Action to the Roundness of it is Atoms; for they tickle, warm, or burn,
according to the Figure of the Bodies, which they draw along with them. So
Straw sends not forth so burning a Flame as Wood does; Wood burns with less
violence than Iron; and the Reason of this is, because the Fire of Iron, of
Wood, and of Straw, though in it self it be the same Fire, yet it acts
variously, according to the diversity of the Bodies that it moves: And therefore
in Straw, the Fire (that spiritual Dust, as it were,) being entangled only with
a soft Body, is less corrosive: In Wood, whose substance is more compact, it
enters more hardly; and in Iron, the Mass whereof is almost wholely solid, and
knit together by Angular Particles, it penetrates and consumes in a trice
whatsoever it touches. These Observations being also familiar, no Body will
wonder, that I approached the Sun without being burnt; seeing that which burns
is not the Fire, but the matter to which it is joined, and that the Fire of the
Sun, cannot be mingled with any matter. Don't we even find by experience, that
Joy which is a Fire, because it only moves an Aerial Blood, whose subtle
Particles beat gently against the Membranes of our Flesh, tickles and produces
I know not what blind Pleasure; and that that Pleasure, or rather that first
Progress of Pain, advances not so far as to threaten the Animal with Death; but
only to make him sensible, that Desire causes a Motion in our Spirits, which we
call Joy. Not but that a Fever, though it have quite contrary Symptoms, is a
Fire as well as Joy; but it is a Fire, wrapped up in a Body of Horned
Particles, such as the Atra bilis or Melancholy, which darting out his hooked
Points, in all parts where its movable Nature carries it, pierces, cuts,
excoriates, and by that violent Agitation, produces that which is called the
Heat of a Fever; but this Concatenation of Proofs is useless; the most vulgar
Experiments are sufficient to convince the obstinate. I have no time to lose, I
must look to my self: I am like Phaeton in the middle of a Career, where I
cannot turn back again; and wherein if I make but one false step, all Nature is
not able to save me.

I perceived most distinctly, what heretofore I suspected, when I went up to
the Moon; that, indeed, it is the Earth that moves from East to West about the
Sun, and not the Sun about it: For I saw next to France, the Foot of the Boot
of Italy, then the Mediterranean-Sea, then Greece, then the Bosphorus, the
Euxin-Sea, Persia, the Indies, China, and at length Japan, pass successively
over against the hole of my Lodging; and some Hours after my Elevation, all the
South Sea having turned, gave way to the Continent of America. I clearly
distinguished all these Revolutions; nay, and I remember that a long time
after, I saw Europe mount once more again upon the Scene; but I could not now
observe the separate States thereof, because I was exalted too high. I left by
the way, sometimes on the right, and sometimes on the left, several Earths like
ours, where if I touched the least upon the Spheres of their Activity, I found
my self incline side-ways: However, the rapid force of my soaring Flight,
surmounted the Power of these Attractions.

I coasted by the Moon, which at that time was got betwixt the Sun and the
Earth, and I left Venus on my right hand. But now I am speaking of that Star,
the old Astronomy has so long preached, that the Planets are Stars which turn
round the Earth, that the Modern dares not make a doubt of it: And
nevertheless, I observed, that during the whole time, that Venus appeared on
this side the Sun, about which she turns, I saw her always Crescent; but
finishing her course, I observed that as she past gradually behind him, the
Horns drew nearer, and her Black Belly was guilt again. Now this vicissitude of
Light and Darkness, makes it very evident, That the Planets are like the Moon
and the Earth, Globes without Light, capable only to reflect that which they
borrow.

The Truth is, as I still mounted, I made the same Observation of Mercury. I
observed besides, that all these Worlds have other little Worlds also which
move about them. Musing afterward on the Causes of the Construction of this
great Universe, I imagined that at the clearing of the Chaos, after that God
had created the Matter, Bodies of the like Nature joined together, by that
Principle of unaccountable Love, by which we see by Experience that every thing
covets its like; Particles formed after a certain Fashion assembled together,
and that made Air: Others again, to which the shape gave a circular Motion, by
clinging fast together, composed the Globes that are called Stars, which not
only, because of that Inclination of whirling about upon their Poles, to which
their Figure determines them, ought to truss together into a Round as we see
them; but ought in the same manner, as they evaporated from the Mass, and kept
a Parallel March in their flight, make the lesser Orbs, which they met in the
Sphere of their Activity, to turn: And therefore Mercury, Venus, the Earth,
Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, have been constrained to whirlegig it, and move both
at once about the Sun. Not but that one may imagine, that heretofore all those
other Globes have been Suns, since the Earth still retains in spite of its
present Extinction, heat enough to make the Moon turn about it, by the circular
motion of the Bodies, which are detached from its Mass, and that Jupiter
retains enough to make four to turn: But these Suns by the length of time, have
sustained so considerable a loss of Light and Fire, by the continual Emission
of the little Bodies, which make Heat and Light; that they remain no more but a
cold, dark, and almost unactive Caput Mortuum. Nay, we discover that these
spots which are in the Sun, and were not perceived by the Ancients, daily
increase: Now, who can tell but that it is a Crust formed in its Superfice,
it is Mass that extinguishes proportionably as the Light leaves it; and if it
become not, when all these moveable Bodies have abandoned it, an obscure Body
like the Earth? There are very distant Ages, beyond which there appears no
Vestige of Mankind: perhaps heretofore, the Earth was a Sun peopled with
Animals, proportioned to the Climate that produces them; and perhaps these
Animals, were the Demons of whom Antiquity relates so many Instances. Why not?
Is it not possible, that these Animals after the Extinction of the Earth, have
still lived there for some time, and that the Alteration of their Globe, had
not as yet destroyed all their Race? In effect, their life continued until the
time of Augustus, according to the Testimony of Plutarch. It would even seem,
that the prophetic and sacred Testament of our Primitive Patriarchs, designed
to lead us by the Hand to that truth. For we read in it of the Revolt of
Angels, before mention is made of Man. Is not that Sequel of time, which the
Scripture observes, half of a Proof in a manner, that Angels inhabited the
Earth before us? And that these proud Blades, who had lived in out World,
whilst it was a Sun, disdaining, perhaps, since it was extinct, to abide any
longer in it, and knowing that God had placed his Throne in the Sun, had the
boldness to adventure to invade it? But God who resolved to punish their
Audacity, banished them even from the Earth, and created Man less perfect, but
by consequence less proud, to possess their vacant Habitations.

About the end of four Months Voyage, at least as near as one can reckon, when
there is no Night to distinguish the Day; I came upon the Coast of one of those
little Earths that wheel about the Sun, which the Mathematicians call Spots;
where by reason that Clouds interposed, my Glasses now not uniting so much
heat, and by consequence the Air not pushing my Shed with so much Force, what
remained of the Wind could do no more, but bear up my fall, and let me down
upon the top of a very high Mountain, to which I gently descended.

I leave it to you to consider what Joy I felt, when I saw my Feet upon firm
Ground, after I had so long acted the part of a Fowl. Words, indeed, are too
weak to express the Ecstasy of Gladness I found my self in; when, at length, I
perceived my Head Crowned with the Brightness of the Heavens. However, I was
not so far transported yet with that Ecstasy, but that I thought of getting out
of my Box, and of covering the Capital thereof with my Shirt before I left it;
because I was apprehensive, that if the Air becoming Serene, the Sun should
again kindle my Glasses, as it was likely enough, I might find my House no more.

By Gullies which seemed hollowed by the fall of Water, I descended into the
Plain, where because of the thick Mud, that fatned the Earth, I had much ado to
go: However, having advanced a little way, I arrived in a great Bottom, where I
rencountred a little Man stark-naked, sitting and resting himself upon a Stone.
I cannot call to mind whether I spoke to him first, or if it was he that put
the Question to me: But it is as fresh in my Memory, as if I heard him still,
that he discoursed to me three long Hours in a Language, which I knew very well
I had never heard before, and which has not the least resemblance with any of
the Languages in this World; notwithstanding I comprehended it faster, and more
intelligibly than my Mother Tongue. He told me, when I made enquiry about so
wonderful a thing, that in Sciences there was a true, without which one was
always far from the easy; that the more an Idiom was distant from this truth,
the more it came short of the Conception, and was less easy to be understood.
In the same manner, continued he, in Music one never finds this true; but that
the Soul immediately rises, and blindly aspires after it. We see it not, but we
feel that Nature sees it; and without being able to conceive, in what manner we
are swallowed up by it, it still ravishes us, tho we cannot observe where it
is. It Is the very same with Languages; he who hits upon that verity of Letters,
Words, and Order in expressing himself, can never fall below his thought, he
speaks always with congruity to his Conception; and it is because you are
ignorant of this perfect Idiom, that you are at a stand, not knowing the Order,
nor the Words, which might explain what you imagine. I told him, that the first
Man of our World, had undoubtedly made use of that Language, because the
several Names which he gave to several things, declared their Essence. He
interrupted me, and went on. It is not absolutely necessary, for expressing all
the mind conceives, but without it we cannot be understood of all. Seeing this
Idiom is the Instinct or Voice of Nature; it ought to be intelligible to all
that live under the Jurisdiction of Nature: And therefore if you understood it,
you might Discourse and Communicate all your thoughts to Beasts, and the Beasts
theirs to you; because it is the very Language of Nature, whereby she makes her
self to be understood by all Living Creatures.

Be no more surprised, then, at the faoility wherewith you understand the
meaning of a Language, which never sounded before in your Ear. When I speak,
your Soul finds in every Word of mine, that Truth which it gropes after; and
though her Reason understand it not, yet she has Nature with her that cannot
fail to understand it.

Ha! without doubt, cried I, it was by the means of that Emphatick Idiom, that
our first Father heretofore conversed with Animals, and was by them understood;
for seeing the Dominion over all the kinds of them, was given to him, they
obeyed him, because he commanded in a Language that was known to them; and it
is for that Reason also, that (this Original Language being lost) they come not
at present, when they are called, as heretofore they did, seeing now they do
not understand us.

The little Man seemed as if he had no mind to answer me; but resuming his
discourse, he was about to go on, if I had not once again interrupted him. I
asked him, then, what World it was that we breathed in, if it was much
inhabited; and what kind of Government they lived under? I am going, replied
he, to discover Secrets to you, which are not known in your Climate.

Consider well the Ground whereon we go; it is not long, since it was an
indigested disorderly Mass, a Chaos of confused Matter, a black and glewy
Filth, whereof the Sun had purged it self: Now after that by the force of the
rays, which the Sun darted against it, he mingled, pressed, and compacted those
numerous Clouds of Atoms: After, I say, that by a long and powerful Coction,
he separated the more contrary, and reverted the more similary parts of this
Bowl; the Mass pierced through with heat sweat so, that it made a Deluge, which
covered it above Forty days; for so much Water required no less time, to ^ll
down into the more declining and lower Regions of our Globe.

The Liquor of these Torrents being assembled, formed the Sea, which by its
Salt makes it still apparent, that it must needs be a conflux of Sweat; all
sweat being Salt. When the Waters were retired, a fat and fertile Mud remained
upon the Earth: Now when the Sun shone out, there arose a kind of a Tumor or
Wheal, which could not, because of the Cold, thrust out its bud: It therefore
received another coction; and that coction still rectifying and perfecting it
by a more exact mixture, it sent forth a Sprout; endowed then only with
Vegetation, but capable of Sense: But because the Waters, which had so long
stood upon the slime, had too much chilled it, the swelling broke not; so that
the Sun recocted it once more; and after a third Digestion, that Matrix being
so thoroughly heated, that the Cold brought forth a Man; who has retained in
the Liver, which is the seat of the vegetative Soul, and the place of the first
Concoction, the power of Growing; in the Heart, which is the seat of Activity,
and the place of second Concoction, the vital Power; and in the Brain, which is
the seat of the Intellectual, and the place of the third Concoction, the power
of Reasoning: Otherwise, why should we be longer in the Womb of our Mothers,
than the rest of Animals, unless it be that our Embryo receives three distinct
Concoctions, for forming the three distinct Faculties of our Soul; and the
Beasts only two, for forming their two Powers? I know that the Horse is not
completed in the Belly of the Mare, before the tenth, twelsth, or fourteenth
Month: But seeing he is of a Constitution, so contrary to that which makes us
men, that he never has Life but in Months, which are observed to be fatal to
ours, when we remain in the Womb beyond the natural Course; it is no wonder,
that Nature needs another period of time for delivering a Mare, than that which
brings a Woman to Bed. It is so; but in fine, some body may say, The Horse
remains longer than we in the Belly of his Mother; and by consequence he
receives there, either more perfect, or more numerous Coctions: I answer, that
it follows not; for, not to rely upon the Observations, that so many Learned
men have made upon the Energy of numbers, when they prove, That all Matter
being in motion, some Beings are completed in a certain Revolution of days,
which are destroyed in another; nor yet to lay any great stress, upon the
Arguments they deduce, from the Cause of all these motions, to prove that the
number Nine is the most perfect; I shall content my self with this answer, That
the Bud of man being hotter, the Sun interferes and compleats more Organs in
the space of nine Months, than he has rough-hew'n in a Colt during a whole
year. Now it is not to be doubted, but that a Horse is a great deal colder than
a Man; seeing that Beast never dies, but of a Swelling of the Spleen, or other
Diseases that proceed from Melancholy. Nevertheless, you will tell me, there is no
man in our World engendered of Mud, and produced in that manner: I believe it,
your World at present is overheated; for so soon as the Sun draws a sprout out
of the Earth, finding none of that cold Humidity, or to say better, that
certain Period of completed Motion, which obliges it to several Coctions, it
turns it presently into a Vegetable; or if it make two Coctions, seeing the
second has not time enough to receive perfection in, it only engenders an
Insect. And it is a Remark that I have made also, That the Ape, which, as we,
carrys it is young almost nine Months, resembles us in so many Humors, that not
a few Naturalists have ranked us in the same Species; and the reason is, that
their Seed being of a temper, much like ours, has during that time, had almost
the leisure to perfect those three Digestions.

You Will undoubtedly ask me, of whom I have the Story, that now I have told you;
you will tell me, that I could not have had it from those that were not in being:
It Is true, I am the only person that has hit upon it, and by consequence I can
give no Vouchers for it, because it is a thing that happened before I was born;
that is likewise true: But take this along with you also, That in a Kegion
bordering upon the Sun, as ours does, the Souls full of Fire are more
illuminated, more subtle, and more penetrant, than those of other Animals in
remoter Spheres. Now seeing even in your World, there have been Prophets
heretofore, whose minds, heightened by a vigorous Inspiration, have had
Foreknowledge of future things; it is not impossible, but that in this, which
is far nearer the Sun, and by consequence more luminous than yours, a strong
Genius may have some smelling of what is past; that his active Reason may move
as well backwards, as forwards, and that it may be able to attain to the Cause
by the Effects, seeing it can reach the Effects by the Cause.

Thus he ended his Philosophical Disscourse; but after a more particular
Conserence, that we had, about very deep Secrets, which he revealed to me; part
whereof I Will conceal, and of which the rest has escaped me; he told me, That it
was not as yet three Weeks, since a clod of Earth, impregnated by the Sun, was
brought to Bed of him. Consider that Tumor attentively. Then he made me
observe, I know not what Swelling upon the Mud, not unlike to a Molehill:
That, says he, is an Apostume, or to say better, a Matrix, which for these Nine
Months past, has contained the Embryo of one of my Brothers. I wait here, on
design to play the part of a Midwife to it.

He would have gone on, had he not perceived a Palpitation of the Earth, about
that Swelling of Clay. That with the bigness of the Tumor, made him conclude,
that the Earth was in Labor, and that that Shake, was already the effort of
the Pangs of Travel. He thereupon immediately left me, that he might run to it;
and for my part, I went to look for my Lodge.

I therefore clambered up again the Mountain, I had come down from, and was
very weary before I got to the top of it. You may imagine what trouble I was
in, when I did not find my House, where I had left it. I began to lament the
loss of it, when I perceived it, skipping and vaulting at a great distance; I
ran thither, as fast as my Legs could carry me, till I was out of Breath again;
and really, it was an agreeable Diversion, to behold that new way of Coursing;
for sometimes, when I had almost my Hand upon it, a new increase of Heat, got
into the Glass-Ball, which attracting the Air with more force, and that Air
raising my Box up above my reach, made me leap after it, as a Cat does to a
Hook, where it sees a Hare hanging. Had not my Shirt been upon the Capital, to
resist the force of the Glasses, it would have made the Voyage by it self alone.

But to what purpose is it, to call to mind an Accident that I cannot think on,
but with the same Grief, that I felt at that time! It Is enough to know, that it
bounded, rolled, and flew so long; and that I jumped, run, and skipped so much,
that at length, I saw it fall down, at the Foot of a very high Hill. It had
perhaps led me a Dance, a great deal farther, had not that lofty Swelling of
the Earth, by its shade, that blackned the Sky, to a large distance upon the
Plain, spread forth a Night of half a Leagues Circumference: For falling into
that Darkness, the Glass thereof no sooner felt the Cool, but that no more
Vacuity was engendered in it, no more Wind through the Hole, and by consequence,
no more Impulsion to support it; so that it tumbled down, and would have broken
into a Thousand shivers, had not by good luck, a Pond of Water, into which it
fell, yielded under the weight. I drew it out of the Water, repaired what was
bruised; and then having taken fast hold of it in my Arms, carried it to the
top of a little Hill, hard by. There I took my Shirt off on it; but I could not
put it on, because my Glasses beginning to work their effect, I perceived my
Castle already wagging to be gone. I had no more time left, but suddenly to get
in, where I shut my self up as at first.

The Sphere of our World, appeared to me as a Planet, much about the bigness of
the Moon, as she appears to us: Nay, it grew less and less, still
proportionably as I ascended, infomuch that it became a Star, then a Spark, and
then nothing at all; for that luminous Point grew so sharp, that it might equal
that, which terminates the last Ray of my sight; that at length it was
swallowed up in the common color of the Heavens. Some perhaps may wonder, that
during so long a Voyage, I was not overtaken with Sleep; but seeing Sleep is
only produced by the gentle Exhalation of the Victuals, which evaporate from
the Stomach to the Brain, or by a Necessity that Nature finds of locking up our
Soul, that during Repose, she may recover as many Spirits, as have been spent
in Exercise: I had no mind to Sleep, since I did not Eat, and that the Sun
supplied me, with more radical Heat, than I consumed. In the mean while, my
Elevation continued, and proportionably, as it brought me nearer to that
enflamed World, I felt a certain Joy diffuse it self through my Blood, which
rectified it, and advanced to my very Soul. Ever now and then I looked upwards,
that I might admire the Vivacity of the Luster, that rayed into my little
Chrystal-House; and it is fresh in my Memory still, that at the time I put my
Eye to the Orifice of the Vessel, behold, with a sudden start, I felt something
heavy, that fled from all the parts of my Body. A whirling Cloud of very thick,
and, in a manner, palpable Smoke, choked my Glass with Darkness; and when I
stood up to contemplate that Obscurity, which blinded me, I saw no more,
neither Vessel, nor Burning Glasses, Glass-Window, nor Covering to my Shed: I
looked down, then, with Design to see what made my Masterpiece thus fall to
ruin; but in place of it, and of the four Sides and Floor, I found nothing but
the Heavens round about me. I was frightened beyond measure, when I found, as if
the Air had been petrified, I know not what invisible Obstacle, which forced
back my Arms, when I thought to stretch them forth. It came then into my
Imagination, that mounting so high, I had without doubt got into the Firmament,
which some Philosophers and Astronomers have maintained to be solid. I began to
fear, I should remain studded in there; but the Horror that the oddness of
that Accident cast me into, was exceedingly increased by those that followed:
For my sight, that rambled here and there, falling by chance upon my Breast,
instead of stopping at the Surface of my Body, went quite through; then a
moment after, I thought I saw behind me, and almost without any interval, as if
my Body had been no more but an Organ of sight: I perceived that my Flesh,
being cleansed from its Opacity, transferred Objects to my Eyes, and my Eyes
Objects through it. At length, having above a Thousand times knocked against the
Roof, Floor, and Walls of my Chair-volant, without being able to see it; I
found, that through a secret Necessity of the Light in its source, my Shed and
I were both become transparent. Not but that I ought to have perceived it,
though Diaphanous, seeing we very well perceive Glass, Crystal, and Diamonds
that are so; but I fancy that the Sun, in a Region so near himself, purges
Bodies more perfectly from their Opacity, by ranking more straightly the
imperceptible Pores of the Matter, than in our World; where his Force, worn out
almost by so long a passage, is hardly able to transfuse his Luster into
precious Stones: However, by reason of the internal Smoothness of their
Surfaces, he makes them reflect through their Glasses, as through little Eyes,
either the Green of Emeralds, the Scarlet of Rubies, or the Violet of
Amethysts, according as the different Pores of the Stone, either more straight
or more winding, extinguish or rekindle that weak Light, by a great many
Reflections. One difficulty may puzzle the Reader, to wit, How I could see my
self, and not my House, seeing I was become Diaphanous, as well as it? I
answer, That without doubt the Sun acts otherwise upon animate, than upon
inanimate Bodies; because no part neither of my Flesh, Bones nor Entrails, though
transparent, had lost its Natural Color; on the contrary, my Lungs under an
incarnate Red, still retained their delicate Softness: My Heart still
Vermilion, gently moved with its Systole, and Diastole: My Liver seemed to burn
in a Purple Red, and boiling the Air which I breathed, continued the
Circulation of the Blood: In short, I saw, touched, and felt my self to be the
same, and nevertheless I was not so.

Whilst I was considering this Metamorphosis, my Voyage grew shorter and
shorter still, but with a great deal of slowness then, by reason of the
Serenity of the Ether, which was rarefied proportionably, as I drew nearer the
source of Day; for seeing the matter in that Region is very thin, because of
the great Vacuity it is full of, and that by consequence that Matter is very
lazy, by reason of the Vacuity that has no Action, that Air passing through the
hole of my Box, could not produce but a little Wind, hardly able to support it.

I never reflected upon the Malicious Capriciousness of Fortune, which always
so obstinatly opposed the Success of my undertaking, but I wonder my brains did
not turn. But listen to a Miracle, which future Ages will hardly be inclined to
believe.

Being shut up in a Box as clear as day, that I had just lost sight of, and my
flight flagging so, that I had much ado not to fall; in a word, being in a
condition, that all that is contained in the great Fabric of the World, was
unable to assist me; I found my self reduced to the Period of extreme
Misfortune: Nevertheless, as when we are expiring, we find an internal Impulse
in us, to embrace those who have given us a Being; I lifted up my Eyes to the
Sun, our common Father. That ardour of Will, not only supported my Body, but
also raised it up toward the thing, which it aspired to embrace. My Body
pushed forwards my Box, and in that manner I continued my Vovage. So soon as I
perceived this, more intensly than ever, I plied all the faculties of my Soul,
to raise my Imagination toward that which attracted me; but my head being
loaded with my Shed, against the upper part whereof, the Efforts of my Will
pusht it, whether I would or not, that did so incommode me, that at length so
much weight, forced me to grope for the place of its invisible Door. By good
fortune I found it, and having opened it, threw my self out: But that natural
Apprehension of falling, which all Animals have, when they find nothing to
support them, made me briskly stretch forth my Arm, that I might take hold of
somewhat: I had no other Guide but Nature, which stands not upon Reasoning; and
therefore Fortune, her Enemy, maliciously forced my hand upon the Capital of
Crystal. Alas! what Thunderclap to my Ears, was the sound of the Icosaedron,
which to my hearing broke in pieces! Such a Disorder, Misfortune, and Fright
are beyond all expressions! The Glasses attracted no more Air, for no more
Vacuity was made; the Air became no more wind, by its hastening to fill it, and
the wind ceased to carry my Box on high: In short, immediately after that
wrack, I saw it long a falling through those vast plains of the World. It
recontracted in the same Region, the dark Opacity which it had exhaled; in
respect that the energetick Virtue of the Light, ceasing in that place, it
greedily united again to the obscure Thickness, which was in a manner essential
to it; in the same manner as Spirits, long after their Separation, have been
seen to come in search of their Bodies, and that they might rejoyn them, to
wander for the space of an hundred years about their Graves. I fancy it lost in
this manner its Transparency, for I have seen it since in Poland, in the same
condition it was in, when first I entered it. Now I have been informed, that it
fell under the Equinoctial Line, in the Kingdom of Borneo; that a Portuguess
Merchant bought it of the Islander that found it, and that from hand to hand,
it fell into the possession of that Polish Engineer, who makes use of it at
present to fly with.

Thus, then, hanging in the open space of the Heavens, and terrified already by
the Death, which my fall threatened me with, I turned, as I told you, my sad
eyes toward the Sun: My Sight carried my thought thither, and my Looks being
fixed upon his Globe, marked out a way which my Will followed, to transport my
Body to the same place.

That vigorous Launching out of my Soul, will not be incomprehensible to any,
that will but consider, the simple Efforts of our Will; as, for Instance, It is
very well known, that when I have a mind to leap, my Will being excited by my
Fancy, raises the whole Microcosm, and endeavors to transport it to the mark,
that it proposed to it self. If it attain not always to it, it is because that
the Universal Principles of Nature prevail over the Particullar; and that the
Power of Willing being particular to sensitive Beings; and that of falling to
the Center, proper to all things, mater^ in general; my Leap is forced to
cease, so soon as the Mass of my Body, having overcome the Insolence of the
Will, that surprised it, draws near the Point to which it tends.

I shall wave what else happened to me, during the rest of my Voyage, lest I
should be as long in relating, as I was in making it: I Will only tell you in
general, that at the end of 22. Months, I at length happily arrived at the
great plains of Day.

That Land looks like flakes of burning Snow, so luminous it is; nevertheless
it is a thing pretty incredible, that I could never comprehend, after that my
Box fell, whether I mounted up, or descended toward the Sun. I only remember,
when I arrived there, that I walked lightly; I touched only the Ground in a
point, and I often rolled like a Bowl, finding it alike commodious, to walk
either upon my Head or Feet. Though sometimes my Feet were toward Heaven, and
my Shoulders toward the Earth; yet in that posture, I found my self as
naturally situated, as if my Feet had been toward the Earth, and my Shoulders
toward Heaven. Upon what part soever of my Body I placed my self, whether upon
my Belly, or Back, on Elbow or Ear, I found my self standing. By that I knew,
that the Sun is a World, which has no Center; and that as I was far enough
from the active Sphere of ours, and of all the others which I met; so by
consequence, it was impossible, that I should still be ponderous, seeing Weight
is nothing else, but an Attraction of the Center, within the Sphere of its
Activity.

The Respect, wherewith I printed my steps upon that Luminous Plain, suspended
for some time, the eager Desire I had to advance on my Journey. I was all
ashamed to walk upon the Day: Nay, and my astonished Body, desiring to rely
upon mine Eyes; and that transparent Ground, which they pierced, not being able
to support them; my Instinct in spite of me, now become Master of my thought,
hurried it into the Abyss of a bottomless Light. My Reason nevertheless, by
degrees undeceived my Instinct; I walked confidently, and without trembling
upon the Plain, and directed my steps so boldly, that if Men could have
perceived me from their World, they would have taken me for some Power marching
upon the Clouds. Having, as I think, traveled about fifteen days time, I came
into a Country of the Sun, not so resplendent as those I had left. I found my
self transported with Joy, and I imagined, that undoubtedly that Joy proceeded
from a secret Sympathy, which my Being still retained with its Opacity.
Nevertheless, the knowledge I had of this, made me not desist from my
Enterprise; for then I was like to those sleepy Old men, who though they know
that sleep is hurtful to them, and that they have ordered their Servants, to
snatch them out of it is Clutches, are nevertheless very angry when they awaken
them. In like manner, though my Body growing obscure, as I reached the darker
Provinces, recontracted the weaknesses, that that infirmity of matter brings
along with it; yet I was pleased therewith: Growing weary, sleep invaded me;
for that flattering Heaviness, wherewith the approaches of sleep charms us,
distilled so much pleasure into my Veins, that my Senses over come thereby,
forced my Spirit to congratulate the Tyrant, who chained its Servants; for
Sleep, that Ancient Tyrant of one half of our days, who because of his Old age,
being unable to support the Light, or to look on it without fainting, was
forced to forsake me, upon my entry into the shining Countries of the Sun, was
come to expect me on the Confines of the dusky Region I speak of; where having
caught me, he made me Prisoner, shut up my Eyes, his declared enemies, under
the dark vault of my Eyelids; and for fear that my other Senses betraying him,
as they had betrayed me, might disturb him in the peaceable possession of his
Conquest, he tied them fast to their several Beds. The meaning of all this is
in two words, that I lay down upon the Sand, and fell asleep. It was a plain
Country, and so open that as far as my sight could reach, I did not discover so
much as one Bush; and nevertheless when I a woke, I found my self under a Tree,
in respect of which the tallest Cedars would but appear as Grass. The Trunk of
it was of Massive Gold, it is Branches of Silver, and it is Leaves of Emeralds,
which upon the resplendent Verdure of their precious Surface, represented, as
in a Looking-Glass, the Images of the Fruit that hang about them. But judge ye
whether the Fruit owed any thing to the Leaves; the enflamed Scarlet of a large
Carbuncle, composed one half of every one of them; and the other was in
suspense, whether it held it is matter of a Chrysolite, or of a piece of gilt
Amber; the blown Blossoms were large Roses of Diamonds, and oriental Pearls the
Buds.

A Nightingale, whose smooth Plume rendered it exceeding lovely, perching on
the highest sprig, seemed sollicitous, with it is Melody, to force the Eyes to
confess to the Ears, that it well deserved the Throne whereon it sat.

I stood a long while amazed at the sight of that rich Spectacle, and I could
not have my full of beholding it: But whilst my thoughts were wholly taken up
in contemplating, amongst the other Fruit, an exceeding lovely Pomegranate,
whose Flesh was a swarm of large Rubies in clusters, I saw that little Crown
that stands it instead of a Head move, which lengthened it self, as much as was
needful, to form a Neck; next I saw somewhat white bubble and boil over it,
which by means of Condensation, Concretion advancing and repelling the matter
in certain places, appeared at length to be the face of a little bulk of Flesh.
That little bulk shaped it self into a round Figure toward the girdle, that is
to say, that in the lower part of it, it still retained the shape of an Apple.
Nevertheless it extended it self by degrees, and the tail of it being converted
into two Legs, each Leg divided it self into five Toes. So soon as the
Pomegranate was humanized, it broke off from its stalk, and with a gentle Toss
fell just at my Feet. I confess, really, when I saw marching stately before me
that rational Apple, that little Butt-end of a Dwarf, no bigger than my Thumb,
and yet so powerful as to create himself; I was seized with Veneration. Human
Animal (said he to me, in that Original Tongue I told you of before,) after I
had long considered thee, from the top of the Branch where I hung; I thought I
read in thy countenance, that thou wast no Native of this World, and that is the
reason why I am come down to be informed of the truth. When I had satisfied his
Curiosity, as to all the questions he put to me -- But pray, said I to him,
tell me who you are; for what I have now seen, is so strangely surprising, that
I despair of ever knowing the Cause of it, unless you discover it to me. How! a
great Tree all of pure Gold, the Leaves whereof are Emeralds, the Flowers
Diamonds, the Buds Pearls; and besides all that, Fruit that make themselves men
in the twinkling of an Eye? For my part, I confess it passes my Capacity, to
comprehend such a Miracle. Having uttered this Exclamation, whilst I expected
his answer: You will not take it amiss, said he to me, if being King of all the
people that make up this Tree, I call them to follow me. When he had so said, I
observed that he recoiled within himself: I cannot tell, whether by bending the
internal springs of his Will, he excited without him some Motion, that produced
what now you shall hear: But so it is, That immediately after, all the Leaves
and Branches, in short the whole Tree, broke to pieces, and became little Men,
that saw, felt, and walked, who as if they intended to celebrate their
Birthday, at the very instant of their production, fell a dancing about me: Of
all, I saw none but the Nightingale retained it is former shape, and was not at
all Metamorphosed; it came and perched upon the Shoulder of our little Monarch,
where it Sung so melancholic and a^orous an Air, that the whole Assembly, and
the Prince himself, mollified by the sweet Languishings of its dying Voice,
could not forbear to shed some Tears. A Curiosity to learn whence that Bird
came, seized me at that time, with such an extraordinary Itch of Tongue, that I
could not for my heart restrain it. Sir, said I, addressing my self to the
King, did I not fear to trouble your Majesty, I would ask you the question, why
amongst so many Transformations, the Nightingale alone has retained its kind?
That little Prince listened to me with so much Civility, that it showed he had
a great deal of good Nature; and knowing my Curiosity: The Nightingale, replied
he, has not changed its Form as we have done, because it could not; it is a
real Bird, and nothing else than what it appears to be to you. But let us go
toward the obscurer Regions, and by the way I Will tell you who I am, and give
you the Story of the Nightingale. Hardly had I intimated to him, the
Satisfaction that I received from his offer, when he skipped nimbly up upon one
of my Shoulders. He stood upon his little Tip-toes, that he might reach my ear
with his Mouth; and sometimes swinging, sometimes pestered in my Hair: In
troth, said he, thou must even excuse one that is already out of breath; seeing
in a narrow Body my Lungs are contracted, and by consequence my Voice so small,
that I am forced to take a great deal of pains, to make my self be heard: The
Nightingale would do best, to tell it is own History it self; let it sing, then,
if it think fit, we shall have the Pleasure, at least to hear it is Story in
Music. I replied, that I was not as yet, sufficiently acquainted with the
Language of the Bird; that a certain Philosopher, indeed, whom I met with, as I
was mounting up to the Sun, had given me some general Principles, for
understanding the Language of Brutes; but that they were not sufficient, for
the understanding of all words in general, nor for being affected with all the
Delicacies that occur in an adventure, such as that must needs be. Well then,
said he, since thou wilt have it so, thine Ears shall not only be deprived of the
sweet Songs of the Nightingale; but in a manner of all its adventure also, of
which I can tell thee no more, than what is come to my knowledge: However be
content with that Pattern; besides though I knew it fully, yet the shortness of
our journey into it is Country, whither I am going to carry it back again, would
not suffer me to enlarge in my Relation. Having said so, he jumpt down from my
Shoulder upon the ground; then he gave the hand to all his little People, and
fell a dancing with them in a kind of Figure, that I cannot represent, the like
having never seen. But hearken, O ye people of the Earth, to what I don't at
all oblige you to believe; seeing in that World, where your Miracles are but
natural Effects, this has past for a real Miracle. So soon as these little men
were fallen a dancing, I thought I felt their Agitation in my self, and my
Agitation in them. I could not behold that Dance, but that I was sensibly drawn
out of my place, as by a Vortex that moved by it is own whirling, and by the
particular Agitation of every one of them, all the parts of my Body were put
into Agitation; so that I felt the same Gayness flush in my countenance, which
a like Motion had spread upon theirs. As the Dance closed more and more, the
Dancers shuffled together, by a prompter and more imperceptible way of
skipping. The design of the Ball seemed to be, to represent a huge Giant; for
by approaching to one another, and redoubling the swiftness of their Motions,
they mingled so close together, that I distinguished no more, but a great
transparent Colossus; however my eyes saw them enter one into another. About
that time, it began to be out of my power, any more to discern the Diversity of
their several Motions, by reason of their extreme Volubility; and also because
that Volubility, contracting more and more, according as it approached to the
Center, each vortical Trip at length, took up so little a space, that it
escaped my eyesight. Nevertheless I believe, that the parts still approached
one another; for that humane Mass, heretofore so hugely great, was by degrees
reduced into the shape of a young Man, of a middle stature, whose Members were
proportioned with so exact a Symetry, that the highest Idea of perfection could
never reach it: He was beautiful, beyond all that the fancy of Painters could
ever imagine; but that which seemed to me very strange was, that all the parts
which completed that perfect Microcosm, were linked together in the twinkling
of an eye; the nimbler sort of our little Dancers cut a Capriol, to the height
and natural posture of forming a Head. The hotter, but less agile, formed the
Heart; and those that were much heavier, furnished only the Bones, Flesh, and
Plumpness.

When that lovely big young Man, was completely finished, though the speedy
Composition of him, had hardly allowed me time to observe any interval in the
Progression; I saw the King of all these People, of whom he was an Abridgement,
enter in at the Mouth: Nay, it seemed to me, that he was drawn into that Body,
by the Respiration of the Body it self. This Pile of little Men, had not as yet
given any sign of Life; but so soon as it had sucked in its little King, it
perceived it self then, to be no more but one. For some time he stood
considering of me, and seeming by his looks, now acquainted with me, he drew
near, caressed me, and giving me his Hand: Now it is, said he, that without
wronging the delicateness of my Lungs, I can entertain thee with the things,
that thou passionately desiredst to know: But first of all, it is but
reasonable, that I should discover to thee, the hidden Secrets of our Original.
Know then, that we are native Animals of the brighter Regions of the Sun; the
most ordinary, as well as the most useful of our Employments, is to Travel over
the vast Countries of this great World. We curiously observe the Manners of
People, the Genius of Climates, and the Nature of all things, that deserve our
Consideration; by means whereof, we form to our selves, a certain Science of
every thing that has a Being. Now thou must know, that my Vassals traveled
under my Conduct; and to the end, we might have time to observe things more
curiously, we retained not that particular Conformation of our Bodies, which
cannot fall under they Senses, and whose Subtilty would have made us make too
much haste; but we converted our selves into Birds; all my Subjects, by my
Orders, became Eagles; and as for my self, least they might grow weary, I
Metamorphosed my self into a Nightingale, to sweeten their Labor, by the
Charms of Music: Without flying, I followed the rapid flight of my People; for
I perched upon the Head of one of my Vassals, and we were still pursuing our
Journey; when a Nightingale, an Inhabitant of a Province of the obscure
Country, that at that time we Traveled through, astonished to see me in the
Power of an Eagle (for it could take us for none other, but what it saw us to
be) fell a bewailing my Misfortune: I ordered my People to halt, and we lighted
on the top of some Trees, where that Charitable Bird lamented. I took so much
Pleasure in the sweetness of her doleful Airs, that to the end I might enjoy
them the longer, and with more convenience, I resolved not to undeceive her. I
devised upon the spot a Story, wherein I told her the imaginary Misfortunes,
that had made me fall into the power of that Eagle: I pieced it out with so
surprising Adventures, which so dexterously raised the Passions, and the Air
was so well adapted to the Letter, that the Nightingale, was quite beside her
self. We reciprocally warbled to one another, the History of our mutual Love in
Music. I chanted in my Airs, that not only I was comforted, but even rejoiced
in my disaster, seeing it had procured me the Glory, to be lamented in such
pretty Songs; and that little disconsolate Bird answered me in hers, that she
would joyfully accept all the esteem, I put upon her; if she thought, that that
could make her deserve, the Honor of dying in my place; but that Fortune, not
having reserved so much Glory, for such a Wretch as she, she only accepted of
that esteem, as much as might hinder me, from being ashamed of my Friendship. I
made answer again, on my part, with all the transports, tenderness, and
softness of so touching a Passion, that I perceived her, three or four times,
ready to die of Love, upon the Branch. The Truth is, I mingled so much Art,
with the Sweetness of my Voice, and surprised her Ear with such quaint Touches,
and by ways so unusual to those of her Kind, that I raised in her pretty Soul,
what Passion soever I pleased. In this Exercise, we spent four and twenty
Hours; and I believe, we had never given over making of Love, had not our
Throats denied us any more Voice. That was the only Obstacle, that hindered us
from proceeding: For perceiving, that the Pains I took, began to tear my
Throat, and that I could hold out no longer, without falling into a Swoon, I
made her a sign to draw near to me. The danger she thought me to be in, amidst
so many Eagles, persuaded her, that I called her to my aid: She came flieing
immediately, to my Assistance, and resolving to give me a Glorious Instance,
that she could for a Friend brave Death even upon his Throne, she boldly
lighted upon the great crooked Beak of the Eagle, where I was perched. Really,
so strong a Courage, in so weak a Creature, affected me, with some Veneration;
for, grant I had implored her aid, as she fancied, and that it be a Law,
amongst Animals of the same kind, to assist the unfortunate; yet, the Instinct
of her timorous Nature, ought to have made her waver; and nevertheless, she
boggled not in the least: On the contrary, she made so much haste, that I
cannot tell which flew first, the Signal, or the Nightingale. Proud, to see
under her Feet, the Head of her Tyrant, and ravished, to think that for my
sake, she was to be Sacrificed, almost under my Wings, and that some happy
drops of her Blood, might perhaps Jert upon my Feathers, she gently turned her
Eyes to me, and having bid me adieu, as it were, by a Glance, which seemed to
ask me leave to die; she struck so briskly her little Beak, into the Eyes of
the Eagle, that they seemed to me to be out, before the peck was given. When my
Bird perceived it self to be blind, it formed to it self another sight of new.
I gently rebuked the Nightingale, for her too rash Action; and thinking it
would be dangerous to conceal our real Being, any longer from her, I told her,
who we were; but the poor little thing, prepossessed with an Opinion, that
these Barbarians, whose Prisoner I was, forced me to devise that Tale, gave no
credit to all that I could say to her. When I found that all the Reasons,
whereby I thought to convince her, proved ineffectual, I gave private Orders,
to ten or twelve thousand of my Subjects, and immediately, the Nightingale,
perceived under her Feet, a River, running under a Boat, and the Boat floating
upon it; the Boat was no bigger, than was sufficient to hold me, and another of
my Size. At the first Signal given, my Eagles flew away, and I threw my self
into the Skiff; from whence, I called to the Nightingale, that if she could not
as yet, resolve to leave me so soon, she should embark with me. So soon as she
was come in, I commanded the River to take its course, toward the Region,
whither my People flew; but the fluidity of the Water, being inferior to that
of the Air, and by consequence, the Rapidity of their flight greater than that
of ours, we were left a little behind. During the whole Voyage, I made it my
Business, to undeceive my little Passenger; I told her, that she ought not to
expect any fruit of her Passion, since we were not of the same Kind, that she
might very well have perceived that, when the Eagle, whose Eyes she had struck
out, framed to it self new ones, in her presence, and when at my command,
twelve thousand of my Subjects, had Metamorphosed themselves, into that River
and Boat, which carried us. My Remonstrances had not the least Success: She
made me answer, that as for the Eagle, who, I would have it believed, had
formed to it self Eyes, it had no need of them; because she had not struck her
Beak right into the Ball of its Eye; and as to the River and Boat, which I said
to have been begot only of a Metamorphosis of my People, they were in the Wood
from the Creation of the World, though they had not been minded. Perceiving her
so Ingenious, in deceiving her self, I agreed with her, that my Vassals, and I,
should Metamorphose our selves to her view, into what she pleased; provided,
that after that, she would return to her own Country. Sometime, she desired it
should be into a Tree; sometime, she wished it might be into a Flower; sometime
into Fruit, sometime into Metal, and sometime into Stone. In fine, that I might
at once satisfy all her Desires, when we arrived at my Court, where I ordered
her to expect me, we Metamorphosed our selves, to the Eyes of the Nightingale,
into that precious Tree, thou foundest upon the Road, of which we have just now
abandoned the form. Now after all, that I see that little Bird, resolved to
return into her own Country, my Subjects, and I, are about to resume our
Figure, and the right way of our Journey: But it is but reasonable, that I
should first discover to thee, that we are Natives, and Aborigenes of the Sun,
in the bright part thereof; for there is a very remarkable Difference, betwixt
the People, which the Luminous Region produces, and the People of the obscure
Country. We are they, whom in the World of the Earth, ye call Spirits, and your
presumptuous stupidity, has given us that Name; because, imagining no Animal,
more perfect than Man, and perceiving that some Creatures, perform things above
Humane Power, you have taken these Animals for Spirits. You are mistaken
though, we are Animals as well as you: For although when we please, we give to
our Matter, as you have just now seen, the essential Figure, and Form of the
things, into which we have a mind to transform our selves, that does not infer
that we are Spirits. But listen, and I Will discover to thee, how all these
Transformations, which seem to thee to be so many Miracles, are no more but
pure natural Effects. Thou must know, that being born Inhabitants of the bright
part of this great World, where it is the Principle of Matter to be in Action;
we ought to have the Imagination, far more active, than those of the obscure
Regions, and the Substance of Body, far more subtle also. Now this being
supposed, it must needs be, that our Imagination meeting with no Obstacle, in
the matter that composes us, it disposes the same as it pleases, and becoming
Mistress of all our Mass, makes it by moving all its Particles, to pass into
the order, necessary for constituting that great thing, which it had formed in
little. So that every one of us, having imagined the place, and part of that
precious Tree, into which we had a mind to be changed; and having by that
effort of Imagination, excited our matter to the Motions, necessary for
producing them, we transformed our selves into the same. Thus my Eagle, having
his Eyes peckt out, had no more to do, for restoring of them again, but to
imagine himself a sharp-sighted Eagle; for all our Transformations, are
performed by Motion; and therefore it is that, when from Leaves, Flowers, and
Fruit that we were, we became transmuted into Men, thou saw us dance still
sometime after, because we were not as yet recovered from the agitation, which
we ought to give to our matter, for making of us Men: After the manner of
Bells; which though they be stopped, yet Chime for some time after, and dully
retain the same sound, which was caused by the striking of the Clapper; and
therefore thou saw us dance, before we made that great Man, because for
production of him, it behoved us to take all the general, and particular
Motions, that were necessary to constitute him; to the end that that agitation
by degrees compressing, and compacting our several Bodies by it is motion, might
create in every part the specific Motion, which it ought to have. Ye men of
the other world, cannot do the same things, by reason of the Heaviness of your
Mass, and the Coldness of your Imagination.

He continued his Probation, and illustrated it by so familiar and palpable
Instances, that at length I was undeceived of a great many ill proved opinions,
wherewith our obstinate Doctors possess the minds of the weak. At that time I
began to conceive, that in reality, the imagination of these Solar people,
which by reason of the Climate ought to be hotter, their Bodies for the same
reason lighter, and their persons more active (there being in that World, as
there is in ours, no Activity of the Center, which may divert the matter from
the motion, which that Imagination stamps upon it:) I conceived, I say, that
that Imagination might produce without a Miracle, all the Miracles which it had
performed. A thousand Examples of almost the like effects, affirmed by people
of our Globe, fully persuaded me of this Cippus K. of Italy, who having been
present at a fight of Bulls, and his imagination all the night after, running
upon Horns, found his forehead horned next morning. Gallus Vitius, who bent his
mind, and so vigorously excited it, to conceive the Nature of Folly; that
having by an effort of Imagination, given to his matter the same motions, that
that matter ought to have for constituting Folly, became a Fool. King Codrus
being Ptisical, and fixing his eyes and thoughts upon the fresh looks of a
young Countenance, and that florid Cheerfulness which darted upon him, from the
youthfulness of the Boy, exciting in his Body the motion, whereby he fancied
the healthfulness of a young man, recovered his Health. In short, many Women
have made their Children, already formed in the Womb, Monsters; because their
imagination, that was not strong enough, to give to themselves the Figure of
the Monsters, which they conceived, had force sufficient to muster the matter
of the Faetus, that was much hotter, and more moveable than their own, into an
order propper for the production of these Monsters. Nay I was persuaded, that
when that famous Hypochondriacal man of Antiquity, imagined himself to be a
Pitcher, if his two compact and heavy matter could have followed the emotion of
his Fancy, it would have formed of his entire Body a perfect Pitcher; and he
would have appeared to all men to be a real Pitcher, so as he appeared to be to
himself alone. A great many other Instances, wherewith I satisfied my self, so
thoroughly convinced me, that I made no doubt any more, of the wonders which the
Man-spirit told me. He asked me, if I desired any thing else of him; and I
thanked him with all my Heart: After that, he had still the goodness to advise
me, that since I was an Inhabitant of the Earth, I should follow the
Nightingale into the obscure Regions of the Sun; because they were more suitable
to the pleasures which Human Nature covets. No sooner had he concluded this
discourse, but that opening his Mouth very wide, I saw the King of these little
Animals come out of his Throat, in shape of a Nightingale. The great man
instantly fell down, and at the same time, all his Members by morcels flew away
under the form of Eagles. That Nightingale self-Creator, perched upon the
fairest of them, from whence he warbled out a most excellent Air, whereby, I
fancy, he gave me the Farewell. The real Nightingale took flight also, but not
the way as they did, nor did she soar so high; so that I did not lose sight of
her. We traveled much about the same rate; for seeing I was indifferent what
Country I went to first, I was very willing to accompany her; besides that the
obscure regions of the Birds, being more conform to my Constitution, I hoped
also to meet with Adventures there, more agreeable to my humor. In that
Expectation I traveled for the space of three weeks at least, with all
imaginable content, had I had nothing but my ears to satisfy; for the
Nightingale let me not be without Music; when she was weary, she came and
rested upon my Shoulder; and when I stopped, she staid for me. At length I
arrived in a Country, of the Kingdom of that little Quirister; who then cared
no more for my Company, so that I lost sight of her. I sought her, and called
to her; but at length growing weary of running up and down in vain after her, I
resolved to take some rest: For that end I laid my self along upon a soft
Carpet of Grass, spread at the Root of a lofty Rock, that was covered with many
trees, whose blithe and fresh Verdure was a perfect Emblem of Youth: But whilst
softened by the Charms of the place.

The History of BIRDS.
I Began to fall asleep in the Shade, I perceived in the Air a strange Bird,
that hovered over my Head; it supported it self by so slight and imperceptible
a motion, that I was many times in doubt, whether it might not be also a little
Universe, balanced by its own Center. However by little and little it
descended, and at length came so near, that it filled my Eyes with a delightful
Prospect. The Tail of it seemed to be green, its Breast Azure-enamel'd, its
Wings Incarnate, and its Head Purple, which tossed a glittering Crown of Gold,
the Rays whereof sparkled from its Eyes.

It kept a long time upon the Wing, and I was so attentive to observe what
became on it, that my Soul being contracted, and in a manner wrapped up in the
sole action of Seeing, it hardly reached my Ear, to let me hear that the Bird
spoke as it sung.

However, being by little and little unbent from my Ecstasy, I distinctly
remarked the Syllables, Words, and Discourse which it uttered.

To the best of my Memory, then it spun out its Song into these terms,

You are a Stranger, whistled the Bird, and has had your birth in a World, of
which originally I am. Now that secret propensity to mutual Love, that those of
the same Country have one for another, is the instinct, which Inclines me to
inform you of my Life.

I perceive your mind puzzled to conceive, how it is possible that I should
express my self to you, in a continued Discourse, seeing though Birds imitate
your words, they understand not the meaning of them; but, on the other hand,
when you counterfeit the Barking of a Dog, or the Note of a Nightingale, you
understand as little what the Dog or Nightingale means thereby. Conclude then
from thence, That neither Birds nor Men are therefore the less rational.

Nevertheless, in the same manner as amongst you, there have been some so
Ingenious, as to have understood and spoken our Language, as Apollonius,
Thianeus, Aneximander, Aesop, and many others, whose names I conceal, because
they never came to our knowledge; so there are those amongst us, who understand
and speak yours. Some indeed, know only the Language of one Nation: But just so
as there are some Birds that say nothing at all, some that chirp, and others
that speak; there are also some more perfect, who can make use of all Idioms;
as for my self, I have the honor to be one of that small number.

After all, you must know, that in what world soever it be, nature has stamped
on Birds a secret desire of flying up hither; and perhaps that Emotion of our
Will is, that which has made our Wings to grow; as Women with Child imprint
upon their Children, the figure of the things they have longed for; or rather
as those who passionately would learn to Swim, have been seen in their sleep to
jump into Rivers, and with more skill than an experienced Swimmer pass those
dangers, that if they had been awake, they durst not have so much as beheld; or
as the Son of that same King Craesus, whom a vehement desire of speaking, to
save his Father's Life, taught a Language all of a sudden; or in short, as that
Ancient who being pursued by his Enemy, and surprised without Arms, had Bulls
Horns grow out on his Forehead, through the desire that a Rage, not unlike to
that of that Beast, inspired into him.

When Birds then arrive in the Sun, they go and associate themselves to the
Republic of their kind. I well perceive, you are big with expectation to learn
what I am, it is I who amongst you am called a Phoenix, in every world there is
but one at a time, which lives there for the space of an hundred Years; for at
the end of an Age, when upon some Mountain of Arabia, it has laid a great Egg
amidst the Coals of its Funeral Pile, which it has made of the Branches of
Aloes, Cinnamon and Frankincense, it takes its flight, and diverts its course
toward the Sun, as the Country to which its heart has long aspired. It has
indeed made many Attempts before, for accomplishing that Voyage; but the weight
of its Egg, which has so thick a shell, that it requires an Age to be hatched
in, still retarded the Enterprise.

I am sensible, that you can hardly comprehend that miraculous Production; and
therefore I Will explain it to you. The Phoenix is an Hermaprodite, but amongst
Hermaphrodites, it is likewise another Phoenix altogether extraordinary: For --

It continued half a quarter of an hour without speaking, and then added: I
perceive you suspect what I have told you to be false, but if what I say be not
true, the first time I come into your Globe, may an Eagle devour me.

It remained a little while longer hovering upon Wing, and then flew away.

The Admiration that its relation put me into, gave me the Curiosity to follow
it; and because it cut the Welkin with no swift flight, I easily kept within
sight of it.

At the end of Fifty Leagues, or thereabouts, I found my self in a Country so
full of Birds, that their number equalled almost the number of the leaves that
covered them. The thing that surprised me most was, that in stead of growing
wilder upon my coming, they flew about me, one chirped into my Ears, another
fetched a compass about my head: In short, when their Gambols had for a long
time taken up my attention, all of a sudden I felt my Arms loaded with above a
Million of all sorts and kinds, which pressed them down so heavily, that I
could not move them.

They held me in this posture, until I saw Four great Eagles come, of which Two
having with their Talons taken fast hold on me by the Legs, and the other Two
by the Arms, they carried me up aloft in the Air.

Amongst the Wood I spied a Magpy, that made a great bustle flying up and down;
and I heard her call to me, that I should not make resistance, because her
Companions were already consulting to put out my Eyes. This admonition put a
stop to all the Struggling that I could have made; so that these Eagles carried
me above a Thousand Leagues from thence into a great Wood, which was (as the
Magpy told me) the City where their King held his Residence.

The first thing they did, was to throw me into Prison, in the hollow Trunk of
a large Oak; and a great many of the strongest perched upon the Branches, where
they performed the duty of a Company of Soldiers standing to their Arms.

About the end of Four and twenty hours, another Company mounted the Guard, and
relieved these. In the mean time, whilst I waited with a great deal of
Melancholy, to know what it would please Fortune to determine of me; amidst my
Misfortunes my charitable Magpy informed me of all that past.

Amongst other things, I remember she told me, That the Mobile of the Birds,
had made a heavy Rout, because they had kept me so long without devouring me;
that they had alleged I would grow so lean, that there would be nothing of me
left but Bones to pick.

The Clamor was like to break out into a Sedition; for my Magpy having taken
the boldness to represent, That it was a barbarous Procedure to put to death in
that manner without any Trial, an Animal, which in some sort had Reason as well
as they; they had like to have torn her to pieces, pretending that it would be
very ridiculous, to think that an Animal stark naked, which Nature her self,
when she produced it, took no care to furnish with things necessary for its
Preservation, should be capable of Reason like them: Nay more, added they, were
it an Animal that resembled our shape somewhat more, it were somewhat; but of
all things the most unlike, and most hideous. In a word, a bald Beast, a
featherless Bird, a Chimera patched up of all sorts of Natures, and terrible to
all. Man, I say, so vain and foolish, that he persuades himself, we were only
made for him. Man, who with his sharp-sighted Soul, cannot distinguish Sugar
from Arsenick, and who will swallow down Hemlock, when his quaint Judgment has
made him take it for Parsley. Man, who maintains that there is no Reasoning,
but with a reference to the Senses; and yet has the weakest, dullest and most
erring Senses of all Creatures living. Man, in fine, whom Nature has formed as
she does Monsters, to show her skill; and yet has filled with the Ambition of
domineering over, and extirpating all other Animals.

This was the discourse that the wiser sort held; as for the Rabble they cried,
That it was a horrid thing, to believe that a Beast who had not a Face like
theirs, should have Reason. Now, chattered they one to another, he has neither
Beak, Feathers nor Claws, and can he have a Spiritual Soul? Strange! what
Impertinence is that!

Though the more generous pittyed me, yet that hindered not, but that an
Indictment was brought in against me; all the Writings were drawn upon the Bark
of a Cypress Tree: And then some Days after, I was carried before the Tribunal
of Birds. There were none chosen for Advocates, Counselors and Judges of the
Court, but Magpys, Jays, and Starlings; because they would have none but those
that understood my Language. Instead of trying me at the Bar, they set me
stradling upon a Stump of a rotten Tree; where he that was President of the
Court, having chattered two or three times with his Beak, and Majestically
shrugged his Feathers, asked me, From whence I came, of what nation and kind I
was? My charitable Magpy had given me some Instructions before, which were very
useful to me; and amongst other, that I should have a special care, not to
confess that I was a Man. I made answer then, That I was of that little World
which is called the Earth, that the Phoenix, and some others whom I saw in
Court, might have told them of: That the Climat where I was born, lay under the
temperate Zone of the Artick Pole, in the utmost part of Europe, which was
called France; and that as to my kind, I was not a Man, as they imagined, but
an Ape: That some Men had carried me away very young out of the Cradle, and
brought me up amongst them: That their bad Breeding had rendered my skin so
delicate; that they made me forget my Mother's Tongue, and taught me theirs:
That to comply with these Wild Animals, I had accustomed my self to walk only
on two Legs: And that, in a word, since it is more easy to degenerate than to
improve in kind, the Opinion, Custom, and Food of these unclean Beasts, had so
much power upon me, that hardly my Parents, who are Apes of Quality, could
themselves know me. I added for my Justification, that they might have me
viewed by expert Birds, and that in case they found me to be a Man, I should be
willing to be annihilated as a Monster.

Gentlemen, cried a Swallow of the Court, so soon as I had made an end, I hold
him as convicted: You have not forgot that just now he said, That the Country
where he was born, was France; but you know that the Apes in France do not
engender: Judge now after that, if he be what he boasts himself to be.

I made answer to my Accuser, That I was carried away so young out of the Bosom
of my Parents, and Transported into France, that I had reason to call that my
native Country which I remembered best.

That reason though specious, was not sufficient; but the most part being
ravished to hear, that I was not a Man, were very willing to believe it so: For
those who had never seen any, could not be persuaded, but that a Man was a far
more horrid Creature, than I appeared to be to them; and the discreeter added,
That a Man was so abominable a thing, that it were good they should believe him
to be only an imaginary Being.

All the Court clapped their Wings for Joy, and immediately I was committed to the
Aldermen-Birds to be examined, on condition they should present me again next
Morning, and at the opening of the Court, make report of the Verdict of the
Jury. They undertook the Affair then, and carried me into a Bye-copice: Whilst
they kept me there, they did nothing but play a hundred Monkey tricks about me;
sometimes they knocked their Feet one against another, by and by they dug
little Holes, only that they might fill them up again; and then all of a sudden
I was amazed that I could see no Body at all.

The Day and Night were spent in these trifles, until next Morning, that the
hour appointed being come, they brought me to appear again before my Judges:
Where my Syndicks being desired to tell the truth, answered, That to discharge
their Consciences, they thought themselves obliged to inform the Court, That
for certain I was not an Ape, as I bragged: For, said they, it was to no
purpose for us to leap, skip, whirl round, and invent before him a hundred odd
Tricks and Capers, whereby we thought to move him to do the like, according to
the custom of Apes, when all would not do. Now though he has been bred amongst
Men, seeing an Ape is always an Ape, we maintain that it could not have been in
his power, to refrain from imitating our Apish Tricks. This, Gentlemen, is our
Report.

The Judges at that drew near to give their Opinions; but they perceived that
the Sky was overcast and charged with Clouds, which made them break up the
Court.

I imagined that the appearance of bad Weather inclined them to do so.

When the Attorney General by order of Court came, and gave me intimation, That
they would not pass Sentence on me that Day; that they never determined a
criminal Process, when the Sky was not serene; because they were afraid, that
the bad temper of the Air, might work some alteration in the good Constitution
of the minds of the Judges; that the peevish temper the Birds are in, during
Rain, might influence the Cause: Or, in a word, that the Court might revenge
their Sadness upon the Prisoner; and therefore it was, that my Sentence was
deferred till fairer Weather. I was carried back to Prison then, and I remember
that in the way my charitable Magpy never forsook me; she kept flying all along
by my side, and I believe she would never have left me, had not her Companions
drawn near to us.

At length I arrived at the place of my Prison, where, during, my Captivity, I
had no other Food but the King's Bread; for so they call half a hundred Worms,
and as many Maggots, that every seven hours they brought me to eat.

I thought that I should have appeared again next day, and every Body thought
so too; but one of my Keepers told me, at the end of five or six Days, that all
that time had been employed, in rendering Justice to a Society of Gold-finches,
who had complained of one of their number. I asked my Keeper, What crime that
poor Wretch had been accused of? Of the most enormous, replied my Keeper, that
a Bird can be aspersed with. They accuse it -- can you believe it? They accuse
it -- but good Gods! the very thoughts of it makes my Feathers to stand an end!
In a word, they accuse it, that during the space of Six Years, it has not as
yet deserved to have a Friend; and therefore it has been condemned to be a
King, and a King of a People that differ from it in kind.

Had its Subjects been of its own nature, it might at least have beguiled its
Eyes and Desire with their Pleasures: But seeing the pleasures of one kind,
have no relation to those of another, it will support all the fatigues, and
taste all the bitterness of Royalty, and never be able to relish the pleasures
thereof in the least.

They have sent it away this Morning, accompanied with a great many Physicians,
to take heed that it do not poison it self by the way.

Though my Keeper was naturally a great Talker, yet he durst not entertain me
any longer in discourse, for fear of being suspected of Intelligence with me.

About the end of the Week, I was again brought before my Judges.

They rested me upon the breech of a little Tree without Leaves.

All the Birds of the Long-Robe, as well Advocates, Counselors, as Judges, and
Presidents, roosted by Stories, every one according to his Dignity, on the Top
of a tall Cedar: For the rest who were only present out of Curiosity, they
placed themselves promiscuously till all the Seats were full, that is to say,
till the Branches of the Cedar were covered with Feet.

The Magpy, in whom I observed all along so much Compassion for me, came and
perched upon my Tree, where pretending to divert her self by pecking the Moss:
Really, said she to me, you cannot believe how much I am concerned at your
Misfortune; for though I am not ignorant that amongst the Living, a Man is a
Plague, that ought to be purged out of all well-governed States; yet when I
call to mind, that I was bred amongst them from the Cradle, that I have learned
their Language so perfectly, that I had almost forgot mine own; and that. I
have eaten out of their Hands such excellent Green Cheese, I cannot think on it,
but that it brings Water into my Eyes and Mouth; I have so great a kindness for
you, that I cannot incline to the right side.

She had gone on so far, when we were interrupted by the coming of an Eagle,
that lighted amongst the Branches of a Tree, pretty near to mine. I was about
to have risen and fallen upon my knees before the Eagle, thinking he had been
the King, if my Magpy with her Foot had not held me fast in my Seat. Did you
think, said she, that that great Eagle had been our Sovereign? That Is an
Imagination of you Men, who because you suffer your selves to be commanded by
the greatest, the strongest, and the most cruel of your Companions, have
foolishly thought, judging of all things according to your own measures, that
the Eagle ought to command us.

But our Politics are quite different, for we never choose for our Kings, but
the Weakest, the Wildest, and most Peaceable: Nay, and we change them every Six
Months, and pitch upon the Weak, to the end, that the meanest amongst us, who
may have been wronged by him, may take his Revenge. We choose the Mild, to the
end he neither hate, or be hated of any Body; and we would have him to be of a
Peaceful Temper, for avoiding of War, the Sink of all Injustice.

Once every Week he holds a Parliament, where all are received to propose their
Grievances against him. If there be but three Birds only dissatisfied with his
Government, out he goes, and they proceed to a new Election.

All that Day the Parliament sits, our King is mounted on the top of a high
Yew-Tree, upon the brink of a Lake, bound Feet and Wings. All the Birds one
after another pass before him; and if any of them know him to be guilty of a
Crime that deserves death, he may throw him into the Water; but he must upon
the spot, justify the fact by good Reasons, otherwise he is Condemned to the
said Death.

I could not forbear to interrupt, and ask her, what she meant by the said
Death? And this is the Answer she made me:

When the Crime of a Malefactor is judged to be so enormous, that an ordinary
Death is not sufficient to expiate it, they endeavor to choose one that
contains the pain of many; and in this manner they proceed to it:

Those amongst us that have the most melancholic and doleful Tone, are sent to
the Malefactor, who is carried upon a dismal Cypress. There these sad Musicians
gather about him, and by the Ear fill his Soul with such tragical and doleful
Notes, that the bitterness of his Sorrow disordering the Economy of his
Organs, and pressing his Heart, he pines away to the sight, and dies choked
with Sadness.

However such a spectacle never happens; for seeing our Kings are exceeding
mild, they never force any Body to incur so cruel a Death, upon the account of
Revenge.

He that at present Reigns is a Dove, who is of so peaceable a temper, that
the other day, when two Sparrows were to be made Friends, it was the hardest
thing in the World, to make him conceive what Enmity was.

My Magpy could not continue so long a discourse, without being observed by
some of the Bystanders; and because she was already suspected of some
Intelligence with me, the chief of the Assembly made one of the Eagles of my
guard, catch her by the Neck, and make sure of her Person. King Dove arrived in
the mean while; all were silent, and the first thing that was heard, was the
complaint of the great Censor of the Birds, which he made against the Magpy.
The King being fully informed of the Scandal she had given, asked her her Name,
and how she came to know me? Sir, answered she, all in amaze, My name is
Magget, there are here a great many Birds of Quality, that will vouch for me.
One day in the World of the Earth, of which I am a Native, I was informed by
Chirpper the Posy there, (who having heard me cry in my Cage, came to visit me
at the Window where I hung,) that my Father was Bobb-tail, and my Mother
Crack-nuts: I had not known so much but for him; for I was carried away very
Young, from under the Wings of my Parents; my Mother some time after died of
Grief; and my Father, being then past the Age of having any more Children,
despairing to see himself without Heirs, went to the War of the Jays, where he
was killed by a peck in the brain. They that carried me away were certain wild
Animals, whom they call Hog-herds; who had me to be sold at a Castle, where I
saw that Man who now stands upon his Trial. I cannot tell, whether he conceived
any Kindness for me, but he took the pains to cause the Servants to cut meat
for me; he had sometimes the goodness to prepare it for me himself. If I caught
cold in the Winter, he carried me to the Fire, lined my Cage, or ordered the
Gardener to warm me in his Bosom. The Servants durst not vex me in his
presence: and one day I remember, he saved me from the Jaws of the Cat, who
held me in her Paws, to which my Lady's little Page had exposed me; but it will
not be impertinent, to tell you the Cause of that Barbarity. To comply with
Verdelet (for that was the Page's name,) I was chattering one day some idle
words that he had taught me. Now it happened, as ill Luck would have it, though
I always repeated my Lessons in course, that I came to say in order, just as he
came in to deliver a Message, Be quiet, you Son of a Whore, you lie. The Man
there that stands Indicted, who knowing the Rogue to be naturally given to
Lying, imagined, that I might very well have spoken by Prophecy, and sent to
the place to know, if Verdelet had been there: Verdelet was convinced of his
Knavery, Verdelet was whipped, and Verdelet in revenge, would have had me
devoured by Maulkin. The King by a Nod of the head showed, that he was
satisfied with the Pity that she had conceived for my disaster: However he
discharged her to speak any more to me in private. Then he asked my Adversary's
Council, if his Plea was ready? He made a sign with his Foot, that he was going
to speak, and if I mistake it not, these are the Points whereon he insisted
against me:

The Plea brought in the Parliament of Birds, Assembled against an Animal,
accused of being a Man.
Gentlemen, The Plaintiff is Guillemot the Fleshy, a Partridge by extraction,
lately arrived from the World of the Earth, his Breast still gaping by a shot
that he has received from Men; Demandant against all Mankind, and by
consequence against an Animal, whom I pretend to be a member of that great
Body. It would be no hard matter for us, to hinder, by his death, the Violences
that he can commit: Nevertheless, seeing the Preservation or Loss of every
thing that has breath, concerns the Commonwealth of the Living, I think we
should deserve to have been made Men, that is to say, Degraded from Reason and
Immortality, which we enjoy above them, had we resembled them in any unjust
Action like theirs.

Let us examine then, Gentlemen, the Difficulties of this Cause, with all the
Application that our divine minds are capable of.

The stress of the matter lies here, to wit, Whether or not this Animal be a
Man? and then in case we make it out, that he is, whether or not he deserves
Death for that?

For my part, I make no doubt but that he is; in the first place, Because he is
so impudent as to tell a Lie, in maintaining that he is not; in the second
place, Because he laughs like a Fool; thirdly, In that he weeps like a Sot;
fourthly, In that he blows his Nose like a nasty Villain; fifthly, In that he
is Feathered but in part; sixthly, In that he carries his Tail before;
seventhly, In that he has always a great many little square Bones in his
Mouth, which he has neither the wit to spit out, nor swallow down; eighthly and
lastly, Because every Morning he lifts up his Eyes, his Nose, and large Snout,
claps his open Hands close together, which he points up to Heaven, joins them
into one piece, as if it troubled him to have two at liberty; breaks his Legs
short off by the middle, so that he falls upon his Geegots; and then by Magical
words that he mutters, I have observed, That his broken Legs are knit again,
and that he rises up as gay as he was before. Now, you know, Gentlemen, that
amongst all Animals, none but Man has so black a Soul, as to be given to
Magic, and by consequence I conclude, That this is a Man: We are now to
enquire, whether or not, as Man, he deserves to be put to death.

I think, Gentlemen, it never was yet doubted, but that all Creatures are
produced by our common Mother, to live together in Society. Now if I prove,
that Man seems to be Born only to break it; shall I not make it out, that he
going contrary to the end of his Creation, deserves that Nature should repent
her self of her work?

The first and fundamental Law, for the maintenance of a Republic, is
Equality: But Man cannot endure it to Eternity; he falls upon us that he may
eat us; he persuades himself that we were only made for his use; he makes the
Barbarity, wherewith he massacres us, and the small Resistance he finds on our
side, an Argument of his pretended Superiority: And nevertheless will not own
Eagles, Condores, and Griffins, who are too hard for the strongest Man, to be
his Masters.

But why should that great Size, and conformation of Members, make the
diversity of Kind, seeing there are Dwarffs and Giants to be found amongst Men
themselves?

Nay more, that Empire wherewith they flatter themselves, is but an imaginary
Right: On the contrary, they are so inclinable to Servitude, that least they
should not serve, they fell one another for Slaves. In this manner, the Young
are Slaves to the Old, the Poor to the Rich, the Clowns to the Gentlemen, the
Princes to the Monarchs, and the Monarchs themselves to the Laws which they
have Established. And besides all that, the poor Drudges are so afraid to be
without Masters, that as if they apprehended, that Liberty might come to them
from some unexpected place; they frame to themselves Gods in all parts, in the
Water, in the Air, in the Fire, and under the Earth; they will make them of Wood,
rather than want; nay, I fancy also that they tickle themselves with the vain
hopes of Immortality, not so much out of a Horror, that they have of being
annihilated, as for fear that they may have none to command them after their
death. Here Is the fine effect of that fantastical Monarchy, and of that natural
Empire of Man, as they would have it, over the Animals, nay and over us too;
for he has been so insolent, as even to pretend to that. In the mean while, in
consequence of that ridiculous Principality, he fairly takes to himself the
power of Life and Death over us; he lays snares for us, chains us, claps us up
in Prison, kills us, eats us; and makes the power of killing those which remain
free, a mark of Nobility: He thinks that the Sun is lighted on purpose to let
him see how to make War against us; that Nature has only suffered us to take
our turns in the Air, that from our flight he may draw lucky or unlucky
Auspices; and that when God put Entrails into our Bodies, his intention only
was, to make a great Book, wherein Man might learn the Science of future
Contingencies.

Good, then, is not this unsupportable Pride? Could any that is guilty of it,
deserve a less punishment, than to be made a Man? However, I don't insist upon
this as a reason, why ye should condemn this Man: The poor Beast wanting the
use of Reason that we have, I excuse those errors of his, that proceed from
want of Judgment; but for such as are only the Daughters of his Will, I demand
Justice. For instance, in that he kills us, though we do not attack him; in
that he eats us, when he may satisfy his hunger with more convenient Food; and
what I esteem the basest of all, in that he debauches the good nature of some
of our Brethren, as of Lanners, Faulcons and Vultures, by teaching them to
murder those of their kind, and to feed on their fellow Creatures alive; or to
deliver us up into his clutches.

That alone is so pressing a Consideration, that I beg the Court he may be
dispatched by the sad Death.

The whole Bench shivered for horror at so terrible a Punishment; and therefore
that they might have ground to moderate it, the King made a Sign to the
Council, that was assigned me, to answer.

This was a Starling, and a great Lawyer, who having three times stamped with
his Foot, upon the Branch he sat on, spoke to the Court in this manner:

It is true, Gentlemen, that moved with Pity, I undertook the defense of that
unfortunate Beast; but just as I was about to Plead, I felt a remorse of
Conscience, and, as it were, a secret Voice, that has forbidden me to fulfill
so detestable a Resolution: So that, Gentlemen, I declare to you, and the whole
Court, That for the Salvation of my Soul, I Will not contribute in any manner, to
the preservation of such a Monster, as Man is.

The whole Mobile clacked with the Beak, in sign of Joy, and to congratulate
the Sincerity of so Conscientious a Bird.

My Magpy offered to Plead for me in place of the other, for it was impossible
for her to be heard; because that being bred amongst Men, and perhaps, infected
with their Morality; it was to be feared, that she would manage the Cause, with
a prejudicated Mind; for the Court of Birds, never suffer a Lawyer, that
concerns himself more for the one Client, than for the other, to be heard;
unless he make it appear, That that Inclination proceeds from the Parties being
in the Right.

When my Judges saw, that no Body appeared in my defense, they stretched out
and shook their Wings, and immediately flew to Voting.

The greatest part, as I was informed fince, insisted hard, that I should be
dispatched by the sad Death; but nevertheless, when they perceived that the
King inclined to Clemency, all joined with him in Opinion. Thus my Judges
moderated themselves, and instead of the sad Death, which they excused me from,
they thought it convenient, that my Punishment might quadrate with some of my
Crimes, and I destroyed by a Death, which might serve to undeceive me, of that
pretended Empire of Man, over the Birds, which I bragged of, that I should be
abandoned to the weakest of those that are carried by Wings; my meaning is,
That they Condemned me to be eaten up by Flies.

At the same time the Court broke up, and I heard a whisper, that they had not
enlarged in Specifying the particular Circumstances of my Tragedy, because of
an accident that happened to a Bird, who just as he was about to speak to the
King, had fallen into a swoon. It was thought to have been occasioned, by the
Horror that had seized him, in looking too steadfastly upon a Man: And
therefore I was ordered to be carried away.

But my Sentence was pronounced first; and as soon as the Ospray, which
officiated as Clerk to the Assizes, had made an end of reading it to me, I
perceived all about the Sky blackened with Flies, Drones, Bees, Gnats and
Muskettoes, which hummed for impatience.

I expected that my Eagles should have come and carried me away after the usual
manner; but in place of them a great black Ostridge came, that ignominiously
set me stradling upon his back; for amongst them, that is the most disgraceful
posture a Malefactor can be put into; and no Bird for what offense soever, can
be Condemned to it.

The Officers that waited on me to Execution, were half a hundred Condores, and
as many Griffins in the van; after whom came flying softly, a procession of
Ravens, that croaked I know not what mournful Ditty; and I fancy that I heard
as at a greater distance, a Chorus of Owls, that answered them.

As we parted from the place where I had received Sentence, Two Birds of
Paradise, who had orders to assist me at my Death, came and sat on my Shoulders.

Though my Soul, at that time, was very heavy and discomposed, by reason of the
lamentable Condition I was in; yet I remember, in a manner, all the Reasons
they made use of to comfort me.

Death, said they to me, (putting their Beak to my Far,) without doubt is no
great Evil, seeing Nature our good Mother subjects all her Children unto it;
and it ought not to be a matter of great Consequence, since it happens at all
times, and for the least things: For if Life were so excellent, it would not be
in our power, not to give it; or if Death were attended by consequences of
Importance, as thou imaginest, it would not be in our power to give it: There
is a great deal of appearance to the contrary, seeing the Animal begins by
play, and ends at the same rate. I speak to thee in this manner, because thy
Soul not being immortal as ours is, thou may very well conclude, That when
thou die, all dies with thee. Let it not trouble thee then, that thou do a
little sooner, what some of thy fellows will do e're it be long: Their
condition is more deplorable than thine; for if Death be an evil, it is only
Evil to those who are to die: And in respect of thee, who have not above an
hour betwixt here and there; they shall be Fifty or Sixty Years in a state of
dying; and besides, mind me, he that is not born is not unhappy. Now thou art
going to be like him that is not born: In a twinkling of an Eye, when thou art
out of this Life, thou shall be what thou wast a twinkling of an Eye before;
and that twinkling of an Eye being over, thou shall be as long dead, as he that
died a Thousand Ages ago: But make the worst on it; suppose Life be a Blessing,
the same Accident, that in the infinite spaces of time has made thee to be;
may it not some time or other, make thee once more to be again? Matter, which
by various mixtures, arrived at length to that Number, Disposition and Order,
necessary for the Construction of thy Being; may it not, by mixing again of
new, attain to a Disposition requisite for bringing thee once more again into
Being? Yes, it may; but thou wilt say to me, I shall not remember that I have
been. Ha! dear Brother, what does that concern thee, provided thou find thy
self in Being? And then may it not be, that to comfort thee for the loss of thy
Life, thou wilt imagine the same Reasons which I at present propose to thee?

These considerations are weighty enough to make thee patiently drink that
bitter Potion; yet I have others more pressing still, which will without doubt
incline thee to wish for it. Thou must be persuaded, Brother, that as thou and
the rest of Brutes are material, and that as Death, instead of annihilating
Matter, does only trouble the Economy thereof; so thou ought, I say,
certainly to believe, that ceasing to be what now thou art, thou wilt begin to be
something else. Grant then, that thou only become a clod of Earth, or a Pibble,
thou wilt still be somewhat less wicked than Man. But I have a Secret to discover
to thee, which I would not any of my Companions should hear from my Mouth, and
that is, That being Eaten, as thou art going to be, by our little Birds,
thou wilt pass into their Substance; yes, thou wilt have the honor to contribute,
though blindly, to the Intellectual operations of our Flies, and share of this
Glory, that if thou reasonest not thy self, thou wilt make them at least to
reason.

About this part of the Exhortation, we arrived at the place appointed for my
Execution.

There were Four Trees very near, and in a manner equally distant one from
another, on every one of which at a parallel height, a great Heron perched. They
took me down from the Black Ostridge, and a great many Cormorants lifted me up
to the place where the Herons were. These Birds being opposite to one another,
and firmly perched on their several Trees, with their prodigious long Necks, as
with a Cord, twisted about me, the one about my Arms, the other about my Legs,
and bound me so fast, that though every one of these members was only tied by a
single Neck, yet it was not in my power, to wag or stir in the least.

They were to continue a long while in that posture; for I heard orders given
to those Cormorants that lifted me up, to go and fish for the Herons, and to
slide their Foot into their Beaks.

The Flies were still expected, because they could not fly so fast as we had
done; however it was not very long before they were heard.

The first thing they exploited, was to distribute my Body among them into
several Provinces; and that Distribution was so maliciously made, that my Eyes
were assigned to the Bees, to the end they might Sting them out as they fed on
them; my Ears to the Beetles and Drones, that they might stum and devour them
at the same time; my Shoulders to the Muskettoes, to the end, they might make
me itch with their Bitings; and so of the rest. No sooner had I heard them
settle their Orders, but that immediately I saw them approach. All the Atoms
and Motes in the Sun, seemed to be converted into Flies; for scarcely was I
visited with two or three faint Beams of Light, that seemed by stealth to reach
me, so close were these Battalions, and so near my Flesh.

But as every one of them was greedily choosing the place where he was to bite,
I perceived them to recoyle briskly all of a sudden; and amidst the confusion
of an infinite number of Shouts, that made the Clouds resound again; I several
times distinguished the word Pardon, Pardon, Pardon.

Afterward Two Turtle Doves drew near to me; at their approach, all the ghastly
Preparatives for my Death were dissipated: I felt my Herons let loose the
twists of their long Necks, wherewith I was begirt, and my Body extended in
form of a St. Andrew's-cross, slide from the Top of the Four Trees, down to
their very Roots.

I expected no less from my fall, than to be bruised by some Stone in the
Ground; but when my fear was over, I was not a little surprised, to find my
self decently seated upon a White Ostridge, who fell a galloping, so soon as he
felt me upon his Back.

They made me take another way, than the way I came; for I remember that I
crossed a great Wood of Myrtles, and another of Turpentine Trees, adjoining to
a vast Forest of Olive Trees, where King Dove in the middle of his Court staid
for me.

So soon as he perceived me, he gave a sign that they should help me to get
down. Immediately Two Eagles of the Guard, gave me their Talons, and carried me
to their Prince.

I would in honor, have embraced and kissed his Majesty's little Claws, but he
drew back: And I ask you the question, said he first, If you know that Bird?

At these words they showed me a Parrot, who began to turn round and clap his
Wings, when he perceived that I considered him: Yes, I fancy, cried I to the
King, that I have seen him somewhere; but Fear and Joy have so confounded my
Memory, that I cannot as yet call distinctly to mind, where it has been.

With that the Parrot came, and embracing my Face with its Wings, said to me,
How! do'nt you know Caesar, then, your Cousins Parrot, which has so often
given you the occasion, to maintain that Birds used Reason? It is I who just
now had a mind, after your Trial was over, to declare the obligations I have to
you; but grief to see you in so great danger, made me fall into a Swoon. His
discourse fully opened my Eyes, and having known him perfectly, I embraced and
kissed him, and he embraced and kissed me. Is it thee, then said I, my poor
Caesar, whose Cage I opened to give thee thy Liberty, that the Tyrannical
Custom of our World deprived thee of?

The King interrupted our Caresses, and spoke to me in this manner: Man, with
us a good Action is never lost; and therefore it is that, tho as being a Man,
thou deservest to die, only because thou wast Born, yet the Senate gives thee
thy Life. It Is fit we should thus acknowledge those Notices, wherewith Nature
enlightened thine Instinct, when it gave thee a Foretast of that Reason in us,
which thou wast not capable of understanding. Go then in Peace, and live
Joyfully.

He gave some orders in private, and my White Ostridge, conducted by the Two
Turtle Doves, carried me out of the Assembly.

My Bird having galloped with me about twelve hours, left me near to a Forest,
into which I went so soon as it was gone. There I began to taste the Pleasure of
Liberty, and of feeding on the Honey, which distilled down the Bark of the
Trees.

I fancy that I should never have made an end of my Walk, (for the agreeable
Varieties of the place, presented always some new thing more delightful to my
Eyes,) had my Body been able to hold out: But seeing I found my self at length
wholly overcome with Wearisomness, I softly laid my self down upon the Grass.

Lying thus stretched out under the shadow of the Trees, I found my self
invited to Sleep, by the fresh Air and Solitude of the Place; when a humming
noise of confused Voices, which seemed to sound about my Ears, made me awake
with a start.

The ground appeared to be very level and smooth, without the least Bush that
might intercept the Sight; and therefore my Prospect reached far amongst the
Trees of the Forest. Nevertheless, the Murmurring that I heard, could not be
but very near me; so that listening to it more attentively, I very distinctly
heard a parcel of Greek Words; and amongst several that discoursed together,
one who spoke to this purpose,

Doctor, one of my Allies, Elm with Three Heads, has just now sent me a
Chaffinch, to acquaint me that he is Sick of an Hectic Fever, and of a
Scurffy Moss, wherewith he is covered from Head to Foot. I beg of you for all
Love, that you would be pleased to order him somewhat.

For some time I heard no more; but after a little intermission, I thought I
heard one make this reply: Though Elm with Three Heads, were none of your
Allies; and though instead of you who are my Friend, the greatest Stranger of
all our kind, should desire the same thing of me, I would grant it; for my
Profession obliges me to assist every Body. You shall therefore acquaint Elm
with Three Heads, That for the Cure of his Distemper, it is necessary, that he
Suck in as much humide, and as little dry Nourishment, as possibly he can; that
for that end he ought to direct the little Fibers of his Root, toward the
moistest place of his Bed: That he must keep himself Merry and Cheerful, and
daily be diverted by a consort of Music, of some excellent Nightingals. You Will
hear from him afterward, how he finds himself, with that course of living; and
then according to the Progress of his Distemper, when we have prepared his
Humors, some Stork of his Friends shall from me give him a Glister, that will
fully recover him.

These words being ended, I heard not the least noise more; till about a
quarter of an hour after, that a voice which I fancy I had not observed before,
came to my Ears, and spoke in this manner, Hola, Gaffer Forked Trunk, what, do
ye Sleep? I heard another voice that thus replied, No, Fresh-bark, why?
Because, said the first that spoke, I find the same Emotion in me, that
commonly we do, when these Animals they call Men, come near us; and I would ask
you, if you feel the same thing?

It was some time before the other made Answer; as if he intended to employ the
most exquisite of his Senses in that Discovery; but at length he cried out:
Good God, you are in the right, and I swear to you I find my Organs so full of
the Ideas of a Man, that I am the most mistaken in the world, if there be not
one very near to this place: At that time there was a mixed noise of voices that
said, they smelt out a Man.

It was in vain for me to look about on all hands; I could not discover whence
that word could come: At length being a little recovered from the Horror,
whereinto that accident had cast me; I made answer to the voice, which I took
to be that which had asked, if there was any Man there; that there was one: But
I beseech you, continued I, whoever you be that speak to me, tell we who you
are. Within a trice after I heard these words:

We stand in thy Presence; thine Eyes behold us; and yet thou see us not:
Look upon these Oaks, on which we perceive thine Eyes are fixed: They are we
that speak to thee; and if thou be surprised that we speak a Language, used in
the World from whence thou come; know, that our first Parents were Natives of
it: They lived in Epirus, in the Forest of Dodona; where their natural goodness
inclined them to render Oracles to the afflicted, who consulted them. For that
end they learnt the Greek Tongue, which at that time was most universal; that
so they might be understood: And because we are descended of them, from Father
to Son, the gift of Prophecy has been transmitted even to us. Now thou must
know, That a great Eagle, to whom our Fathers of Dodona had given retreat;
being disabled from going to prey, because she had broken one of her Legs, fed
upon the Acorns, which their branches furnished her with: When one day, being
impatient of living in a World where she suffered so much, she took a flight to
the Sun; and prosecuted her Voyage so happily, that at length she arrived in
the luminous Globe, where we are: But upon her arrival, the heat of the Climate
put her into a reaching to Vomit, which made her bring up a great quantity of
Acorns, not as yet digested; these Acorns sprouted, and produced the Oaks which
were our Progenitors.

In this manner we changed our Habitation: Nevertheless, though you hear us
speak a humane Language, you must not therefore conclude, That the other Trees
express themselves so: No Trees, but we Oaks descended from the Forest of
Dodona, speak as you do. For as for the other Vegetables, they express
themselves after this manner. Have you not minded that soft and gentle Breeze,
that never fails to blow about the Skirts of a Wood? That Is the breath of their
Words; and that easy Murmuring, or delicate Whisper, whereby they break the
sacred silence of their solitude, is, to speak properly, their Language. But
though the noise of Forests seem always to be the same; yet it is so different,
that every kind of vegetables have distinctly their own; so that the Birch
speaks not like the Maple, nor the Beach like the Cherry Tree: Had the Foolish
People of your World, heard me speak as I do, they would have thought it had
been a Devil, enclosed within my Bark; for they are so far from believing that
we can reason, that they do not imagine we have a Sensitive Soul; though every
day they see, that at the first blow the Woodman gives the Tree, the Hatchet
enters the Wood four times deeper, than at the second; and they ought to
conjecture, that the first blow surprised it, and took it unprovided; since
that as soon as it is warned by the pain, it contracts within it self, unites
it Forces for resisting, and in a manner petrified, that it may withstand the
sharpness of its Enemies Arms. But it is not my design, to make blind Men
Judges of Colors; an Individual is to me the whole kind, and the whole kind,
is no more to me than an Individual, when the Individual is not infected with
the Errors of the kind; and therefore be attentive, for in speaking to you,
it is the same thing to me, as if I spoke to all Mankind.

You are to understand then, in the first place, That almost all the warbling
Consorts of the Music of Birds, are composed in praise of Trees; but in
recompense also of the pains they take, in celebrating our famous Actions, it
is we that take care to hide their Amors; for don't you imagine when it costs
you so much trouble to find one of their Nests, that that is occasioned by the
Sagacity wherewith they hide it? No, it is the Tree it self, that has twisted
its Boughs about the nest, to secure the Family of his Lodger, from the
Cruelties of Man: And on the contrary, consider the Airies of those, which are
hatched either for the destruction of Birds, their fellow Citizens, such as
Sparrow-Hawks, Hobbies, Kites, Faulcons, etc. or which only speak to breed
Quarrels, as Jays and Magpies; or that delight to frighten us, as Owls and
Howlets: You shall observe, that the Nests of such are exposed to the sight of
all People; because the Tree removes its Branches from them, that it may leave
them for a Prey.

But there is no need of specifying so many things, to prove that Trees exert
your Functions, as well in Mind as in Body. Is there any one amongst you, who
has not observed, that in the Spring, when the Sun has refreshed our Bark
with a fertile Sap, we thrust out our Branches, and extend them loaded with
Fruit, upon the Breasts of the Earth, that we are in Love withal? The Earth on
her side opens, and is warmed with the like heat; and makes her approaches
toward a Conjunction, whilst our Branches discharge into her Lap, that which
she so ardently desires to conceive. She is, however, Nine Months in breeding
and forming that Embrio, before she bring it forth; but the Tree her Husband,
fearing that the Winters cold may be prejudicial to her Conception, strips
himself of his green Garment to cover her, and contents himself with an old
Fuil-demort Cloak, to hide part of his Nakedness.

Well then, O Men, you look eternally on these things, and never see them: Nay,
more convincing Proofs have presented themselves to your Eyes; but none are so
Blind, as those that will not See.

I listened most attentively to the discourse, with which that Arboreal Voice
entertained me, and was expecting the sequel; when all of a sudden it broke off
with a Tone like to the Whizzing of the shortness of Breath, that hinders one
to speak.

When I perceived it obstinately resolved to be silent, I adjured it by all,
which I thought might most affect it, that it would vouchsafe to instruct one,
who had run the Risk of so long and dangerous a Voyage, upon the account only
of learning. At the same time I heard Two or Three Voices, which for my sake
made the same request to it, and one I distinguished that said to it, as if in
anger,

Well then, since you complain so much of your Lungs, repose your self; I Will
tell him the Story of the Amorous Trees.

Whoever you be, cried I, falling upon my Knees, O Wisest of all the Oaks of
Dodona, who condescendest to take the pains to instruct me, know this; That you
shall not teach an ungrateful Person; for I vow, that if ever I return to my
native Globe, I shall publish the Wonders, you are pleased to make me a Witness
of. I had no sooner made this Protestation, but I heard the same voice proceed
in this manner: Look, Little Man, and you shall see about Fourteen or Fifteen
steps to the Right Hand, Two Twin-Trees of a middle Stature, which confounding
their Branches and Roots, strive by all possible means to unite and become but
one.

I turned my Eyes toward these Plants of Love, and observed that the leaves of
both gently stirred, as it were, by a voluntary Motion, excited by their
Agitation so delicate a murmur, that hardly it grazed upon the Ear; and yet one
would have said, that thereby they mutually asked, and answered one another.

Having spent as much time as was necessary, to observe that double Vegetable,
my good Friend the Oak went on in his discourse, after this manner:

You cannot have lived to this Age, and not have heard of the celebrated
Friendship of Pylades and Orestes.

I would describe to you all the Joys of a sweet Passion, and tell you the
Wonders wherewith these Lovers astonished their Age, did I not fear that so
much Light might offend the Eyes of your Reason; and therefore I shall paint
those two young Suns only in their Eclipse.

Let this then suffice you to know, That one day the brave Orestes being
engaged in a Battle, sought out for his dear Pylades, that he might have the
Pleasure of overcoming or dying in his Presence. When he perceived him amidst
an hundred Arms of Iron, lifted up over his Head: Alas! what became of him? In
despair he threw himself through a Forest of Pikes: He cried, roared and
foamed: But how ill do I express the fearful Commotions of that Inconsolable
Man; he tore his hair, bit his Hands, rent his Wounds; nay, and when I have
said all I can say, I am obliged to confess, that the means of expressing his
grief, died with himself. When he thought to cut out a way with his Sword to
get to the assistance of Pylades, a Mountain of Men withstood his passage.
Nevertheless he broke through them; and having long marched upon the Bloody
Trophies of his Victory, by little and little he approached to Pylades; but
Pylades seemed to him already so near Death, that he durst hardly resist his
Enemies any longer, for fear he might survive the thing for which alone he
lived. To see his Eyes already full of the shades of Death, one would have
said, That he endeavored by his Looks to poison the Murderers of his Friend.
At length Pylades fell down dead; and amorous Orestes perceiving his own life,
to be upon the brink of his Lips, still retained it; till with a wandering look,
having sought and found out Pylades amongst the Dead, he seemed, by joining
Mouth to Mouth, as if he intended to infuse his Soul into the Body of his
Friend.

The Younger of those two Heroes expired upon the dead Body of his Friend; and
you must know, that from the Corruption of their Trunk, which without doubt,
impregnated the Earth, two young Shrubs were seen to sprout out from amongst
their dry bones; whose Stem and Branches mingling promiscuously together,
seemed to hasten to grow only, that they might be twisted into a closer
Contexture. It was visible that they had changed their Being, without
forgetting what they had been; for their perfumed Buds leaned one upon another,
and interchanged the Warmth of their Breathing, as it were to make themselves
blow the sooner: But what shall I say of the loving Distribution, that
maintained their Society? The Juice, wherein the nourishment resides, never
offered it self to their Stock, but they ceremoniously divided it: The one was
never ill fed, but the other decayed for want; they both Sucked inwardly the
Breasts of their Nurse; as ye Men do outwardly the Teats of yours. At length
these happy Lovers brought forth Apples, but such miraculous Apples, as wrought
greater Wonders than their Sires had done. All that eat of the Apples of the
one, were instantly smitten with a Passionate Love for every one, that had
tasted the Fruit of the other; and this happened almost daily, because all the
Boughs of Pylades environed, or were environed by Orestes; and their Fruit,
that were almost Twins, could not endure to be distant one from the other.

Nature however so cautiously distinguished their double Efficacy, that when
one Man did eat the Fruit of one of these Trees, and another Man the Fruit of
the other, it produced Reciprocal Friendship; and when the same happened to two
Persons of different Sexes, it begot Love; but such a vigorous Love, as still
retained the Character of its Cause; for though that Fruit proportioned its
effect to the Capacity, softening its force in a Woman, yet it still reserved
somewhat that was masculine.

It is also to be remarked, That he of the two who had eaten most, was also
most beloved. The Fruit was not only very lovely, but very sweet also; there
being nothing so lovely and pleasant as Friendship. And indeed, it was the two
qualities of Lovely and Good, which seldom meet in one subject, that put it
into Vogue. How often by its miraculous virtue, has it multiplied the Examples
of Pylades and Orestes: Since that time there have been instances of such as
Hercules and Theseus, Achilles and Patroclus, Nisus and Euryalus; in short, of
an infinite number of those, who by more than humane friendships, have
consecrated their Memory in the Temple of Eternity. Cyens of these Trees were
carried to Peloponnesus; and the place of Exercise, where the Thebans trained
their Youth, was adorned with them: They were planted there in a straight line;
and in the season, when the Fruit hung upon the branches, the youth who daily
went into the place, being tempted by the beauty thereof, refrained not from
eating; which according to custom presently influenced their Courage. They
forthwith interchanged their Souls; every one becoming the half of another,
living less in himself than in his Friend; and the faintheartedest became bold
and rash, for the sake of him he loved.

That celestial Passion warmed their Blood with so noble an Heat, that by the
advice of the wiser, these Lovers were listed for the Wars into one Company:
They have been called since, because of the Heroic Actions which they
achieved, The sacred Band. These Exploits went a great deal further, than the
Thebans had promised themselves; for in time of Fight, every one of these
Bravos, ventured such incredible Efforts, for the safety of his Lover, or for
meriting his Affection, that the like has not been seen in Antiquity: And
indeed, so long as that amorous Company subsisted, the Thebans, who before were
reckoned the worst Soldiers of all the Grecians, fought and still overcame
afterward the Lacedaemonians themselves, the most Warlike people upon the face
of the Earth.

But amongst a vast number of laudable Actions caused by these Apples; they
also produced (though innocently) some very ignominious ones.

Myrrha, a young Lady of Quality, eat of them with Cinyras her Father;
unfortunately the one was of Pylades, and the other of Orestes. Love
immediately thereupon swallowed up, and so confounded Nature, that Cinyras
could swear, I am my own Son-in-Law; and Myrrha, I am my own Stepmother. In
short, I think it sufficient to inform you of the nature of that Crime, that at
Nine Months end the Father became the Grandfather of those he begot; and the
Daughter was brought to bed of her Brothers.

Nor was Chance yet satisfied with this Crime; it so ordered matters, that a
Bull coming into the Gardens of King Minos, unluckily found under a Tree of
Orestes some Apples, which he swallowed down; I say unluckily, because the
Queen Pasiphae daily eat of that Fruit: And so you have them mad in Love one
with another. I shall not, however, speak of the enormous Enjoyment; it shall
suffice to say, That Pasiphae plunged her self into a Crime, that was never
matched before.

Exactly about that time, the famous Carver Pigmalion, was cutting a Marble
Statue of Venus in the palace. The Queen, who loved good Workmen, made him a
Present of a couple of these Apples: He eat the fairest; and because
accidentally he wanted Water, which, as you know, is necessary for the cutting
of Marble; he moistened his Statue with the Juice of the other. The Marble,
influenced by this Juice, by little and little grew soft; and the efficacious
virtue of that Apple, acting according to the design of the Workman, delineated
within the Image, the draughts that it had met with in the Superfice; for it
dilated, heated, and colored, proportionably to the nature of the Places that
it found in its passages. In fine, the Marble becoming animate, and being
touched with the Passion of the Apple, embraced Pigmalion, with all her heart;
and Pigmalion, transported with a reciprocal Love, took her for Wife.

In the same Province the young Iphis had eaten of that Fruit, with the fair
Ianthe, her Companion in all the Exercises that are requisite to cause a
reciprocal Friendship: Their Banquet was attended by its usual effect: But
because Iphis had found it to be very agreeable to her Palate, she fed so
heartily, that her Friendship increasing with the number of Apples, wherewith
she could not be satisfied, usurped all the functions of Love; and that Love
growing still and still stronger, became more masculine and vigorous: For
seeing her whole Body impregnated with that Fruit, strove to form Motions that
might answer the Caprices of her Will; it stirred up so powerfully its own
matter, that it made to it self much stronger Organs, fit to comply with her
Desire, and to satisfy her Love in its most manly Extent: My meaning is, That
Iphis became what one ought to be, that marries a Wife.

I should term this strange accident a Miracle, had I still a name to give to
the following Prodigy.

A most accomplished Youth, called Narcissus, had by his Love merited the
Affection of a very lovely Maid, whom the Poets have celebrated by the Name of
Echo. But seeing Women, as you know, are fonder of being much made of, than
those of our Sex; she having heard the virtue of the Apples of Orestes much
talked of, used means to procure a great many of them, from several parts; and
because she apprehended, (Love being always fearful) That those of the one
Tree, might have less force than the other, she would have him to taste of
both: But so soon as he had eaten them, the image of Echo was quite blotted out
of his memory; all his Love turned toward him who had digested the Fruit; and
he became both the Lover and the Beloved; for the substance drawn from the
Apple of Pylades, embraced within him the substance of the Apple of Orestes.
That twin-fruit diffused through the whole mass of his blood, excited all the
parts of his body to caress one another: His Heart, where their double virtue
boiled, darted its flames inwards; all his Members animated with his Passion,
endeavoring to penetrate one into another: Nay, not so much as his Image still
burning in the cold Fountains, but attracted his Body to join it: In a word,
poor Narcissus fell desperately in Love with himself.

I will not be tedious in relating to you his deplorable Catastrophy; the Ages
of Antiquity have spoken enough of that: And besides I have Two Adventures
still to acquaint you with, which will take up the time far better.

You shall know then, that the fair Salmacis frequented the company of the
Shepherd Hermaphroditus, but with no other Privacies, than what the
Neighborhood of their Houses could allow of: When Fortune, who delights to
disturb the most quiet and harmless Lives, so ordered, that in an Assembly of
Plays, where the rewards for Beauty and Running were two of these Apples,
Hermaphroditus gained that of the Race, and Salmacis the other of Beauty.
Though they had been gathered together, yet it was from different Branches;
because these amorous Fruits mingled together so cunningly, that one of Pylades
was never without another of Orestes; and that was the reason, why appearing to
be Twins, they plucked always a Couple at a time. The fair Salmacis eat her
Apple, and pretty Hermaphroditus locked his up in a Cupboard. Salmacis being
inspired with the effects of her own Apple, and of that of the Shepherd, which
began to grow hot in his Cupboard, felt her self attracted toward him, by the
Sympathetick Flux and Reflux of the two.

The Shepherds Parents, who perceived the Amors of the Nymph, finding their
advantage in that Alliance, endeavored to entertain and promote it: And
therefore having heard much talking of the Twin-Apples, as of a Fruit whose
Juice inclined People to Love, they distilled some of them; and having
rectified the Spirit to the highest degree, found a means to make their Son and
his Lover drink of it. The virtue of the Juice, being sublimed to the highest
degree it could be raised to, kindled in the Hearts of the Lovers, so vehement
a desire of Conjunction, that at first sight Hermaphroditus was swallowed up in
Salmacis, and Salmacis melted away in the Arms of Hermaphroditus: The one past
into the other, and of two of different Sexes, they made up I know not what
double Person, that was neither Man nor Woman. When Hermaphroditus had a mind
to enjoy Salmacis, he found himself to be the Nymph; and when Salmacis desired
to be embraced by Hermaphroditus, she perceived her self to be the Shepherd.
This couple though still retained its Unity; it Begat and Conceived, and yet
was neither Man nor Woman: In short, in it Nature has shown a Miracle, which
she has never been able since to hinder from being One.

Well now, are not these pretty surprising Stories? Really they are; for to see
a Daughter couple with her Father; a young Princess glut her self with the
Amors of a Bull; a Man aspire to the Emjoyment of a Stone. Another to espouse
himself; a Maid to Celebrate a Marriage, which she consummated as a youth; to
cease to be a Man, without beginning to be a Woman; to become a Twin out of the
Mothers Womb, and the Twin of another who had no Relation to him.

These are things quite out of the common Road of Nature; and nevertheless,
you will be more surprised at what I am about to tell you.

Amongst the sumptuous Variety of all sorts of Fruits and Trees, which were
brought from distant Climates, for the Marriage Feast of Cambyses, there was
presented to him a Cien of Orestes, which he caused to be grafted upon a Plane
Tree; and amongst the Dainties of the last course, some Apples of the same Tree
were served up to him.

The delicacy of the Dish invited him to eat heartily of it; and the substance
of that Fruit, being after the three Concoctions converted into a perfect Seed;
it formed in the Womb of the Queen, the Embryo of his Son Artaxerxes; for all
the particulars of his Life, have made Physicians conjecture, that he must
needs have been produced after this manner.

When the young Heart of that Prince, was old enough to deserve the anger of
Love, it was not observed, that he sighed at all after any of his own kind: he
loved nothing but Trees, Groves and Woods; but above all those that affected
him, the lovely Plane Tree, whereon his Father Cambyses had formerly caused
that shoot of Orestes to be graffed, wun his greatest affection.

His Constitution suited so nicely with the progress of the Plane Tree, that he
seemed to grow with the Branches of it: He daily went and embraced it; in his
Sleep he dreamt of nothing else; and under the Canopy of its Green Hangings, he
dispatched all his Affairs. It was easily perceived, that the Plane Tree
smitten with a reciprocal Flame, was ravished with his Caresses: For on all
occasions, without any apparent reason, its Leaves were seen to shake, and in a
manner leap for Joy; the Branches bend round about his Head, as it were to make
a Crown for him, and to reach down so near to his Face, that it was easy to be
known, that it was rather to kiss him, than out of any natural inclination, of
bending downwards. Nay, it was also observed, that out of Jealousy it ranked
its Leaves in order, joining one close to the other, for fear least the
Sunbeams piercing through, might kiss him as well as it. The King on his part,
set no more bounds to his Love; he had his Bed made under the Plane Tree, and
the Tree not not knowing how to repay his Friendship, bestowed upon him the
most precious thing that Trees have, which was its Honeydew, that every Morning
dropped upon his Face.

Their Caresses would have lasted longer, had not Death, the Enemy of Noble
Actions, put an end to them: Artaxerxes died of Love in the embraces of his
dear Plane Tree; and the Persians extremely afflicted at the death of so good a
Prince, resolved that they might give him satisfaction even after his Death,
that his Body should be burnt with the Branches of that Tree, and no other Wood
employed in Consuming it.

When the Funeral Pile was kindled, the Flame was seen to twist it self with
that of the Fat of the Body; and their burning Locks which curled one into the
other, to taper into a Pyramide as far as could be discerned.

That pure and subtle Fire divided not; but when it arrived at the Sun,
whither you know all igneous matter tends, it formed the sprout of the
Apple Tree of Orestes, which you see there on your Right Hand.

Now the Breed of that Fruit is lost in your World, and I Will tell you how that
mischance happened.

Fathers and Mothers, who as you know, are only guided by interest, in the
management of their Domestic Affairs, being vexed that their Children, so soon
as they had eaten of these Apples, squandered away upon their Friends all that
they had, burnt all the young Plants they could find of that Tree; so that the
kind being lost, is the reason why no true Friend is now to be found.

As fast then as these Trees were consumed by the Fire, the Rain that fell,
calcined their Ashes, so that the congealed Juice was petrified in the same
manner, as the sap of burnt Fern is changed into Glass. Hence it is, that in
all Climates of the Earth two Metallic Stones are formed of the ashes of those
Twin-Trees, that now adays are called the Iron and Lodestone, which because of
the Sympathy of the Fruits of Pylades and Orestes, the virtue whereof they have
still retained, always aspire to embrace one another; and observe that if the
piece of the Lodestone be the bigger, it attracts the Iron; or if the piece of
Iron exceed in quantity, it attracts the Lodestone; as formerly it happened in
the miraculous Effects of the Apples of Pylades and Orestes, of the one of
which whosoever had eaten most, was the most beloved of him who had eaten the
other.

Now Iron feeds so visibly upon the Loadstone, and the Lodestone upon the
Iron, that the one rusts, and the other loses its force; unless they be put
together for the reparation of what substance they lose.

Have you never observed a piece of Loadstone, laid upon the File-dust of Iron,
you will see the Lodestone cover it self in a trice with these metallic Atoms;
and the amorous Heat wherewith they cling together, is so sudden and impatient,
that when they have embraced one another in all places, you would say that
there is not one grain of the Lodestone, that would not kiss a grain of the
Iron, nor a grain of the Iron, that would not be united to a grain of the
Lodestone; for the Iron or Lodestone being separated, continually send out
from their Mass, some most agile little Bodies, in quest of that which they
love: But when they have found that, having got their desire, every one puts an
end to their Progress; and the Lodestone takes its rest in possessing the
Iron, as the Iron wholly contents its self in the enjoyment of the Lodestone.
From the Sap then of these two Trees, the humor which has given Being to
those two Metals has been derived.

Before that they were unknown; and if you have a mind to know, of what matter
Arms were made for the War; Sampson armed himself against the Philistines, with
the Jaw Bone of an Ass; Jupiter King of Crete, with Artificial Fireworks,
whereby he imitated the Thunder, in subduing of his Enemies; and, in a word,
Hercules with a Club overcame Tyrants, and crushed Monsters. But these two
Metals, have another more specific relation to our two Trees: You must know,
that though that Couple of Life-less Lovers incline toward the Pole, yet they
never tend thither but in Company; and I Will tell you the Reason of it, after I
have discoursed to you a little about the Poles.

The Poles are the Mouths of Heaven, by which it sucks up again the Light,
Heat, and Influences that it has shed upon the Earth: Otherwise if all the
Treasures of the Sun, remounted not to their source, (all its Brightness being
only a dust of inflamed Atoms, which are detached from its Globe;) it would
have been long ago extinguished, and shone no more: Or that abundance of little
igneous Bodies, heaping together upon the Earth, when they could not get out
again, would have already consumed it. There must then, as I have told you, be
breathing Holes in Heaven, by which the Repletions of the Earth are discharged,
and others by which Heaven may repair its losses; to the end the eternal
Circulation of these little bodies of Life, may successively pass through all
the Globes of this vast Universe. Now the breathing holes of Heaven are the
Poles, through which it retakes the Souls of all that die in the other Worlds
without it; and all the Stars are its Mouths, and the Pores through which again
it exhales its Spirits. But to show you, that this is not so new an
Imagination; when your Ancient Poets, to whom Philosophy discovered the most
hidden secrets of Nature, spoke of an Hero, whose Soul they would have said was
gone to live with the Gods; they expressed it in this manner: He is gone up to
the Pole, he is seated on the Pole, he has past through the Pole; because they
knew that the Poles where the only Avenues, through which Heaven receives
again, all that is gone out from thence. If the Authority of these great Men be
not sufficient to convince you, the Experience of your modern Navigators, who
have sailed toward the North, may, perhaps, give you satisfaction. They have
found, that the nearer they drew toward the Bear, during the Six Months of
Night, when it was thought that Climate lay under a black Darkness, a great
Light cleared the Horizon, which could not proceed but from the Pole; because
the more one drew near to it, and by consequence removed from the Sun, that
Light became greater. It is very probable then, that it proceeds from the Beams
of day, and a great heap of Souls, which as you know, are only made of Luminous
Atoms, that are returning to Heaven by their wonted Doors.

This being so, it is no difficult matter to comprehend, wherefore the Iron
rubbed with the Lodestone, or the Lodestone rubbed with the Iron, turns
toward the Pole; for they being an Extract of the Body of Pylades and Orestes,
and having still retained the Inclinations of the two Trees, as the two Trees
have those of the Two Lovers, they ought to aspire to be rejoined to their
Soul; and therefore they skip toward the Pole, through which they perceive
that it has mounted; but with this Reserve still, that the Iron never turns
that way, unless it be touched by the Lodestone, nor the Lodestone, unless it
be rubbed with the Iron; by reason that the Iron will not quit a World, leaving
his Friend the Lodestone behind, nor the Lodestone leaving its Friend the
Iron, and that the one cannot resolve to perform this Voyage without the other.

This voice, as I think, was about to go on with another Discourse; but the
noise of a great Alarm that happened hindered it: All the Forest in an uproar,
resounded with nothing but these Words, The Plague, the Plague, stand upon your
Guard, look about ye.

I adjured the Tree, that had so long entertained me in discourse, to tell me
the Cause of so great a Disorder. Friend, said he to me, we are not in these
quarters, sufficiently as yet informed of all the Particulars of the Evil: I Will
only tell you in Three Words, that the Plague wherewith we are threatened, is
that which Men call a Fire; we may very well call it so, because amongst us
there is no such contagious Distemper. The remedy we are about to use against
it, is to force our breath, and blow altogether, toward the place from whence
the Inflammation comes, to the end we may drive back that bad Air. I believe
that burning Fever is occasioned us by a fiery Beast, that for some days has
been roaming about our Woods; for seeing they never go without Fire, and cannot
be without it, this, without doubt, is come to set some of our Trees on Fire.

We sent for the Animal Frozen-nose, to come to our Assistance; however is not
as yet arrived. But, farewell, I have no time to talk, we must look to the
public Safety; nay, do you look to your self also, and fly for it, else you will
be in danger of being involved in our destruction.

I followed the counsel, but without much straining, because I knew my Legs. In
the mean time I was so ill acquainted with the Geopraphy of the Country, that
at the end of Eighteen hours, I found my self at the back of the Forest that I
thought I fled from; and to add to my fear, a hundred dreadful Thunderclaps
stunned my Brains, whilst the ghastly and pale Glimpses of a Thousand flashes
of Lightning put out my Eyesight.

These Claps redoubled from time to time with so much fury, that one would have
said, The Foundations of the World were about to be over-turned; and
nevertheless the Heavens never appeared more serene. Though I was at my wits
end, yet the desire of knowing the Cause of such an extraordinary Accident,
made me go toward the place, from whence the noise seemed to proceed.

I had advanced about four hundred Furlongs, when I perceived in the middle of
a great Plain, as it were, two Bowls, which having rustled and turned along
time round one another, approached and then recoyled: And I observed that when
they knocked one against the other, then were these great Claps heard; but
going a little farther on, I found that what at a distance I had taken for two
Bowls, were two Animals; one of which, tho round below, formed a Triangle about
the middle, and his lofty Head with ruddy Locks, which floated upwards, spired
into a Pyramide; his Body was bored like a Sieve, and through these little
holes, that served him for Pores, thin flames glided, which seemed to cover him
with a Plume of Fires.

Walking about there, I met with a very venerable old Man, who observed that
famous conflict, with no less curiosity than my self. He made me a sign to draw
nigh, I obeyed, and we sat down by one another.

I had a design to have asked him the motive, that had brought him into that
Country, but he stopped my Mouth with these words; Well then, you shall know the
motive, that brought me into this Country. And thereupon he gave me a full
account of all the particulars of his Voyage. I leave it to you to judge, in
what amazement I was. In the mean while, to increase my consternation, as I was
boiling with desire to ask him, what Spirit revealed my thoughts to him: No,
no, cried he, it is no Spirit that reveals your thoughts to me --

This new hit of Divination, made me observe him with greater attention than
before, and I perceived that he acted my Carriage, my Gestures and Looks, that
he postured all his Members, and shaped all the parts of his Countenance,
according to the pattern of mine; in a word, my Shadow in relief could not have
represented me better. I see, said he, you are in pain to know why I
counterfeit you, and I am willing to tell you. Know then, that to the end I
might know your inside, I dispofed all the parts of my Body, into the same
Order I saw yours in; for being in all parts situated like you, by that
disposition of matter, I excite in my self the same thought, that the same
disposition of matter raises in you.

You will judge this to be a thing possible, if heretofore you have observed,
that Twins who are like, have commonly the like Mind, Passions and Will:
insomuch, that there were two Twins at Paris, who always had the same
Sicknesses, and the same Health; married without knowing one another design,
the same day and at the same hour; wrote Letters mutually to one another in the
same Sense, Words and Style; and in short, have upon the same Subject composed
a Copy of the same kind of Verse, with the same Stops, Words and Order. Now
don't you see, that it was impossible, but that the Composition of the Organs
of their Bodies, being in all Circumstances alike, they must act in a like
manner; seeing two like Instruments alike touched, ought to render a like
Harmony? And that so I having conformed my Body wholly to yours, and become, if
I may say so, your Twin; it is impossible, but that the same Agitation of
Matter, must cause in both of us the same Agitation of Mind.

Having said so, he fell a counterfeiting me again, and thus went on:

You are at present in great pain to know, the Original of the Conflict of
these two Monsters; but I will inform you of it. Know then, that the Trees of
the Forest behind us, being unable with their blowing, to repel the attempts of
the fiery Beast, have had their recourse to the Animal Frozen-Nose.

I never heard of these Animals, said I to him, but from an Oak of this
Country, and that in great haste too, because it was sollicitous for its own
safety; and therefore I would beg of you, to give me some account of them.

He thereupon spoke to me in this manner: In this Globe where we are, we should
see the Woods very thin sow'n, by reason of the great number of the fiery
Beasts that destroy them; were it not for the Animals Frozen-Noses, which at
the desire of the Forests their Friends, come daily to cure the Sick Trees: I
say cure, for no sooner have they, from their Icy Mouth, blown upon the coals
of that Plague, but they put it out.

In the World of the Earth, from whence both you and I are come, the fiery
Beast is called the Salamander; and the Animal Frozen-Nose, is known by the
name of Remora. Now you must know, that the Remoras live toward the extremity
of the Pole, at the bottom of the Mare Glaciale; and it is the cold of these
Fishes, evaporated through their Scales, which makes the Seawater in those
quarters to freeze, though it be Salt.

Most Navigators, who have Sailed for the discovery of Green-land, have at
length experienced, that in certain Seasons they found none of the Ice, which
at other times had stopped them: Now though that Sea was open at the time, when
it is bitterest Winter there, yet they have attributed the cause of it, to some
secret Heat that had thawed it; but it is far more probable, that the Remoras,
who only feed upon Ice, had at that time devoured the whole stock. Besides you
are to know, that some Months after they have filled their Bellies, that
strange Food of uneasy digestion, so chills their Stomach, that their very
blowing of their Breath, freezes again all the Sea under the Pole. When they
come on Land (for they live in both Elements) they fill their Paunch only with
Hemlock, Wolf-bane, Opium and Mandrakes.

It Is wondered at in our World, whence proceed those piercing North-Winds, that
always bring Frost with them; but if our Countrymen knew what we know, that
the Remoras live in that Climate, they would know as well as we, that they
proceed from a puff of their Breath, whereby they endeavor to blow back the
heat of the Sun that draws near them.

That Stygian-Water wherewith the Great Alexander was poisoned, and whose
Coldness petrified his Bowels, was the Piss of one of these Animals. In fine,
the Remora contains all the principles of Cold in so eminenta degree, that
passing under a Ship the Vessel is seized with Cold, and struck with such a
Numness, that it cannot wag out of the place. And that is the reason that one
half of those, who have cruised Northward, for the discovery of the Pole,
never came back again; because it is a Mirracle if the Remoras, who are so
numerous in that Sea, stop not their Vessels. And so much for the Animals
Frozen-Noses.

But as to the Fiery Beasts, they lodge on Land under Mountains of burning
Bitumen, such as Aetna, Vesuvius and others. The Pimples which you see upon the
Breast of this Beast, that proceed from the Inflammation of his Liver, are --

Hear we put a stop to our Talk, that we might be more attentive to that famous
Duel.

The Salamander attacked with much ardour; but the Remora defended
impenetrably. Every dash they gave one another, begot a clap of Thunder; as it
happens in the Worlds there abouts, where the Clashing of a hot Cloud with a
cold, causes the same Report.

At every glance of Rage which the Salamander darted against its Enemy, out of
its Eyes flashed a reddish Light, that seemed to kindle the Air in flying; it
sweat boiling Oil, and pissed Aquafortis.

The Remora on the other hand, that gross, square and heavy Animal, presented a
Body scaled all over with Ysicles. Its large Eyes looked like two
Chrystal-plates, whose glances conveyed so chilling a light, that on what
member of my Body it fixed them, I felt a shivering Winter-cold. If I thought
to put my Hand before me, my Fingers ends were nummed; nay, the very Air about
infected with its quality, condensed into Snow, the Earth hardened under his
Steps; and I could reckon the Footings of the Beast, by the number of the
Chil-blanes, that welcomed me when I trod upon them.

In the beginning of the Fight, the Salamander by the vigorous activity of its
first heat, had put the Remora into a Sweat; but at length that Sweat cooling
again, glazed all the Plain with so slippery an Ennamel, that the Salamander
could not get up to the Remora without falling. The Philosopher and I knew very
well, that the trouble of falling and rising so many times, had made it weary;
for these Thunderclaps so dreadful before, that proceeded from the shock he
gave its Enemy, were no more now but the dull Sound of those little
After-claps, which denote the end of a Storm; and that dull Sound, deadned by
degrees, degenerated into a Whizzing, like to that of a hot Iron plunged into
cold Water.

When the Remora perceived, that the Fight was near an end, by the Weakness of
the shock which was hardly felt by it, it raised it self upon an Angle of its
Cube, and with all its weight fell upon the Breast of the Salamander, with so
good success, that the Heart of the Salamander, wherein all the rest of its
heat was contracted, bursting, made so fearful a Crack, that I know nothing in
nature to compare it to.

Thus died the Fiery Beast, under the lazy resistance of the Animal Frozen-Nose.

Sometime after the Remora was gone, we approached the place of Battle; and the
old Man having daubed his Hands over with the Earth, on which it had walked, as
a Preservative against burning, laid hold on the Dead Body of the Salamander.
Give me but the Body of this Animal, said he, and I Have no need for Fire in my
Kitchen; for provided it be hung upon the Pot-hook, it will Boil and Roast all
that is laid upon the Hearth. As for the Eyes, I Will carefully keep them; if they
were cleansed from the Shades of Death, you would take them for two little Suns.
The Ancients of our World knew well what use to make of them; they called them
burning-Lamps, and never hung them up but in the Pompous Monuments of
Illustrious Persons.

The Moderns have found some of them, by digging into these famous Tombs; but
their ignorant Curiosity made them put them out, thinking to find behind the
broken Membranes, the Fire which they saw shine there.

The old Man went on still, and I followed him, listening very attentively to
the Wonders he told me. But since I have been speaking of the Fight, I must not
forget the Discourse which we had, concerning the Animal Frozen-Nose.

I don't think, said he to me, that you have ever seen a Remora; for they are
Fish that never rise to the brim of the Water; nay, seldom or never do they
leave the Northern Sea: But without doubt you have seen a sort of Animals,
which in some manner may be reckoned of their kind. I told you just now, that
that Sea which reaches toward the Pole, is full of Remoras, that spawn in the
mud as other Fishes do. You must know then, that that Seed, the Extract of all
their mass, so eminently contains all its Coldness, that if a Ship pass over
it, the Ship contracts one or more Worms, which become Birds; whose Blood is so
destitute of heat, that though they have Wings, yet they are reckoned amongst
Fishes: And so the Pope, who knows their Original, forbids them not to be eaten
in Lent; and these are the Fowls which in France they call Maquereuses.

I marched on still without any other design than to follow him, but so glad
that I had found a Man, that I durst not take my Eyes off of him; so afraid was
I to lose my Man. Mortal Youth, said he to me, (for I well perceive, that you
have not as yet paid the tribute, which we owe to Nature, as I have done,) so
soon as I saw you, I discovered in your Face, somewhat that shows you to be
curious and inquisitive. If I be not mistaken in the Shape and Conformation of
your Body, you must be a Frenchman, and a Native of Paris. That City is the
place, wherewith I ended my Misfortunes, which I had carried about with me all
over Europe.

My name is Campanella, and I am a Calabrian by Nation. Since my coming into
the Sun, I have spent my time in visiting the Climates of this great Globe,
that I may discover the Wonders of them: It is divided as the Earth is, into
Kingdoms, Republics, States and Principalities; so that Four-footed Beasts,
Fowl, Plants and Stones, every one have their own; and though some of these
allow no entrance amongst them, to Animals of a strange kind, especially to
Men, whom the Birds above all others mortally hate, yet I can travel over all
without any danger; because the Soul of a Philosopher, is made up of more
subtle Parts, than the Instruments which might be made use of to torment it. I
was by good luck in the Province of the Trees, when the disorders of the
Salamander began those great Thunderclaps, that you must have heard as well as
I, which guided me to their Field of Battle, whither you came soon after; but I
was upon my return to the Province of Philosophers -- What, said I to him, are
there Philosophers also then in the Sun? Are there, replied the good Man, yes,
sure; and they are the chief Inhabitants of the Sun, and the very same, whom
Fame in your World does celebrate with so full Mouth. You may shortly converse
with them, provided you have the Courage to follow me; for before Three Days be
over, I hope to be in their City. I don't think you can possibly perceive the
manner, how these great Spirits are transported hither. No certainly, cried I,
for could so many others been hitherto so blind, as not to find the way? Or
that after our Death, we fall into the Hands of an Examiner of Spirits, who
according to our Capacity grants or refuses us our freedom in the Sun?

Nothing of that, replied the old Man: It Is by a Principle of Similitude, that
Souls attain to this mass of Light; for this World is made up of nothing else,
but the Spirits of every thing that dies in the Circumambient Orbs, such as
Mercury, Venus, the Earth, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn.

Thus, so soon as a Plant, a Beast or a Man expire, their Souls without
extinction mount to its Sphere, just as you see the flame of a Candle points up
thither, in spite of the Tallow that holds it by the Feet. Now all these Souls
being united to the source of Day, and purged from the gross matter that
pestered them, exert far more noble Functions than those of Growing, Feeling
and Reasoning; for they are employed in making the Blood, and vital Spirits of
the Sun, that great and perfect Animal: And therefore also, you ought not to
doubt, but that the Sun acts by the Spirit, more perfectly far than you do;
since it is by the heat of a Million of these Souls rectified, whereof his own
is an Elixir, that he knows the secret of Life, that he influences the matter
of your Worlds, with the power of Generation, and that he makes Bodies sensible
that they have a Being; and, in short, that he renders himself, and all things
else, visible.

Now it remains, that I should clear to you, why the Souls of Philosopers, do
not essentially join to the mass of the Sun, as those of other Men.

There are three orders of Spirits in all the Planets, that is to say, in the
little Worlds which move about this.

The grosser serve only to repair the Plumpness of the Sun, the subtle
insinuate into the place of his Beams; but those of Philosophers, having
contracted no Impurity in their exile, arrive entire in the Sphere of Day to
become its Inhabitants. Now they are not as others, a constituent part of its
Mass; because the matter that composes them, in the point of their Generation,
is so exactly mixed, that nothing can again dissolve it: Like to that which
forms Gold, Diamonds, and the Stars, whereof all the parts are so closely
interwoven and knit together, that the strongest Dissolvent cannot separate the
Mixture.

Now these Souls of Philsophers, are so much in regard of other Souls, what
Gold, Diamonds, and the Stars are, in respect of other Bodies; that Epicurus in
the Sun, is the same Epicurus, who heretofore lived in the Earth.

The pleasure which I received in hearing that great Man, shortened my way; and
I often started curious Questions, about which I importuned his opinion, that I
might be thereby instructed: And really I never found so great goodness in any
Man, as in him; for though by reason of the Agility of his Substance, he might
in a few Days have arrived in the Kingdom of Philosophers; yet he chose rather
to take the trouble of Jogging on with me, than to leave me amidst vast
Solitudes.

Nevertheless he was in great haste; for I remember that having asked him, why
he returned before he had surveyed all the Regions of that great world? He made
answer, that his Impatience to see one of his Friends, who was newly arrived,
obliged him to break off his Travels. I found by the sequel of his discourse,
that his Friend was that famous Philosopher of our time Monsieur des Carts,
and that he made all haste to meet him.

He made answer also, when I asked him, what he thought of his natural
Philosophy? that it ought to be read with the same respect, as Men listen to
Oracles. Not, added he, but that the Science of natural things has need, as
other Sciences have, to prepossess our Judgment with Axioms, which it proves
not: But the Principles of his are simple and so natural, that being once
supposed, there is nothing that more necessarily satisfies all Appearances.

I could not forbear to interrupt him in this place: But methinks, said I to
him, that that Philosopher has always impugned the Vacuum: And nevertheless,
though he was an Epicurean, yet that he might have the honor of giving a
Beginning to the Principles of Epicurus, that is to say, to Atoms; he has
supposed for the beginning of things, a Chaos of matter thoroughly solid, which
God divided into an innumerable number of little Squares, to every one of which
he gave opposite Motions. Now he will have these Cubes, by rubbing one against
another, to have crumbled themselves into pieces of all sorts of Figures: But
how can he conceive, that these square Pieces, could begin to turn separately,
without granting a Vacuity betwixt their Angles? Must there not be necessarily
a Void in the spaces, which the Angles of these Squares were forced to leave,
that they might move? And then could these Squares, which only possessed a
certain Extent before they turned, move in a Circle, unless in their
Circumference they had possessed as much more? Geometry tells us, That that
cannot be; one half then of that space, ought necessarily to have remained
void, seeing there were as yet no Atoms to fill it.

My Philosopher made me answer, That Monsieur des Carts himself would give us
a reason for that; and that being an obliging Gentleman, as well as a
Philosopher, he would certainly be overjoyed to find a mortal Man in this
World, that he might clear him of an Hundred Doubts, which his unexpected Death
had constrained him to leave in the Earth, that now he had forsaken: That he
did not think though, there was any great difficulty to answer that objection,
according to his Principles which I had not examined, but as far as the
weakness of my Wit could permit me; because, said he, the Works of that great
Man, are so full and so subtle, that to understand them, there is need of the
attention of the Soul of a true and consummated Philosopher: Which is the
reason, that there is not a Philosopher in the Sun, but has a Veneration from
him, insomuch that they will not dispute him the Precedence, if his modesty
suffer him to take it.

To ease the trouble that the length of this Journey may give you, we will
discourse of his Philosophy according to his Principles; which undoubtedly are
so clear, and seem so abundantly satisfactory, through the admirable Wit of
that great Genius, that one would say, He had assisted in the lovely and
magnificent Structure of this Universe.

You remember, he says, that our Understanding is Finite; so Matter being
divisible in infinitum, it is not to be doubted, but that is one of the things,
that it can neither imagine nor conceive; and that it is far above the reach of
the Intellect, to give you a Reason for it: But, said he, though that cannot
fall under the Senses, yet we conceive that it is so, by the knowledge we have
of Matter; and we ought not, said he, suspend our Judgments about things that
we conceive. Can we imagine the manner how the Soul acts upon the Body?
Nevertheless, that is a truth not to be denied, nor doubted of; whereas it is a
far greater absurdity to attribute to a Vacuity, that quality of yiedling to a
Body, and that Space, which are the dependances of an Extent, which can only
agree to a Substance; seeing by so doing one would confound the Notion of
Nothing with that of a Being, and give Qualities to that, which can produce
nothing, and cannot be the Author of any thing whatsoever. But, poor Mortal,
said he, I perceive that these Speculations are tedious to thee; because as
that Excellent Man says, Thou have never taken pains enough, to purify thy
Spirits from the mass of thy Body; and because thou have rendered it so lazy,
that it will perform no Functions now, without the aid of Senses.

I was about to reply, when he pulled me by the Arm, to show me a Valley of
wonderful Beauty. Do you perceive, said he to me, that bottom we are going down
into? One would say, that the tops of the little Hills that bound it, were
purposely Crowned with Trees, that by the cool of their Shade, they would
invite Travelers to repose.

At the foot of one of these Hills, the Lake of Sleep takes its source; it
consists only of the Liquor of five Fountains, and if it mingled not with Three
Rivers, and by its weight dulled the stream of their Waters, no Animal of our
World could sleep. I cannot express how impatient I was to question him, about
these Three Rivers, which I had never heard of before; but I was satisfied when
he told me, that I should see all.

Soon after we arrived in the Valley, and much about the same time, upon the
Carpet that borders that great Lake.

The truth is, said Campanella to me, you are happy, in that you see before you
die, all the wonders of this World; it is a blessing for the Inhabitants of your
Globe, that it has produced a Man, who can inform them of the marvels of the
Sun; seeing without you, they were in danger of living in gross Ignorance, and
of tasting a thousand Pleasures, without knowing whence they come; for it
cannot be imagined, how liberally the Sun bestows his Largesses, upon all your
little Globes: and this Valley alone, diffuses an infinite nnmber of Blessings,
throughout the whole Universe, without which you could not live, nor so much as
see the Day: Methinks that the sight of this Country alone, is enough to make
you confess, that the Sun is your Father, and that he is the Author of all
things. These Five little Rivers, that come and discharge themselves in it, run
not above Fifteen or Sixteen hours; and nevertheless they seem to be so weary
when they arrive, that hardly can they move; but they express their Lassitude
by very different effects, for that of Sight contracts its self proportionably,
as it approaches to the Lake of Sleep. The Hearing at its Mouth, confounds,
wanders, and looses it self in the Pool: The Smelling raises a murmur, like
that of a Man who snores: The Taste growing wallowish by the way, becomes
altogether insipid: And the Feeling, so powerful a little before, that he
lodged all his Comrades, is fain to conceal his own abode. On his part the
Nymph of Peace, who resides in the middle of the Lake, with open Arms receives
his guests, lays them in her Bed, and dandles them so gingerly, that to make
them sleep, she her self takes the pains to rock the Cradle. After they have
for some time been thus confounded in this vast Basin, they again divide
themselves at the further end, into Five Rivulets, which resume the same names
when they issue out, that they left when they entered: But those which hasten
most to be gone, and tug their Companions to set out, are the Hearing and
Feeling; for the other Three wait, till these awaken them, and of all the rest
the Taste lags always hindmost.

The Lake of Sleep is Vaulted over, with the black Arch of a Grotto. A great
many Tortoises march slowly about the Shore; the Flowers of a Thousand Poppies,
by looking into the Water, communicate to it its drouzy virtue. Not so much as
Dormice, but come above Fifty Leagues to drink in it; and the purling of the
Stream is so charming, that it would seem to break upon the Pebbles with
Cadence, and to endeavor to compose Soporifick Music.

The Wise Campanella without doubt foresaw, that I was about to feel the
effects of it, and therefore he advised me to mend my pace. I would have obeyed
him, but the Charms of that Water had so enveigled my Reason, that hardly could
I understand his last Words. Sleep on, then, sleep on, I give you leave, said
he; and indeed the Dreams that one has here are so perfect, that you will be glad
one day to call to mind, that which you are about to have. In the mean time,
I Will divert my self in viewing the Rarities of the place, and then come back to
you again. I think he talked no more, or at least the Vapors of sleep, had
already put me out of condition, of being able to hear him.

I was in the middle of the learnedest and best conceived Dream that ever was,
when my Philosopher came to awake me. I Will tell it you, when I can without
digression; for it is very important you should know it, to let you see, with
what freedom the Mind of the Inhabitants of the Sun acts, whilst Sleep
captivates their Senses. For my part, I think, that that Lake evaporates an
Air, which has the property of depurating the Mind, entirely from the Fogs of
the Senses; for nothing is presented to your thoughts, which does not seem to
perfect and instruct you; and that is the reason why I highly respect those
Philosophers, that are called Dreamers, who are laughed at by the ignorant.

I opened then my Eyes with a start: I fancy I heard him saying; Mortal, you
have slept enough, rise, if you would see a Rarity that can never be imagined
in your World. During the space of an hour, or thereabouts, since I left you; I
have been walking by the Five Fountains, which come out of the Lake of Sleep.
You may believe, that I have considered them with a great deal of Attention;
they bear the name of the Five Senses, and glide very near one to another: That
of the Sight seems to be a forked Pipe, full of the Powder of Diamonds, and
little Looking-Glasses, that steal away and restore the Image of whatever
presents; in its course it incompasses the Kingdom of Linx: That of the Hearing
is in like manner double; it turns by its Insinuations like a Dedalus, and from
the most hollow concavity of its Bed, one may hear an Echo of all the noise
that sounds round about: I am much mistaken, if they were not Foxes that I saw
picking their Ears there: That of Smelling seems like the former, to divide it
self into two Channels, hid under one and the same Arch; out of every thing it
meets, it extracts somewhat invisible, whereof it composes a Thousand sort of
Odours, which stand it in stead of Water; on the brink of that source, there
are a great many Dogs, that rub and cleanse their Noses. That of the Taste runs
by spurts, which commonly happen not above Three or Four times a Day, and for
that too a large van of Coral must be raised, and underneath that a great many
little ones of Ivory; its Liquor resembles Spittle: But as to the Fifth, that
of Feeling, it is so large and deep, that it environs all its Sisters, nay, and
lays it self out at length in their Channels, and its thick Juice, sheds it
self abroad upon the green Turff, covered with sensitive Plants.

Now you must know, that stunned with Veneration, I admired the mysterious
Turnings of all these Fountains: When after a great walk, I came to the entry
where they discharged themselves into Three Rivers: But follow me, you will
better conceive the disposition of these things when you see them. A Promise
that pleased me so well, thoroughly awoke me; I stretched out my Arm to him, and
we kept the same way he had followed, walking along the Dykes that keep the
Five Rivulets in their several Channels.

When we had gone about a Furlong, something as clear as a Lake presented it
self to our Eyes. No sooner had the Wise Campanella perceived it, but he told
me: At length, Son, we are got to the Port, I distinctly see the three Rivers.

I was so briskly transported with that news, that I thought I was become an
Eagle. I flew rather than walked, and ran all about with so greedy a Curiosity,
that in less than an hour, my Guide and I observed what now you shall hear.

Three great Rivers water the Fields of this Burning World: The First and
largest is called Memory; the Second, narrower, but deeper, Imagination; and
the Third, the last of the Three, is called Judgment.

Upon the Banks of Memory, one may hear continually a troublesome chattering of
Jays, Parrots, Magpies, Starlings, Linnets, Chaffinches, and of all sorts of
Birds, that chirp what they have learnt. In the Night time they are silent, for
then they are taken up in feeding upon that thick Vapor, which exhales from
these watery places; but their foul Stomach digests it so ill, that in the
Morning, when they think it converted into their substance, it drops out of
their Beak again, as clear as it was in the River.

The Water of that River seems to be clammy, and runs with much noise.

The Ecchos that are formed in its Caverns repeat the word, even to above a
Thousand times: It breeds a kind of Monsters, who have a Face much like to that
of a Woman. It has others too more furious, who have a Square and Horned Head,
not unlike to that of our Pedants. The whole Business of these is to cry, and
nevertheless say no more but what they have heard one another say before.

The River of Imagination runs more gently; its light and shining Liquor
sparkles on all hands: To look upon that Water like a Torrent of humide
sparkles, one would think, that it observed no Order in its course. After I had
considered it more attentively; I observed that the humor which flowed in its
Channel, was of pure Potable Gold, and its froth of the Oil of Talc. The Fish
that it feeds are Remoras, Syrenes and Salamanders; instead of Gravel, it is
full of those little Stones Pliny speaks of, with which Men become heavy, when
they touch their wrong side, and light when they apply to them their Right
side. I observed there also those other Stones, one of which Giges had in a
ring, which render things Invisible; but above all, there are a great many
Philosophers stones, which sparkle amongst its Sand. There were a great many
Fruit Trees upon the banks of it, especially those which Mahomet found in
Paradise; their Branches swarmed with Phenixes, and I observed Crab-Stocks of
that Tree, from which Discord plucked the Apple which she threw amongst the
three Goddesses; graffs of the Garden of the Hesperides had been graffed on
them. Each of these Two great Rivers, is divided into an infinite number of
Branches, that are interlaced one with another; and I took notice, that when a
great Rivulet of Memory, drew near to a less of Imagination, it immediately
absorbed the other; but on the contrary, if the Rivulet of Imagination was the
bigger, it dried up the Brook of Memory. Now seeing these Three Rivers, both in
their Channels and Branches, run always by one another; wheresoever the Memory
is strong, the Imagination diminishes; and this again swells, as the other is
low.

Near to that the River of Judgment runs with an incredible slowness: It has a
deep Channel, its Liquor seems to be cold; and when it is shed upon any thing,
it drys instead of moistening. In the Owze of its Channel grow
Hellebore-Plants, whose Roots stretching out in long Filaments, even to the
Mouth of it, purify its Waters there: It breeds Serpents, and upon the soft
grass that cover its banks, Thousands of Elephants repose themselves: It is
divided, as the other two, into an infinite number of little Branches; it
increases as it advances in its course: and though it still gains ground, yet
it continually ebbs and flows in it self.

All the Sun is watered by the Juice of these Three Rivers; it serves to steep
the burning Atoms of those that die in that great World; but this deserves
very well to be handled more largely.

The Life of the Animals of the Sun is very long, and they expire not but by a
natural Death, which only happens at the end of Seven or Eight thousand Years;
when by the continued Intension of mind, to which their fiery temper inclines
them, the order of matter is jumbled; for in a Body, so soon as Nature
perceives, that it would require more time to repair the Ancient Being, than to
compose a new one, she aspires to Dissolution; so that the Animal may be seen
daily not to Rot, but to fall into Particles like Red Ashes.

Death never happens but in this manner. The Animal then being expired, or, to
say better, extinct; the little igneous Bodies that made up his substance,
enter into the gross matter of this burning World, until Chance has watered
them with the Liquor of the Three Rivers; for then becoming moveable by their
Fluidity, that they may quickly exert the Faculties, of which that Water has
given them an obscure Knowledge, they fasten together into threads, and by a
Flux of Luminous points, sharpen themselves into Beams, and then disperse into
the Neighboring Spheres; where they are no sooner wafted, but they themselves
dispose the matter, as much as they can, into a Form proper for the exerting
all the functions, whereof they have contracted an Instinct, in the Water of
the Three Rivers, the Five Fountains, and the Lake; and therefore they suffer
themselves to be attracted to Plants for Vegetation; the Plants suffer
themselves to be brouzed upon by Animals for Sensation; and the Animals suffer
themselves to be eaten by Men; that so being converted into their substance,
they may repair the Three Faculties of Memory, Imagination and Judgment, of
whose power the Rivers of the Sun, had given them a Fore-taste.

Now according as the Atoms have been more or less soaked, in the Liquor of
these Three Rivers; they furnish Animals with more or less Memory, Imagination
or Judgment; and according as in the Three Rivers, they have inbibed more or
less, of the Liquor of the Five Fountains, and of the Lake, they form to them
Senses more or less perfect, and produce Souls more or less drowzy.

This is in a manner what we observed, concerning the nature of these Three
Rivers. Little scattered veins of them may be met with every where; but as for
the principal Branches, they run with a straight course to the Province of
Philosophers: And therefore we returned to the high way again, not leaving the
Current wide of us, farther than it was necessary to get upon the Causey. We
saw the Three great Rivers always running by our side; but for the Five
Fountains, we beheld them turning and winding below in the Meadows. That Is a
very pleasant Road, though it be solitary; the Air there is pure and thin,
which nourishes the Soul, and makes it reign over the Passions.

At the end of Five or Six days Journey, as we were diverting our sight, with
the various and rich Prospects of the Country, we heard a languishing Voice,
like the groaning of a sick Person. We drew near the place, from whence we
judged it might come, and found upon the brink of the River Imagination, an old
Man fallen backwards, who complained grievously. Tears of compassion came into
my Eyes, and Pity obliged me to ask the poor wretch what he ailed. That Man,
answered Campanella, turning toward me, is a Philosopher reduced to Extremity:
For we die oftener than once; and seeing we are but parts of this Universe, we
change our form, that we may go Live elsewhere; which is not a Misfortune,
since it is a way to perfect ones Being, and to attain to an infinite number of
Sciences: His distemper is that, which makes all great Men for the most part to
die.

His Discourse obliged me to consider the Patient more attentively, and at the
first glance, I perceived that his Head was as big as a Tun, and open in many
places. Come, come, said Campanella to me, pulling me by the Arm, all the
assistance that we may think we could give to this dying Man, would be
unprofitable, and only trouble him the more. Let Us Jog on, for indeed his Evil
is Incurable: The Swelling of his Head, proceeds from the Restlessness of his
Mind; for though the Ideas, wherewith he has filled the Three Organs, or the
Three Ventricles of his Brain, be but very small Images; yet they are
Corporeal, and by consequence capable of filling a great place, when they are
very numerous. Now you must know, That that Philosopher has so dilated his
brain, by stuffing it with notion upon notion, that being unable longer to
contain them, it has burst. That way of dying is common to great Genies, and
it is called, To crack with Wit.

We marched on still discoursing; and what presented first to our view,
furnished us with matter of Conversation. I should have been very willing
though, to have left the obscure Regions of the Sun, and gone again into the
Luminous; for the Reader must know, That all the Countries are not Diaphanous,
there are some of them that are obscure, like those of our World; and which,
were it not for the light of the Sun, that is perceived beyond them, would be
covered with Darkness. Now proportionably as one enters into the obscure
Regions, he insensibly becomes so himself; and in the same manner, when one
approaches the transparent, he perceives himself stripped of that somber
Obscurity, by the vigorous Irradiation of the Climate.

I remember, that upon occasion of this earnest desire I had, I asked
Campanella, if the Province of Philosophers was resplendent or darkish? It is
more darkish than resplendent, answered he: For as we still Sympathize much
with the Earth, our native Country, which of its own nature is Opacous; so we
could not fit our selves in the clearer Regions of this Globe. Nevertheless by
a vigorous bending of the Will, we can render our selves Diaphanous, when we
have a mind to it: Nay, and most part of the Philosophers, do not speak with
the Tongue, but when they have a mind to communicate their Thoughts, they purge
themselves by the Ejaculations of their Fancy, of a somber Vapor, under which
commonly they keep their Conceptions covered; and so soon as they have remanded
to its place, that obscurity of the Spleen which darkened them, seeing their
Body is then Diaphanous, one may perceive through their Brain what they
remember, what they imagine, what they judge; and in their Liver and Heart,
what they desire, and what they resolve: For though these little Pictures be
more imperceptible, than any thing that we can devise; yet in this World our
Eyes are clearsighted enough, easily to distinguish even the smallest Ideas.

Thus when any of us would discover to his Friend, the Affection he has for
him, his Heart is perceived to dart out Beams, as far as his Memory, upon the
Image of him he Loves: And when on the contrary, he would testify his
Aversion, his Heart is seen to Thunder against the Image of him he hates,
storms of burning Sparks, and to retreat backward as far as it can: In the same
manner when he speaks within himself, the Ideas are clearly to be observed,
that is to say, The Characters of every thing he meditates upon, which by rising
and falling, imprinting and effacing, present to the Eyes of the Beholder, not
an articulated Discourse, but a History of all his thoughts in taille-doux.

My Guide would have gone on, but he was diverted by an Accident, the like was
never heard before: And that was, that all of a sudden we perceived the Earth
blackened under our Feet, and the Heavens kindled before with Beams,
extinguished over head, as if a Canopy Four Leagues broad, had been spread
betwixt us and the Sun.

It would be no easy matter for me to express, what we imagined in that
Juncture: All sorts of Terrors, even that of the Worlds end, seized us, and
none of these Apprehensions seemed to us to be improbable; for to see night in
the Sun, or the Air overcast with Clouds, is a Miracle that never happens
there. And yet this was not all; for immediately after a sharp and skreaking
noise, like to that of the winding up of a Jack, came to grate our Ears; and at
the very same time a Cage fell at our Feet. No sooner had it rested upon the
Sand, but it opened, and was brought to bed of a Man and a Woman; they had an
Anchor with them, which they fastened to the Roots of a Rock; the next thing
they did, was to make toward us. The Woman led the Man, and with threats
dragged him forward. When she was come very near us, Gentlemen, said she, in
some little disorder, Is not this the Province of Philosophers? I made answer,
No; but that we hoped to be there within the space of Four and twenty hours;
and that the old Man, who allowed me his Company, was one of the chief
Ministers of that Monarchy. Seeing you are a Philosopher, replied the Woman,
addressing her self to Campanella, without going further, I must discharge my
heart to you.

To tell you then in a few Words, the occasion of my coming hither, you must
know, that I come to complain of a Murder committed on the person of the
Youngest of my Children; the Barbarian, whom I hold here, has twice killed
him, though he be the Father. We were extremely puzzled at this Discourse, and
therefore I desired to know, what she meant by a Child killed twice? Know,
anssered the Woman, that in our Country, amongst the other Statutes of Love,
there is a Law regulates the number of Kisses, which a Husband is obliged to
give his Wife: And it is for that reason, that every evening a Physician, within
his own precinct, visits all the Houses, where having viewed the Husband and
Wife, he taxes them for that night, according to their Health, strong or weak,
in more or less Embraces. Now my Husband there was adjudged to Seven:
Nevertheless, being netled at some angry words I gave him, as we were going to
Bed, he did not so much as touch me, all the while we were in bed: But God, who
avenges the cause of the afflicted, permitted, That that Wretch being tickled
in a dream, by remembering the Kisses, which he unjustly detained from me, let a
Man be lost. I told you, that his Father has killed him twice, because by
hindering him to be, he is the cause that he is not, there is his first Murder;
and he is likewise the cause, why he has not been, there is his second: Whereas
an ordinary Murderer knows very well, that he whom he destroys, is no more in
being; but he cannot hinder, but that he has had a Being. Our Magistrates
would have rendered Justice in the matter; but the Crafty Man alleged for
excuse, That he would have performed his conjugal Duty, had he not been
apprehensive, that kissing me in the rage that I had put him into, he might
have begot a Madman.

The Senate puzzled at that Plea, ordered us to go and appear before the
Philosophers, and plead our Cause there. So soon as we received the Order to be
gone, we put or selves into a Cage, hung by the Neck of that great Fowl, which
you see there; from whence by means of a Pully which we fastened to it, we let
our selves down to the ground, and hoist our selves up into the Air. There are
people in our Province, purposely appointed to tame them when they are young,
and breed them up to the work we employ them in. That which chiefly makes them
tractable, contrary to their fierce nature, is, that to satisfy their
unsatiable Hunger, we give them the Bodies of all the Beasts that die to feed
on. After all, when we have a mind to sleep, (for because of the constant
excesses of Love, which weaken us, we stand in need of Rest:) We let loose into
the open Fields, at convenient distances, Twenty or Thirty of these Fowls, each
tied to a rope, who taking flight with their great Wings, display in the Sky a
Night larger than the Horizon. I was very attentive both to her Discourse, and
in great ecstasy, to consider the prodigious bulk of that Giant-Bird: But so
soon as Campanella had looked a little upon it, Ha! verily, cried he, it is one
of those Feathered Monsters called Condores, which are to be seen in the Isle
of Mandragora in our World, and all over the Torrid Zone, they cover an Acre of
ground with their Wings: But seeing these Animals grow Huger, according as the
Sun, under which they are bred, is hotter in the World of the Sun, they must
needs be of a prodigious Greatness.

However, added he turning to the Woman, you must of necessity accomplish your
Journey; for it belongs to Socrates, who has the inspection of Manners, to
decide your Cause. In the mean time, I adjure you to tell us, what Country you
are of, because seeing it is but three or four years, since I arrived in this
World, I am but very little as yet acquainted with the Map of it?

We are, answered she, of the Kingdom of Lovers: That great State is on one
side bordered by the Republic of Peace, and on the other, by that of the Just.

In the Country I come from, at Sixteen years of Age, Boys are put into the
Novitiat of Love: It is a very stately Palace, that takes up almost a quarter
of the City. The Maids are put into it at Thirteen; and both accomplish their
year of Probation there; during which the Boys are only employed, in meriting
the affection of the Girls, and the Girls in rendering themselves worthy of the
Love of the Boys. When the Twelve Months are up, the faculty of medicine in
Body, go and visit this Seminary of Lovers: They feel them all over, one after
another, even to the most Privy parts of their Body; make them couple before
them; and then according as the Male, upon Trial, is found to be vigorous and
well-shaped, they give him for Wives, Ten, Twenty, Thirty or Forty Maids, such
as loved him; provided he reciprocally love them. The Husband, nevertheless,
cannot lie but with Two at a time, and it is not lawful for him to Embrace any
of them, so long as she is with Child. Such as are found to be Barren, are only
employed in Service; and Men who are impotent are made Slaves, and may carnally
mingle with the Female-Drudges. After all, when a Family has more Children
than it can bring up, the Republic takes care of them: But that is a misfortune
that very seldom happens; because so soon as a Woman is brought to Bed in the
City, the public Treasury furnishes a yearly Pension for the Education of the
Child, according to its Quality; which on certain days, the Treasurers of State
themselves, carry to the House of the Father: But if you have a mind to know
more, step into our Pannier, it is big enough for Four. Seeing we are going the
same way, we'll talk and make our Journey the shorter.

Campanella was of the mind, that we should embrace the offer; and I was
likewise very glad of it, to avoid being tired: But when I came to help them to
weigh their Anchor, I was much surprised to find, that instead of a great
Cable, which ought to bear it up, it hung only by a Silken thread as small as a
Hair. I asked Campanella how it could be, that a Mass so heavy as that Anchor
was, did not by its weight break so weak a thing? And the good Man made answer,
That that Line did not break, because being spun all of an equal bigness, there
was no reason why it should sooner break, at one place than another. We all
stowed ourselves into the Pannier, and then hoisted up our selves by the Pully,
as high as the Fowl's Throat, where we appeared no bigger than a Bead hanging
at its Neck. When we were up as high as the Pully, we fastened the Cable by
which our Cage hung, to one of its smallest Down-feathers, which nevertheless
was as big as ones Thumb; and so soon as the Woman, had made a sign to the Bird
to be gone, we perceived it cleave the Air with a violent Rapidity. The Condore
hastened or slackened its flight, soared or stooped, according to its Mistresses
pleasure, whose Voice served it for a Bridle. We had not flow'n Two hundred
Leagues, when we perceived on the Earth, to the lest Hand, a night like to
that, which our living Umbrello made under us. We asked the stranger Woman,
what she thought it might be? It Is another Malefactor, answered she, who is
going also to receive Justice in the Province, whither we are going: His Fowl,
without doubt, is stronger than ours, or otherwise we have trifled away a great
deal of time by the way, for he set not out till after I was gone. I asked her,
what Crime that poor Wretch was accused of? He is not barely accused, answered
she; he is condemned to dye, because he is already convicted of not being
afraid of Death. How then, said Campanella to her, do the Laws of your Country
enjoin Men to be afraid of Death? Yes, replied the Woman, they enjoin all,
except those who are admitted into the College of the Wise; for our
Magistrates have found by sad Experience, that he who fears not to lose Life,
may take it from any Body else.

After some other discourses that followed these, Campanella had a mind to make
a larger enquiry into the Manners of her Country: He asked her then, what were
the Laws and Customs of the Kingdom of Lovers? But she begged his pardon, if
she did not answer him; because since she was not born there, and knew them but
in part, she was afraid, she might say too much or too little. I came into that
Province, continued the Woman; but I and all my Prodecessors, are originally of
the Kingdom of Truth; my Mother was delivered of me there, and never had
another Child; she brought me up in the Country, till I was Thirteen Years of
Age, when the King by the advice of Physicians, commanded her to carry me to
the Kingdom of Lovers, from whence I come; to the end, that having my Breeding
in the Palace of Love, that Education which is more cheerful and soft, than the
Breeding of our Country, might render me more Fruitful than she had been. My
Mother carried me thither, and placed me out into that House of Pleasure.

I had much ado to comply with their Customs: At first they appeared to me to
be very rude; for, as you know, the opinions that we have sucked in with our
Mothers Milk, seem always to us to be the most rational; and then I was but
just come from the Kingdom of Truth, my native Country.

Not but that I perceived very well, that the Nation of Lovers, lived with more
Condescension and Indulgence, than ours did; for though every one gave it out,
That my Sight wounded dangerously, that my Looks killed, and that my Eyes
glanced out Flames, which consumed Hearts; yet the Goodness of all, and
especially of the Young Men, was so great, that they carressed, kissed and
hugged me, instead of revenging the Evil that I had done them. Nay, I was even
vexed with my self, for the disorders that I was the cause of; and that was the
reason, that out of Pity I told them one day, That I was resolved to run away.
But alas! how can you save your self, cried they all, embracing my Neck, and
kissing my Hands: Your House is on all Hands beset with Water; and so great the
danger appears to be, that undoubtedly you and we both had been already
drowned, without a Miracle.

How, said I to our Historian, is the Country of Lovers then subject to
Inundations? It may very well be said to be, replied she; for one of my
Gallants (and that Man would not have deceived me, because he loved me) wrote
to me, That for grief of my departure, he had shed an Ocean of Tears. I saw
another who assured me, That within the space of three days, his Eyes had
distilled a Fountain of Water: And as I was cursing, for their sakes, the fatal
Hour when first they saw me, one who reckoned himself of the number of my
Slaves, sent me word, that the night before, an overflowing of his Eyes, had
caused a Deluge. I was about to have left the World, that I might no longer be
the cause of so many Evils, had not the Messenger subjoined, that his Master
had charged him to assure me, That I had no cause to fear any thing, seeing the
Furnace of his Breast, had dried up that Deluge. In fine, you may Conjecture
how waterish the Kingdom of Lovers must needs be, since with them it is to weep
but by halves; when from under their Eyelids, there springs no more but
Rivulets, Fountains and Torrents.

I was in great pain, what Machine I could find, to save my self out of all
these Waters, that were like to over-whelm me: But one of my Lovers, who was
called The Jealous, advised me to pluck out my Heart, and then embark in it;
that I needed not fear, but that it would hold me, because it held so many
others; nor that I should sink, because it was too light: That all I was to be
afraid of, was to be burnt, because the Materials of such a Vessel, was much
subject to Fire: That I should be gone then upon the Sea of his Tears; that the
Fillet of his Love, would serve me for a Sail; and that the favorable Gale of
his Sighs, in spite of his Rivals Storm, would carry me to Shore.

I was a long while a musing with my self, how I could put that enterprise into
execution. The natural Fearfulness of my fex, hindered me from daring; but at
length the opinion that I had, that if the thing were not feasible, a Man would
not be such a Fool as to advise it, and far less a Lover to his Mistress, gave
me the Boldness.

I snatched a knife, slit up my Breast; nay, with both my hands I was already
searching in the wound, and with an undaunted look, I felt for my Heart to
pluck it out, when a Young Man, who loved me, came in. In spite of me he
wrested the Weapon from me, and then asked me the motive of that desperate
Action, as he called it. I gave him an account of it; but was much surprised,
when within a quarter of an hour after, I understood that he had brought the
Jealous before the Justice. Nevertheless the Magistrates, who, perhaps, feared
they might be biassed by the example or novelty of the Accident, referred that
Cause to the Parliament of the Just. There he was Condemned, besides perpetual
Banishment, to go end his Days as a Slave, in the Land of the Republic of
Truth; with prohibition to all that should descend of him, to the Fourth
Generation, ever to return into the Province of Lovers; nay, moreover he was
enjoined upon pain of Death, never more to use an Hyperbole.

Since that time I entertained a great affection for the Young Man that saved
me; and whether it were for that good Office, or because of the Passion,
wherewith he served me, when my Novitiat and his were out, I did not refuse
him, when he demanded me for one of his Wives.

We have always since lived very well together, and should have continued to do
so still, had he not, as I have told you, killed one of my Children twice; for
which I am going to emplore Justice, in the Kingdom of Philosophers.

Campanella and I were much astonished at the silence of that Man; and
therefore I endeavored to comfort him, judging, that such a profound
Taciturnity, was the Daughter of a very deep Remorse: But his Wife took me off
of that. It is not, said she, the excess of Sorrow that stops his Mouth, but
our Laws forbid all Criminals, that stand Indicted, to speak unless it be before
their Judges.

During that conversation, the Fowl was going on still, but I was strangely
amazed when I heard Campanella, with a Countenance full of transports of Joy,
cry out: Now welcome the dearest of all our Friends: Let Us go, Gentlemen,
continued the good Man, Let Us go meet Monsieur Des Carts; come let us alight,
he is just now arrived, and but Three Leagues off. For my part, I was
exceedingly surprised at this Eruption, for I could not comprehend, how he
could come to know the arrival of a Man, of whom we had received no News.
Certainly, said I to him, you have just now seen him in a Dream. If you call a
Dream, said he, what your Soul can see with as great a certainty, as your Eyes
see the light of Day; I confess it. But, cried I, is it not a Ravery to think,
that Monsieur Des Carts, whom you have not seen, since you left the World of
the Earth, is now but Three Leagues off, because you have imagined it to be so?

I had just uttered the last Syllable, when we saw Des Carts come. Immediately
Campanella ran to embrace him: They talked together a long while; but I could
not mind all the obliging Complements they made to one another, I was so full
of desire to learn of Campanella his Secret of Divination. That Philosopher,
who read my Passion in my looks, gave his Friend an account of it, and prayed
him not to take ill if he satisfied me. Monsieur Des Carts answered with a
smile, and my learned Preceptor discoursed in this manner. Out of all Bodies
Species's exhale, that is to say, Corporeal Images, which dance in the Air. Now
these Images still retain, notwithstanding their Agitation, the Figure, Color,
and all the other Proportions of the Object, from which they proceed: But
seeing they are very pure and subtle, they pass through our Organs, without
causing the least Sensation in them: They penetrate into the Soul, where
because of the Delicateness of its Substance, they imprint themselves, and so
represent to it Objects very remote, which the Senses cannot perceive. It Is a
thing that commonly happens here, where the mind is not shut up in a Body, made
of gross Matter, as in thy World. We'll tell thee how that comes to pass, when
we have had the leisure, fully to satisfy the mutual Desire, that each of us
have, to converse with the other; for certainly thou well deservest to be used
with the greatest Civility.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 5. line ult. read bought up. p. 26. l. 1. r. many. p. 31. l. 26. r.
height. p. 50. l. 4. r. in. p. 53. l. 14. dele of it. p. 100. l. 12. r.
directs. p. 101. l. 29. r. Crowd. p. 111. l. 25. r. mildest. p. 121. l. 29. r.
but. p. 127. l. 21. r. food. p. 128. l. 2. r. stunn. p. 136. l. 18. add is. p.
169. l. 18. r. wherein. p. 175. l. 19. r. for. p. 183. l. 9. r. least.


