THE White Robe: OR, The Undefiled Christian clothed in a White Garment; Held
forth in a Farewell Sermon PREACHED BY Mr. JOSEPH CARYL, At Magnus, August the
17. 1662.

Printed Anno Domini. 1662.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
MY design (in putting this Sermon in print in this plain style, without the
consent of the Author) is not to foment our own Discontents, or renew our own
Griefs; but for this end only, that the Words of a dying Minister, (or the
last Words of a good Shepherd departing from his Flock) may not be like the
morning dew upon the grass, but like the good seed that takes root, and brings
forth abundance of fruit.

You have here the white Garment, that honorable Robe, and Angelical Habit, put
upon all those who keep their garments undefiled. And truly I believe (this
Reverend Author) who has been so long a Master in the School of Christ, has
gotten so much experience, that he knows how to keep his own Garment undefiled;
therefore we may the more safer follow his counsel, that if we walk not in the
white of honor, and joy, and comfort here, we may walk in the white of Glory
hereafter.

A SERMON PREACHED BY Mr. JOSEPH CARYL, August the 17. 1662. at Magnus.
Upon Revel. 3. verse 4. the latter part of that Verse. And they shall walk
with me in white, for they are worthy.

IN the former part of this Verse, you heard the Commendation of those few
Names in Sardis: It was this, They had not defiled their garments. In this
latter part you have their Encouragement in their Reward: They shall walk with
me in white. In which Encouragement, I told you we might consider two things;
or take it in two parts. First, That they should walk with Christ. Secondly,
They should walk in white.


I have spoken to the former of these, they shall walk with Christ, and that
the Scripture holds forth under a twofold notion: First, As matter of duty. It
is a duty to walk with Christ. Secondly, It is a matter of promise: They that
keep their garments undefiled, and live in high favor with Christ, they shall
walk with Christ: we favor those walk with us.


Walking with Christ notes to us three things. I. That we have peace with him.
II. That we have intimacy with him. III. That his being so much above us, we
should have this favor from him.


And hence I noted the great privilege of the people of God, that they shall
walk with Christ.

I. It notes the great satisfaction on of the Saints to walk with Christ: they
shall be filled with his company.

II. How safe it is, and what safety there is to walk with Christ: he has a
wing to spread over them.

III. What opportunities such have, as walk with Christ.

IV. What liberty such have as walk with Christ.

V. Such as walk with Christ, may be sure he will communicate his secrets to
them, he will show them what they have to do.

II. We showed you the great goodness of Jesus Christ, that he should take such
creatures to walk with him, such defiled creatures.

III. Then let us take heed of keeping our garments undefiled, lest Jesus
Christ cast us out of his company, and we can no longer walk with Christ any
more. Oh take heed of walking blameless in the ways of Christ.

These things were spoken from the first Point. Now I come to the walking with
Christ in white.

In opening the Text, I told you white might be considered two ways: 1. As it
respects our state; and so that by way of Justification, and thus they shall
walk with Christ; but this is not the walking in white the Text means. 2. Here
is a further walking in white, and that is matter of reward to the people of
God.


1. To walk with Christ in white, it is matter of honor, white garments are
matter of honor. Princes, great Kings, walk in white garments, so the saints of
God shall walk in white. Christ will honor them, and give them honor among men,
because they have kept their garments undefiled. They shall walk in white like
great Princes, and honored persons. A good name is better then precious
ointment: they that are good indeed, they shall have a good name, they shall
walk in white. To keep the conscience clean, is to keep the credit clean, and
they who are careful not to blot their conversations, Christ will take care of
their reputations, that they be not blotted, that they walk with me in honor.

'Twas worthily spoken in the 11. of the Hebrews, They kept their garments
undefiled, and it was by the power of faith, and they obtained a good report by
faith, keeping themselves from the pollutions of the world, they kept
themselves a good report This honor and good report which we get by keeping our
garments undefiled, is sure: Abraham had an honorable title, Abraham, My
Friend, And a man after my own heart. 43 Isaiah, verse 4. Since thou wast
precious in my sight, thou wast honorable; and not only so, that the people of
God are honorable in his eyes, but they also sometimes walk in white, in the
eyes of the men of the world: he can give his people room in the opinions of
men, he moves their hearts to think well of them, and he opens their mouths to
speak well of them, though indeed the honor which they, who keep their garments
undefiled, have in this world, it is most usually from good men, from godly
men, and indeed honor of them is most honorable.

It is not much too us what others say or think of us, what the wicked world
judge of us, yet I say, God can, and does sometimes raise a testimony of honor
for his people amongst carnal men of the world. Joseph would not defile his
garments, he walked in white among men: true, he was cast into prison, what of
that? he was respected by the Keeper of the prison, and afterward he walked in
white.

In the whole Egyptian Court, Daniel was one that walked in white, with common
men of the world; first with the Prince of Enuchs, he had tender favor with
him, he told him he would not disobey God, to please men; yet he did not rail
against him, and call him a stubborn fellow, because he would not bow to Baal;
and afterward Daniel was as great a man as any in all that province, he walked
in white. God has created Testimonies of honor for his people from some men of
the world, yea, they many times put white garments upon them: So it was with
Christ in the 27. of Matthew, and the 4. verse, common men put a good report
upon Christ, a white garment. Truly, says the Centurion, this was the Son of
God. Truly this was a righteous man, says he, when he saw how he carried
himself at his death, he gave him a good report: thus it does come to pass, God
does sometimes keep up their honor in the world, who will not defile their
garments, nor touch the Sacrifice of Baal; and it follows so with them that the
Lord shall clear up their credit, and reputation, and they shall walk in white,
in honor, before the men of the world, 6 of Revelations, and the 11. verse,
where the Souls under the Altar are spoken of, who were miserably used in this
World, white Robes were given them, to every one of them, that is, their
evidences were cleared.

This may teach us the readiest way to the white robe, to the robe of honor, it
is to keep us from being defiled with sinful practices; certainly they who
please God, he can make the world to honor them, if God approve us, he can make
the world approve us too, yet we must not think to have all men speak well of
us; yet this we may say, if we keep our garments undefiled, we shall walk in
white, in the eyes of men, if God see our garments in the dirt, and spotted
with the filth of the world, it will spoil the honor we should have in the
world, as it was said of Arius, when his garments were defiled, they called him
Satanarius, that is to say, devilish: thus it may be, for the Lord has a time
to take our good name from us, to cause our light of honor to be taken from us.

And as he has caused us to walk in the white of honor in the world, so he
does sometimes cause us to walk in reproach with the world: they who defile
their garments, loose their honor with men, and they loose their joy they
should have hereafter. 2 Mal 9. ver. You have departed from my law, therefore
will I make you contemptible in the eyes of all men It is a design of the
spirit of wickedness to draw men to sin, that they may upbraid them, that I
conceive is the sense of the Apostle in the 6. of Galatians 13. For neither
they themselves who are circumcised keep the law, but desire to have you
circumcised, that they might glory in your flesh, says he; oh there are some
of this wicked spirit, that would draw men to such and such wickedness, not
that they joy in their returning; but that they might glory in their flesh,
when as they who stand fast, do even force a good testimony from their enemies:
So it was the unhappy chance of Cranmer, the Pope did persuade him to
subscribe, and did he get any honor by it? No truly, they did upbraid him, and
reproach him, and so he had dyed in a raving condition, had not the Lord been
merciful to him. I remember a speech of St. Austin, about drinking of Healths:
Oh, say they, it is upon the Kings Birthday, and we cannot avoid it, if we deny
it, say they, we shall be reproached and scorned of all men. He gives them many
answers to it; but one as I remember was this, God will so work, that if you
wont comply with them, they in their hearts will honor you: and whereas if you
did comply with them, they would dishonor you, and say you were base spirited.
That is one thing of this point, that keeping close to Jesus Christ will get
you this Reward; you shall walk with him in the white of honor: they shall walk
in the white of honor with his people, and it may be with the world too.

2. They shall walk in white; in the white of peace, and joy, and inward
comfort.

I showed you in the opening of the Text, how the Scripture calls that walking
in white, then the point is this: What ever becomes of the other white of honor
in the world, they shall be sure of this, that abundance of peace, and joy, and
comfort shall possess their souls that keep their garments white; they shall
walk in the inward white of joy and peace with Jesus Christ, and this is a
blessed reward.

Indeed, now this joy, this white of joy, arises in the soul three ways:

1. From the testimony of their own consciences. Oh they who have a good
testimony from their own consciences, walk in white. 2 Corin 1 chap. verse 12.
We have this for our rejoicing, the testimony of our consciences, that in all
simplicity and godly sincerity, we have our conversation in heaven: that is,
walking in white: this is our rejoicing, our conscience speaks well of us, and
kindly to us, and who is able to express the sweetness of this thing? None can
know what this is, but they that have it, as it is said of the New Name written
upon the white stone, 2 Revelations 17. It Is a thing beyond expression what the
joy and peace of a good conscience is! Now this I say, that our white garments,
and our walking in white, arises from the testimony of our consciences.

2. As from the testimony of our consciences, so from that testimony which is
greater than our consciences, the Spirit, the shedding abroad of Divine Love:
thus it is with those that do not defile their garments, but endure any thing
rather than defile their garments, Romans 5. third, fourth, and fifth verses.

And not only so, but we glory in Tribulations, knowing tribulations works
patience, and patience experience, and experience hope, and hope makes not
ashamed, (and whence was all this?) because of the Holy Ghost which was given
to us, this causes joy unspeakable. The Spirit it self bears witness with
our spirits, that we are the children of God, This witness does cause wonderful
joy, much more than the witness of our own consciences.

3 This joy does arise from that well-grounded Hope which that soul has that
keeps himself clean: hope of enjoying Heaven at last, hope of future glory is
our present joy. 5. Romans. 2. verse. By whom also we have aress by faith into
his grace, even we stand and rejoice in hope of the glory of God.

Now they who keep their garments white, have good ground of hope of the love
of God; therefore this must needs cause them to walk comfortably; as they who
have this hope puri^e themselves, so they who purify themselves have good
ground of their hope, and therein great cause to rejoice, 1 Pet. 1 5, 6. who
are kept by the power of God through faith unto salvation, ready to be revealed
in the last times, wherein ye greatly rejoice, though now for a season (if need
be) ye are in heaviness through many temptations.

We walk in white, in hope we have of that Inheritance: now lay these three
things together, If they who keep their garments undefiled, have the testimony
of their own consciences, and the testimony of the Spirit, shedding the Love of
God in their hearts, and a well-grounded hope of future glory, how can it be
but these must walk in white with Jesus Christ? that is, in comfort and joy of
the Spirit, and of their own spirits.

Thus David walked, he had abundance of joy upon his conscience of his own
integrity, and of keeping his heart and hands clean from those iniquities his
enemies charged him with, Psalm, verse 3. The Lord shall judge his people.
Judge me, O Lord, according to my righteousness, and according to mine
integrity that is in me. He appeals to the Lord, the Lord shall judge his
people: judge me, O Lord, according to my righteousness. Thus he appeals to God
himself, he had so much confidence, and his heart gave him that he kept himself
from those iniquities.

So Job walked in white: though his friends blackt him exceedingly, yet he walked
in white in his conscience, Job 16. verse 19. Behold my witness is in heaven,
and my record is on high; I have not only a witness in my conscience, but my
witness is above. He walked in white, notwithstanding all his afflictions from
God and his friends. Hezekiab walked in this white when Death looked him in the
face: Lord, thou know I have walked upright with thee.

I need not stay in the proof of the thing, let me make some Use and
Improvement of it.

Use. Is this blessed Reward to those who keep their garments white, to walk in
the white of peace and joy, then here we see the happiness of all those who are
true to Christ and his ways: 119 Psalm, verse 1. Blessed are the undefiled in
the way, who walk in the Law of the Lord. It Is just in the language of the
Text; they indeed shall walk in white, it is a great part of our blessedness to
have peace of conscience, and inward joy. Oh how much better is it, then the
peace and joy of this world, and the comforts of this world? 15. Proverbs 13.
verse. A merry heart, or another Translation says, A good Conscience, and
indeed a merry heart, and a good Conscience do but one explain the other; a
merry heart; or, a good conscience, is a continual feast: Here is no surfeiting
in this feast, but a continual music, continual joy and comfort; oh how
blessed are they who are undefiled in the way!

That which Christ said of the Lilie, Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed
like one of these, so may I say of the Lilie-white soul that keeps himself
white in the world, who keeps himself white in matter of practice, and worship,
Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these Lilie-white ones! Oh
the rivers of Consolations that flows to them, that keep themselves out of the
puddles of this world! If you keep your selves from the puddles of the world,
from the dung of the world, ye shall have rivers of joy flowing into your
souls. I may say to all such, as Solomon says in the 11. of the Ecclesiastes,
and the 9. verse, Go thy way: it is a familiar speaking to them; Go thy way
blessed soul, eat thy bread with joy, though the world feed thee with the bread
of adversity, and though the world give thee nothing but the water of
affliction, yet let thy garments be always white; though the world clothe thee
in mourning, and cause thee to prophecy in sackcloth with the Witnesses, yet
be of good comfort. O Lilie-white soul, for God now accepts thy works; now
drink thy wine with a merry heart, thy labor, thy ambitious labor is that,
whether present or absent, thou may be accepted of him, thou have the fruits
of thy labor, the Lord accepts thy works, therefore rejoice in it. Here is the
happiness of those who keep themselves clean from a defiled, and a defiling
world.

2. This Point gives us an account why the servants of Christ stand so strictly
upon their terms with the world, even while some call it peevishness, others
ignorance, others wilful stubbornness.

What is the reason? The reason is, because they understand in some measure,
and have had experience in some measure, what it is to walk in some measure
with Christ in white, and it has left such a relish upon their souls, that
they would not loose it for all the dainty Morsels of this world; they had
rather indeed walk with Christ in white, than walk with the world in scarlet;
therefore they must stand upon their terms, Proverbs 10. verse 32. The lips of
the righteous know what is acceptable: The Lips are instruments of Speech, not
faculties of Knowledge. Ay, but there is a great deal of commerce and converse
between the Speech and the Understanding; and a righteous man will speak
nothing with his lips, but what he understands, therefore he is said to
understand. The lips of the righteous know what is acceptable: To whom? The
lips of the righteous know what is acceptable to God; for they are acquainted
with his Rule, and God has showed them his Covenant, he has showed them the
pattern of his House, and the way of his Worship: now because they are pretty
well skilled, and know what is acceptable to God, therefore they will run any
hazard, undergo any affliction, rather than do any thing that will not please
God, or be hurtful to their own consciences; they are afraid of loosing their
peace, and comfort, and joy with God, therefore they will not let go the ways
of God, as Job says, Job 27. verse 6. I hold fast my integrity, and my heart
shall not reproach me so long as I live: as if he had said, You my friends have
reproached me, and I must bear it, but I am resolved my heart shall not
reproach me so long as I live.

The Heart or Conscience is a busy faculty, and has many offices, it records
what we do, and comes as a witness: the conscience is judge of what we do, and
accordingly reproves what we do amiss; therefore says Job, I Will take care of
this: I am more afraid of the report of conscience, then of any man whatsoever,
therefore I will not do any thing that may cause my conscience to reproach me
as long as I live. This is upon the heart of Gods people, they are resolved,
let men reproach and rail against them as much as they will, their hearts shall
not reproach them.

3. In the third place, let it be a word of Caution and Admonition to all at
this day, to take heed of defiling their garments: If you defile your garments,
Christ will pronounce another sentence, he will pronounce a sentence against
you, he has threatenings for those who defile their garments: In the place of
rewards, for those who keep them clean, they who defile their garments, shall
walk in garments of black, in the black of dishonor; as Job says, I walk all
day mourning without the Sun; the Sun of Righteousness shall not shine upon
them; oh what bitter and sower things have many tasted for defiling their
garments, when for favor of men, or to please men, they have stained their own
garments! What sad bitter things has been upon them, how has conscience risen
up against them! oh take heed of the After-claps of conscience, I may say take
heed of the Thunderclaps of conscience, for they will come upon you one time
or other, if you defile your garments: As they who to please men defile their
garments, often fall into their displeasure, whose favor they sought; so
oftentimes such fall into displeasure with themselves, or to be sure they shall
at last: there is many a one lives under the disfavor of his own conscience,
many a one that his conscience will not give him a good word, or good look,
whence has it been? they have defiled their garments. They who venture to do
things displeasing to God, shall not long be pleasing to themselves.

The story speaks of Francis Spira, that to please men to save an estate, he
defiled his garments, and he presently fell into rebuke of himself, and lived
under the rebuke of his conscience a long time.

Job 8. 15. v. speaking of the Hypocrite, his hope shall be cut off, the word
signifies to loath, so some translate, his hope shall be a loathing to him, he
shall loath his hope. There is twofold loathing: First, a loathing to
repentance, that is, a gracious loathing, a loathing our selves for our sins
against God. And there is a loathing of despair, and that is the loathing there
meant: the Hypocrite shall loath his own hope, that is, he shall loath it
despairingly. It Is an affliction to be loathed by men, but it is a dreadful
judgment, to be loathed of our selves despairingly; this is the suburbs of
hell, for this will be the portion of the damned for ever, for their vanity,
for for their madness, it is next to the Regions of hell, for their worm dies
not; and that is the worm of conscience: Oh therefore take heed, conscience may
be silent, yea, it may flatter for a time, but when conscience is provoked, it
will speak, yea thunder.

There is no such thundering Preacher in the world, as conscience is. The
Thundering of Mount Sinai, is not like the thundering of our conscience.

Fourthly and lastly, Let it be for Exhortation, and encouragement, for Christ
here makes it an encouragement, so let this be an encouragement to keep our
garments undefiled, the remembrance that we shall walk with him in white, in
the white of peace, and joy in this world, who would not walk in this white?
who would not be among those who keep their garments white in the midst of a
defiled, and defiling world?

Let me give you but a threefold Consideration, to stir you up to an exceeding
Exactness and Carefulness, not to defile your garments, seeing there is such a
Reward promised, such a Habit of White promised, as this White, wherein we
shall walk with Jesus Christ. It is an Angelical Happiness, so much Heaven is
come down upon ye while you have this White. It Is Heaven before Heaven. Matthew
28. verse 3. the Angel that came down to the Sepulcher of Christ, his Raiment
was white ^s the Light. The Martyrs when they had Angelical Apparitions, they
always appeared to them in white; as one upon the Rack thought he felt an Angel
supplying him, while his enemies tormented him.

Christ calls the Pharisees whited Sepulchers; they are whited, but whited
sepulchers, that is a woeful condition to be whited like a sepulcher. Thus it is
with those who defile themselves, they are whited walls, and whited sepulchers.
They that keep themselves white, shall walk in white, shall have Angelical
glory.

Secondly, Consider this white, or walking in white, is such as conquers all
the blackness of this world: it is not possible for the world to alter the
color of this white, how much dirt soever they put upon it: this white will be
white still, they cannot turn it to be black; they cannot take away this peace,
this joy from us; they cannot strip us of this habit, they may pull off your
fine garments, but you cannot be stripped of this white. Your joy shall no man
take from you. 2 Cor. 6. 20. As sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as poor, yet
making many rich; as having nothing, yet freely possessing all things. The
world may put us into a sad estate as to the world, yet we are not out of our
white garments, always rejoicing. Habakkuk 3. 13. Although the Fig Tree shall
not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the Vines, the labor of the Olive shall
fail, and the fields shall yield no meat, and the flock shall be cut off from
the fold, and there shall be no herd in the stalls, this cannot take away the
white garments, no, says the Prophet, yet I will rejoice in the Lord, and joy
in the God of my salvation: It Is a conquering joy, turns all sorrow into joy,
and blackness to white, therefore keep clean.

Thirdly, Consider this: this white of peace and joy, as it is a joy
unconquerable, so it is that will be with us most when we most need it, when
worldly joys are farthest from us, then this joy will be near to us; that is a
mavelous comfort, to have comfort in its season. The Martyrs who have kept
themselves white, have had this white, and walked in this white; but when they
have most need of it, and come actually to suffering, then they have had most
of it. This is a blessed thing! this the Martyrs of Jesus Christ have given
witness of; although they have had peace and joy in their consciences at other
times, yet never so much as in the hour of temptation. When they have been cast
into the Coalhouse, they have had white garments; when they have been cast into
prisons and dungeons, how have they rejoiced? It Is said of Paul and Silas, they
were men that kept their garments undefiled, and they had a great deal of peace
and joy when they were put in the Stocks and Dungeons, then they sung at
midnight: what an enlargement of heart had they at that time?

So in the Stories of ancient and latter Times, how have they rejoiced, and
gone triumphing to the Gibbet? for then Christ gives most of this white! It
has been the use of Persecutors to put filthy garments upon the Martyrs,
drawing pictures of Devils upon them; and as their malice has risen to the
height (that in time of Sufferings) to make them look like Devils, then the
Love of Christ has risen to the height, and they have been full of peace and
joy at that time, therefore be encouraged to walk with Christ in this white.
This white is an Angelical Habit, it is an unconquerable Habit, and it is that
will be with us most when we have most need of it. I should have added a third,
as walking with Christ is an honor, and it is walking in the white of peace and
joy.

So thirdly, it is a truth of walking with Christ in the white of glory, as in
the Transfiguration, which was a Type of Heaven, his raiment was white, so as
no Fuller on earth was able to whiten it; and that is it which I might have
spoken of to ye, that they who keep their garments undefiled here, shall be
sure of that to walk with Christ in glory hereafter. If we should miss of the
white of honor, and have not much of the white of joy, yet be sure we shall
walk with Christ in the white of Glory.

I would only say this to you, That as I have from this Text, and many more,
labored to bring poor Souls into a white state, to a state of Justification, to
a state of Holiness; and as I have been pressing you to keep your garments
white, that you may be in the habit of white, as your Reward; so it shall be
the desire and prayers of my heart, that if I should have no more opportunities
among you, that as you have been stirred up to get into this white of Grace,
that you and I may meet in the white of Glory, where we shall never part.

Here are three white: The white of Honor is good, the white of Peace and Joy
is very good, the white of Glory is best of all, that is the answer of all our
Prayers, and that is the issue of all our Working, then we shall have as much
as we can hold for ever.

FINIS.

