POPERY Truly Displayed in its Bloody Colors: Or, a Faithful NARRATIVE OF THE
Horrid and Unexampled Massacres, Butcheries, and all manner of Cruelties, that
Hell and Malice could invent, committed by the Popish Spanish Party on the
Inhabitants of West India: TOGETHER With the Devastations of several Kingdoms
in America by Fire and Sword, for the space of Forty and Two Years, from the
time of its first Discovery by them.

Composed first in Spanish by Bartholomew de las Casas, a Bishop there, and an
Eyewitness of most of these Barbarous Cruelties; afterward Translated by him
into Latin, then by other hands, into High Dutch, Low Dutch, French, and now
Taught to speak Modern English.

London, Printed for R. Hewson at the Crown in Cornhil, near the Stocks-Market.
1689.

THE ARGUMENT OF THIS NARRATIVE By way of PREFACE TO THE READER.
THE Reverend Author of this Compendious summary was Bartholomaeus de las Casas
alias Casaus, a Pious and Religious person, (as appears by his zealous
Transports in this Narrative for promotion of the Christian Faith) elevated
from a Friar of the Dominican Order to sit in the Episcopal Chair, who was
frequently importuned by Good and Learned Men, particularly Historians, to
Publish this summary; who so prevailed with him, that he Collected out of that
copious History which might and ought to be written on this subject, the
Contents of this concise Treatise with intention to display unto the World the
Enormities, etc. the Spaniards committed in America, during their residence
there, to their eternal ignominy; and for the Author finding that no
Admonitions or Reprehensions, how mild soever could operate upon or sink into
these rocky-hearted Tyrants in those Occidental Parts; he thereupon took up a
firm resolution, being then about 50 years of age (as he himself declares) to
run the Hazards and Dangers by Sea, and the Risque of a long Voyage into Spain,
there to acquaint and Certify the most Illustrious Prince Phillip the Son and
Heir of his Imperial Majesty Charles the Fifth of Blessed Memory, with the
Horrid crimes, etc. perpetrated in those Countries, part whereof he had seen,
and part heard from such as boasted of their Wickedness. Whereupon his
Caesarean Majesty moved with a tender generous and Christian compassion toward
these Inhabitants and Countries of America, languishing for want of redress, he
called a Council at Valedolid, Anno Dom. 1542. consisting of Learned and Able
Men, in Order to the Reformation of the West-Indian Government, and took such a
course, that from that time their Tyranny and cruelty against those Barbarians
was somewhat repressed, and those Nations in some measure delivered from that
intolerable and more then Egyptian Bondage, or at least the Spaniards ill
usage and treatment of the Americans was alleviated and abated. This Book
mostly Historical, partly Typographical, was Published first by the Author in
Spanish at Sevil, after that Translated into Latin by himself; and in process
of time into High Dutch, Low Dutch, French and now English; which is the Sixth
Language it has been Taught to speak, that every one of what Nation soever
might in this Narrative contemplate and see as in a mirror the dismal and
pernicious fruits, that lacquey and attend unlimitted and close fisted Avarice,
and thereby Learn to abhor and detest it, Cane pejus and angue: it being the
predominant and chiefest motive to the commission of such inexpressible
Outrages, as here in part are faintly, not fully represented. Which sin the
Pagan Indians themselves did exprobrate in the Spaniards with all Detestation,
Ignominy and Disgrace: for when they had taken some of them Prisoners (which
was rarely) they bound them hand and foot, laid them on the ground, and then
pouring melted Gold down their Throats, cried out and called to them aloud in
derision, yield, throw up thy Gold O Christian! Vomit and spew out that Metal
which has so inquinated and envenomed both Body and Soul, that has stained
and infected thy mind with desires and contrivances, and thy hands with
Commission of such matchless Enormities. I will shut up all this, being but an
Extract of what is in the Prefatory part of the Original. I earnestly beg and
desire all Men to be persuaded, that this summary was not published upon any
private Design, sinister ends or affection in favor or prejudice of any
particular Nation; but for the public Emolument and Advantage of all true
Christians and moral Men throughout the whole World.

Farewell
THE CRUELTIES OF THE Spaniards Committed in AMERICA.
AMERICA was discovered and found out An. Dom. 1492. and the Year ensuing
inhabited by the Spaniards, and afterward a multitude of them traveled thither
from Spain for the space of Nine and Forty Years. Their first attempt was on
the Spanish Island, which indeed is a most fertile Soil, and at present in
greatest Reputation for its Spatiousness and Length, containing in
Circumference Six Hundred Miles: Nay, it is on all sides surrounded with an
almost innumerable number of Islands, which we found so well peopled with
Natives and Foreigners, that there is scarce any Region in the Universe
fortified with so many Inhabitants: But the main Land or Continent, distant
from this Island Two Hundred and Fifty Miles and upwards, extends it self above
Ten Thousand Miles in Length near the Sea-shoar, which Lands are some of them
already discovered, and more may be found out in process of time: And such a
multitude of People inhabits these Countries, that it seems as if the
Omnipotent God had Assembled and Convocated the major part of Mankind in this
part of the World.

Now this infinite multitude of Men are by the Creation of God innocently
simple, altogether void of and averse to all manner of Craft, Subtlety and
Malice, and most Obedient and Loyal Subjects to their Native Sovereigns; and
behave themselves very patiently, submissively and quietly toward the
Spaniards, to whom they are subservient and subject; so that finally they live
without the least thirst after revenge, laying aside all litigiousness,
Commotion and hatred.

This is a most tender and effeminate people, and of so imbecile and
unequal-balanced temper, that they are altogether incapable of hard labor, and
in few years, by one Distemper or other soon expire, so that the very Issue of
Lords and Princes, who among us live with great affluence, and fare
deliciously, are not more effeminate and tender than the Children of their
Husbandmen or Laborers: This Nation is very Necessitous and Indigent, Masters
of very slender Possessions, and consequently, neither Haughty, nor Ambitious.
They are as parsimonious in their Diet, as the Holy Fathers were in their
frugal Life in the Desert, known by the name of Eremites. They go naked, having
no other Covering but what conceals their Pudends from public sight. An hairy
Plad, or loose Coat, about an Ell, or a coarse woven Cloth at most Two Else
long serves them for the warmest Winter Garment. They lie on a coarse Rug or
Matt, and those that have the most plentiful Estate or Fortunes, the better
sort, use Network, knotted at the four corners in lieu of Beds, which the
Inhabitants of the Island of Hispaniola, in their own proper Idiom term
Hammacks. The Men are pregnant and docible. The Natives tractable, and capable
of Morality or Goodness, very apt to receive the instilled Principles of the
Catholic Religion; nor are they averse to Civility and good Manners, being not
so much discomposed by variety of Obstructions, as the rest of Mankind;
insomuch, that having sucked in (if I may so express my self) the very first
Rudiments of the Christian Faith, they are so transported with Zeal and Fervor
in the exercise of Ecclesiastical Sacraments, and Divine Service, that the very
Religioso's themselves, stand in need of the greatest and most signal patience
to undergo such extreme Transports. And to conclude, I my self have heard the
Spaniards themselves (who dare not assume the Confidence to deny the good
Nature praedominant in them) declare, that there was nothing wanting in them
for the acquisition of Eternal Beatitude, but the sole Knowledge and
Understanding of the Deity.

The Spaniards first assaulted these innocent Sheep, so qualified by the
Almighty, as is premention'd, like most cruel Tigers, Wolves and Lions
hunger-starved, studying nothing, for the space of Forty Years, after their
first Landing, but the Massacre of these Wretches, whom they have so inhumanely
and barbarously butchered and harassed with several kinds of Torments, never
before known, or heard (of which you shall have some account in the following
Discourse) that of Three Millions of Persons, which lived in Hispaniola it
self, there is at present but the inconsiderable Remnant of scarce Three
Hundred. Nay the Isle of Cuba, which extends as far, as Valledolid in Spain is
distant from Rome, lies now incultivated, like a Desert, and entombed in its
own Ruins. You may also find the Isles of St. John, and Jamaica, both large and
fruitful places, unpeopled and desolate. The Lucayan Islands on the North-side,
adjacent to Hispaniola and Cuba, which are Sixty in number, or thereabout,
together with those, vulgarly known by the name of the Gigantic Isles, and
others, the most infertile whereof, exceeds the Royal Garden of Sevil in
fruitfulness, a most healthful and pleasant Climat, is now laid waste and
uninhabited; and whereas, when the Spaniards first arrived here, above Five
Hundred Thousand Men dwelt in it, they are now cut off, some by slaughter, and
others ravished away by Force and Violence, to work in the Mines of Hispaniola,
which was destitute of Native Inhabitants: For a certain Vessel, sailing to
this Isle, to the end, that the Harvest being over (some good Christian, moved
with Piety and Pity, undertook this dangerous Voyage, to convert Souls to
Christianity) the remaining gleanings might be gathered up, there were only
found Eleven Persons, which I saw with my own Eyes. There are other Islands
Thirty in number, and upward bordering upon the Isle of St. John, totally
unpeopled; all which are above Two Thousand Miles in length, and yet remain
without Inhabitants, Native, or People.

As to the firm Land, we are certainly satisfied, and assured, that the
Spaniands by their barbarous and execrable Actions have absolutely depopulated
Ten Kingdoms, of greater extent than all Spain, together with the Kingdoms of
Arragon and Portugal, that is to say, above One Thousand Miles, which now lie
wast and desolate, and are absolutely ruinated, when as formerly no other
Country whatsoever was more populous. Nay we dare boldly affirm, that during
the Forty years space, wherein they exercised their sanguinary and detestable
Tyranny in these Regions, above Twelve Millions (computing Men, Women, and
Children) have undeservedly perished; nor do I conceive that I should deviate
from the Truth by saying that above Fifty Millions in all paid their last Debt
due to Nature.

Those that arrived at these Islands from the remotest parts of Spain, and who
pride themselves in the Name of Christians, steered Two courses principally, in
order to the Extirpation, and Exterminating of this People from the face of the
Earth. The first whereof was by raising an unjust, sanguinolent, cruel War. The
other, by putting all them to death, who hitherto, thirsted after their
Liberty, or designed (which the most Potent, Strenuous and Magnanimous Spirits
intended) to recover their pristin Freedom, and shake off the Shackles of so
injurious a Captivity: For they being taken off in War, none but Women and
Children were permitted to enjoy the benefit of that Country-Air; in whom they
did in succeeding times lay such a heavy Yoke, that the very Brutes were more
happy than they: To which Two Species of Tyranny as subalternate things to the
Genus, the other innumerable Courses they took to extirpate and make this a
desolate people, may be reduced and referred.

Now the ultimate end and scope that incited the Spaniards to endeavor the
Extirpation and Desolation of this People, was Gold only; that thereby growing
opulent in a short time, they might arrive at once at such Degrees and
Dignities, as were no ways consistent with their Persons.

Finally, in one word, their Ambition and Avarice, than which the heart of Man
never entertained greater, and the vast Wealth of these Regions; the Humility
and Patience of the Inhabitants (which made their approach to these Lands more
facil and easy) did much promote the business: Whom they so despicably
contemned, that they treated them (I speak of things which I was an Eyewitness
of, without the least fallacy) not as Beasts, which I cordially wished they
would, but as the most abject dung and filth of the Earth; and so sollicitous
they were of their Life and Soul, that the abovementioned number of People
died without understanding the true Faith or Sacraments. And this also is as
really true as the praecedent Narration (which the very Tyrants and cruel
Murderers cannot deny without the stigma of a lie) that the Spaniards never
received any injury from the Indians, but that they rather reverenced them as
Persons descended from Heaven, until that they were compelled to take up Arms,
provoked thereunto by repeated Injuries, violent Torments, and injust
Butcheries.

Of the Island HISPANIOLA.
IN this Isle, which, as we have said, the Spaniards first attempted, the
bloody slaughter and destruction of Men first began: for they violently forced
away Women and Children to make them Slaves, and ill-treated them, consuming
and wasting their Food, which they had purchased with great sweat, toil, and
yet remained dissatisfied too, which every one according to his strength and
ability, and that was very inconsiderable (for they provided no other Food than
what was absolutely necessary to support Nature without superfluity, freely
bestowed on them; and one individual Spaniard consumed more Victuals in one
day, than would serve to maintain Three Families a Month, every one consisting
of Ten Persons. Now being oppressed by such evil usage, and afflicted with such
great Torments and violent Entertainment they began to understand, that such
Men as these had not their Mission from Heaven; and therefore some of them
concealed their Provisions and others their Wives and Children in lurking
holes; but some, to avoid the obdurate and dreadful temper of such a Nation,
sought their Refuge on the craggy tops of Mountains; for the Spaniards did not
only entertain them with Cuffs, Blows, and wicked Cudgelling, but laid violent
hands also on the Governors of Cities; and this arrived at length to that
height of Temerity and Impudence, that a certain Captain was so audacious as to
abuse the Confort of the most puissant king of the whole Isle. From which time
they began to consider by what ways and means they might expel the Spaniards
out of their Country, and immediately took up Arms. But, good God, what Arms,
do you imagine? Namely such, both Offensive and Defensive, as resemble Reeds
wherewith Boys sport with one another, more than Manly Arms and Weapons.

Which the Spaniards no sooner perceived, but they, mounted on generous Steeds,
well weapon'd with Lances and Swords, began to exercise their bloody Butcheries
and Stratagems, and overrunning their Cities and Towns, spared no Age, or Sex,
nay not so much as Women with Child, but ripping up their Bellies, tore them
alive in pieces. They laid Wagers among themselves, who should with a Sword at
one blow cut, or divide a Man in two; or which of them should decollate or
behead a Man, with the greatest dexterity; nay farther, which should sheath his
Sword in the Bowels of a Man with the quickest dispatch and expedition.

They snatched young Babes from the Mothers Breasts, and then dashed out the
Brains of those Innocents against the Rocks; others they cast into Rivers
scoffing and jeering them, and called upon the Bodies when falling with
derision, the true testimony of their Cruelty, to come to them, and inhumanely
exposing others to their Merciless Swords, together with the Mothers that gave
them Life.

They erected certain Gibbets, large, but low made, so that their Feet almost
reached the ground, every one of which was so ordered as to bear Thirteen
Persons in Honor and Reverence (as they said blasphemously) of our Redeemer
and his Twelve Apostles, under which they made a Fire to burn them to Ashes
whilst hanging on them: But those they intended to preserve alive, they
dismissed, their Hands half cut, and still hanging by the Skin, to carry their
Letters missive to those that fly from us and ly sculking on the Mountains, as
an exprobration of their flight.

The Lords and Persons of Noble Extract were usually exposed to this kind of
Death; they ordered Gridirons to be placed and supported with wooden Forks, and
putting a small Fire under them, these miserable Wretches by degrees with loud
Shreiks and exquisite Torments, at last Expird.

I once saw Four or Five of their most Powerful Lords laid on these Gridirons,
and thereon roasted, and not far off, Two or Three more overspread with the
same Commodity, Man's Flesh; but the shril Clamours which were heard there
being offensive to the Captain, by hindering his Repose, he commanded them to be
strangled with a Halter. The Executiouer (whose Name and Parents at Sevil are
not unknown to me) prohibited the doing of it; but stopped Gags into their Mouths
to prevent the hearing of the noise (he himself making the Fire) till that they
dyed, when they had been roasted as long as he thought convenient. I was an
Eyewitness of these and an innumerable Number of other Cruelties: And because
all Men, who could lay hold of the opportunity, sought out lurking holes in the
Mountains, to avoid as dangerous Rocks so Brutish and Barbarous a People,
Strangers to all Goodness, and the Extirpaters and Adversaries of Men, they
bred up such fierce hunting Dogs as would devour an Indian like a Hog, at first
sight in less than a moment: Now such kind of Slaughters and Cruelties as these
were committed by the Curs, and if at any time it happened, (which was rarely)
that the Indians irritated upon a just account destroyed or took away the Life
of any Spaniard, they promulgated and proclaimed this Law among them, that One
Hundred Indians should dye for every individual Spaniard that should be slain.

Of the Kingdoms contained in Hispaniola.
This Isle of Hispaniola was made up of Six of their greatest Kingdoms, and as
many most Puissant Kings, to whose Empire almost all the other Lords, whose
Number was infinite, did pay their Allegiance. One of these Kingdoms was called
Magua, signifying a Campaign or open Country; which is very observable, if any
place in the Universe deserves taking notice of, and memorable for the
pleasantness of its Soituation; for it is extended from South to North Eighty
Miles, in breadth, Five, Eight, and in some parts Ten Miles in length; and is
on all sides enclosed with the highest Mountains, above Thirty Thousand Rivers,
and Rivulets water her Coasts, Twelve of which prodigious Number do not yield
at all in magnitude to those famous Rivers, the Eber, Duer, and Guadalquivir;
and all those Rivers which have their Sourse or Spring from the Mountain lying
Westerly, the Number whereof is Twenty Thousand) are very rich in Mines of
Gold; on which Mountain lies the Province of rich Mines, whence that exquisite
pure Gold of Twenty Four Carracts weight, takes denomination. The King and Lord
of this Kingdom was named Guarionex, who governed within the Compass of his
Dominions so many Vassals and Potent Lords, that every one of them was able to
bring into the Field Sixteen Thousand Soldiers for the service of Guarionex
their Supreme Lord and Soverain, when summoned thereunto. Some of which I was
acquainted with. This was a most Obedient Prince, endued with great Courage and
Morality, Naturally of a Pacifick Temper, and most devoted to the Service of
the Castilian Kings. This King commanded and ordered his Subjects, that every
one of those Lords under his Jurisdiction, should present him with a Bell full
of Gold; but in succeeding times, being unable to perform it, they were
commanded to cut it in two, and fill one part therewith, for the Inhabitants of
this Isle were altogether unexperienced, and unskilful in Mine-works, and the
digging Gold out of them. This Cain proffered his Service to the King of
Castile, on this Condition, that he would take care, that those Lands should be
cultivated and manured, wherein, during the Reign of Isabella, Queen of
Castile, the Spaniards first set footing and fixed their Residence, extending
in length even to Santo Domingo, the space of Fifty Miles. For he declared (nor
was it a Fallacy, but an absolute Truth,) that his Subjects understood not the
practical use of digging in Golden Mines. To which promises he had readily and
voluntarily condescended, to my own certain knowledge, and so by this means,
the king would have received the Annual Revenue of Three Millions of Spanish
Crowns, and upward, there being at that very time in that Island Fifty Cities
more ample and spacious than Sevil it self in Spain.

But what returns by way of Remuneration and Reward did they make this so
Clement and Benign Monarch, can you imagine, no other but this? They put the
greatest Indignity upon him imaginable in the Person of his Consort who was
violated by a Spanish Captain altogether unworthy of the Name of Christian. He
might indeed probably expect to meet with a conveninent time and opportunity of
revenging this Ignominy so injuriously thrown upon him by preparing Military
Forces to attaque him; but he rather chose to abscond in the Province De los
Ciquayos (wherein a Puissant Vassal and subject of his Ruled) divested of his
Estate and Kingdom, and there live and dye an Exile. But the Spaniards
receiving certain information, that he had absented himself, connived no longer
at his Concealment but raised War against him, who had received them with so
great humanity and kindness, and having first laid waste and desolate the whole
Region, at last found, and took him Prisoner, who being bound in Fetters was
conveyed on board of a ship in order to his transfretation to Castile, as a
Captive: but the Vessel perished in the Voyage, wherewith many Spaniards were
also lost, as well as a great weight of Gold, among which there was a
prodigious Ingot of Gold, resembling a large Loaf of Bread, weighing 3600
Crowns; Thus it pleased God to revenge their enormous Impieties.

A Second Kingdom was named Marien, where there is to this day a Haven, upon
the utmost Borders of the Plain or open Country toward the North, more fertile
and large then the Kingdom of Portugal; and really deserving constant and
frequent Inhabitants: For it abounds with Mountains, and is rich in Mines of
Gold and Orichalcum, a kind of Copper Metal mixed with Gold; The Kings name of
this place was Guacanagari, who had many powerful Lords (some whereof were not
unknown to me) under his subjection. The first that Landed in this Kingdum when
he discovered America, was an Admiral well stricken in years, who had so
hospitable and kind a reception from the aforesaid Guacanagari, as well as all
those Spaniards that accompanied him in that Voyage, giving them all imaginable
help and assistance (for the Admirals Vessel was sunk on their Coasts) that I
heard it from his own mouth, he could not possibly have been entertained with
greater Caresses and Civilities from his own Parents in his own Native Country.
But this King being forced to fly to avoid the Spanish slaughter and Cruelty,
deprived of all he was Master of, died in the Mountains; and the rest of the
Potentates and Nobles, his subjects, perished in that servitude and Vassalage;
as you shall find in this following Treatise.

The Third Kingdom was distinguished by the Appellation of Maquana, another
admirable healthful and fruitful Region, where at present the most refined
Sugar of the Island is made. Caonabe then Reigned there, who surmounted all the
rest in Power, State, and the splendid Ceremonies of His Government. This King
beyond all expectation was surpised in his own Palace, by the great subtilty
and industry of the Spaniards, and after carried on board in order to his
Transportation to Castile, but there being at that time six Ships Riding in the
Haven, and ready to set Sail such an impetuous storm suddenly arose, that they
as well as the Passengers and Ships Riding in the Haven, and ready to set Sail
such an impetuous storm suddenly arose, that they as well as the Passengers and
Ships Crew were all lost, together with King Canabao loaded with Irons; by
which judgment the Almighty declared, that this was as unjust and impious an
Act as any of the former. This King had three or four Brothers then Living, Men
of strength and Valor, who being highly incensed at the Captivity of their
King and Brother, to which he was injuriously reduced, having also intelligence
of the Devastations and Butcheries committed by the Spaniards in other Regions,
and not long after hearing of their Brothers death, took up Arms to revenge
themselves of the Enemy, whom the Spaniards met with, and certain party of
Horse (which proved very offensive to the Indians) made such havoc and
slaughter among them, that the half of this Kingdom was laid waste and
depopulated.

Xaraqua is the Fourth Kingdom, and as it were the Center and middle of the
whole Island, and is not to be equalled for fluency of Speech and politeness of
Idiom or Dialect by any Inhabitants of the other Kingdoms, and in Policy and
Morality transcends them all. Herein the Lords and peers abounded, and the very
Populace exceled in stature and habit of Body: Their King was Behechio by name
who had a Sister called Anacaona, and both the Brother as well as Sister had
loaded the Spaniards with Benefits and singular acts of Civility, and by
delivering them from the evident and apparent danger of Death, did signal
services to the Castilian Kings. Bebechio dying the supreme power of the
Kingdom fell to Anacaona: But it happened one day, that the Governor of an
Island, attended by 60 Horse, and 30 Foot (now the Cavalry was sufficiently
able to unpeople not only the Isle, but also the whole Continent) he summoned
about 300 Dynasta's, or Noblemen to appear before him, and commanded the most
powerful of them, being first crowded into a Thatcht Barn or Hovel, to be
exposed to the fury of the merciless Fire, and the rest to be pierced with
Lances, and run through with the point of the Sword by a multitude of Men: And
Anacaona her self who (as we said before,) swayed the Imperial Scepter, to her
greater honor was hanged on a Gibbet. And if it fell out that any person
instigated by Compassion or Covetousness, did entertain any Indian Boys and
mount them on Horses, to prevent their Murder, another was appointed to follow
them, who ran them through the back or in the hinder parts, and if they chanced
to escape Death, and fall to the ground, they immediately cut off his Legs; and
when any of those Indians, that survived these Barbarous Massacres, betook
themselves to an Isle eight miles distant, to escape their Butcheries, they
were then committed to servitude during Life.

The Fifth Kingdom is Hiquey, over whom Queen Hiquanama, a superannuated
Princess, whom the Spaniards Crucified, did preside and Govern. The number of
those I saw here burnt, dismembered, and rackt with various Torments, as well as
others, the poor Remnants of such matchless Villainies, who surviving were
enslaved, is infinite. But because so much might be said concerning the
Assassinations and Depopulating of these people, as cannot without great
difficulty be published in Writing (nor do I conceive that one single part of
1000 that is here contained can be fully displayed) I will only add one remark
more of the prementioned Wars, in lieu of a Corollary or Conclusion, and aver
upon my Conscience, that notwithstanding all the abovenamed Injustice,
profligate Enormities and other Crimes which I omit, (tho sufficiently known to
me) the Indians did not, nor was it in their power to give any greater occasion
for the Commission of them, than Pious Religioso's Living in a well regulated
Monastic Life did afford for any Sacrilegious Villains to deprive them of their
Goods and Life at the same time, or why they who by flight avoided death,
should be detained in perpetual, not to be ransomed Captivity and Slavery. I
add farther, that I really believe, and am satisfied by certain undeniable
conjectures, that at the very juncture of time, when all these outrages were
committed in this Isle, the Indians were not so much as guilty of one single
mortal sin of Commission against the Spaniards, that might deserve from any Man
revenge or require satisfaction. And as for those sins, the punishment whereof
God has reserved to himself, as the immoderate desire of Revenge, Hatred, Envy
or inward rancor of Spirit, to which they might be transported against such
Capital Enemies as the Spaniards were, I judge that very few of them can be
justly accused of them; for their impetuosity and vigor I speak experimentally,
was inferior to that of Children of ten or twelve years of age: and this I can
assure you, that the Indians had ever a just cause of raising War against the
Spaniards, and the Spaniards on the contrary never waged a just War against
them, but what was more injurious and groundless then any undertaken by the
worst of Tyrants. All which I affirm of all their other Transactions and
passages in America.

The Warlike Engagements being over, and the Inhabitants all swept away, they
divided among themselves the Young Men, Women and Children promiscuously
reserved for that purpose, one obtained thirty, another forty, to this Man one
hundred were disposed, to the other two hundred, and the more any one was in
favor with the domineering Tyrant (whom they styled Governor) the more he
became Master of, upon this pretense, and with this Proviso, that he should see
them instructed in the Catholic Religion, when as they themselves to whom they
were committed to be taught, and the care of their Souls entrusted to them
were, for the major part Idiots, Cruel, Avaritious, infected and stained with
all sorts of Vices. And this was the great care they had of them, they sent the
Males to the Mines to dig and bring away the Gold, which is an intolerable
Labor; but the Women they made use of to Manure and Till the ground, which is a
toil most irksom even to Men of the strongest and most robust constitutions;
allowing them no other food but Herbage, and such kind of unsubstantial
nutriment, so that the Nursing Women's Milk was exsiccated and so dried up, that
the young Infants lately brought forth, all perished, and Females being
separated from and debarred cohabitation with Men, there was no Prolification
or raising up issue among them. The Men died in Mines, hunger starved and
oppressed with labor, and the Women perished in the Fields, harassed and broken
with the like Evils and Calamities: Thus an infinite number of Inhabitants that
formerly peopled this Island were exterminated and dwindled away to nothing by
such Consumptions. They were compelled to carry burdens of eighty or one
hundred pound weight, and that an hundred or two hundred miles complete; and
the Spaniards were born by them on the Shoulders in a pensil Vehicle or
Carriage, or kind of Beds made of Network by the Indians; for in Truth they
made use of them as Beasts to carry the burdens and cumbersom luggage of their
journeys, insomuch that it frequently happened, that the Shoulders and Backs of
these Indians were deeply marked with their scourges and stripes, just as they
use to serve a tired Jade, accustomed to burdens. And as to those slashes with
whips, blows with staves, cuffs and boxes, maledictions and curses, with a
Thousand of such kind of Torments they suffered during the fatigue of their
laborious journeys it would require a long tract of time, and many Reams of
Paper to describe them, and when all were done would only create Horror and
Consternation in the Reader.

But here it is observable, that the desolation of these Isles and Provinces
took beginning since the decease of the most Serene Queen Isabella, about the
Year 1504. for before that time very few of the Provinces situated in that
Island were oppressed or spoiled with unjust Wars, or violated with general
devastation as after they were, and most if not all these things were concealed
and masked from the Queens knowledge (whom I hope God has Crowned with Eternal
Glory) for she was transported with servent and wonderful zeal, nay, almost
Divine desires for the Salvation and preservation of these people, which things
so exemplary as these we having seen with our eyes, and felt with our hands,
cannot easily be forgotten.

Take this also for a general Rule, that the Spaniards upon what American Coast
soever they arrived, exercised the same Cruelties, Slaughters, Tyrannies and
detestable Oppressions on the most innocent Indian Nation, and diverting
themselves with delights in new sorts of Torments, did in time improve in
Barbarism and Cruelty; wherewith the Omnipotent being incensed suffered them to
fall by a more desperate and dangerous lapse into a reprobate sense.

Of the Isles of St. John and Jamaica.
IN the Year 1509. the Spaniards sailed to the Islands of St. John and Jamaica
(resembling Gardens and Be hives) with the same purpose and design they
proposed to themselves in the Isle of Hispaniola, perpetrating innumerable
Robberies and Villainies as before; whereunto they added unheard of Cruelties by
Murdering, Burning, Roasting and Exposing Men to be torn in pieces by Dogs; and
Finally by afflicting and harassing them with un-exampled Oppressions and
Torments in the Mines, they spoiled and unpeopled this Country of these
Innocents. These two Isles containing six hundred thousand at least, though at
this day there are scarce two hundred men to be found in either of them, the
remainder perishing without the knowledge of Christian Faith or Sacrament.

Of the Isle of Cuba.
IN the Year of our Lord 1511. They passed over to Cuba, which contains as much
ground in length as there is distance between Valledolid and Rome, well
furnished with large and stately Provinces and very populous, against whom they
proceeded with no more humanity and Clemency, or indeed to speak truth with
greater Savageness and Brutality. Several memorable Transactions worthy
observation, passed in this Island. A certain Cacic a potent Peer, named
Hathney, who not long before fled from Hispaniola to Cuba for Refuge from
Death, or Captivity during Life; and understanding by certain Indians that the
Spaniards intended to steer their course thither, made this Oration to all his
People Assembled together. You are not ignorant that there is a rumor spread
abroad among us of the Spaniards Arrival, and are sensible by woeful experience
how such and such (naming them) and Hayti (so they term Hispaniola in their own
Language) with their Inhabitants have been treated by them, that they design to
visit us with equal intentions of committing such acts as they have hitherto
been guilty of. But do you not know the cause and reason of their coming? We
are altogether ignorant of it, they replied, but sufficiently satisfied that
they are cruelly and wickedly inclined: Then thus, said he it is, they adore a
certain Covetous Deity, whose cravings are not to be satisfied by a few
moderate offerings, but they may answer his Adoration and Worship, demand many
unreasonable things of us, and use their utmost endeavors to subjugate and
after that murder us. Then taking up a Cask or Cabinet near at hand, full of
Gold and Gems, he proceeded in this manner: This is the Spaniard's God, and in
honor of him if you think well of it, let us celebrate our Arcytos (which are
certain kinds of Dances and caprings used among them); and by this means his
Deity being appeased, he will impose his Commands on the Spaniards that they
shall not for the future molest or injure us; who all unanimously with one
consent in a loud tone made this reply. Well said, Well said, and thus they
continued skipping and dancing before this Cabinet, without the least
intermission, till they were quite tired and grown weary: Then the Noble
Hathney re-assuming his discourse, said, if we Worship this Deity, till ye be
ravished from us, we shall be destroyed, therefore I judge it convenient upon
mature deliberation, that we cast it into the River, which advice was approved
of by all without opposition, and the Cabinet thrown into the next River.

When the Spaniards first touched on this Island, this Cacic, who was
thoroughly acquainted with them, did avoid and shun them as much as in him lay,
and defended himself by force of Arms, wherever he met with them, but at length
being taken he was burnt alive, for flying from so unjust and cruel a Nation,
and endeavoring to secure his Life against them, who only thirsted after the
blood of himself and his own People. Now being bound to the post, in order to
his Execution a certain Holy Monk of the Franciscan Order, discoursed with him
concerning God and the Articles of our Faith: which he never heard of before,
and which might be satisfactory and advantageous to him, considering the small
time allowed him by the Executioner, promising him Eternal Glory and Repose, if
he truly believed them, or otherwise Everlasting Torments. After that (...) had
been silently pensive sometime, he asked the Monk (...) Spaniards also were
admitted into Heaven, and he answ^^^^ (...) the Gates of Heaven were open to
all that were Good (...) the Cacic replied without farther Consideration, that
he would rather go to Hell than Heaven, for fear he should cohabit in the same
Mansion with so Saguinary and Bloody a Nation. And thus God and the Holy
Catholic Faith are Praised and Reverenced by the Practices of the Spaniards in
America.

Once it so happened, that the Citizens of a Famous City, distant Ten Miles from
the place where we then resided, came to meet us with a splendid Retinue, to
render their Visit more Honorable, bringing with them delicious Viands, and
such kind of Dainties, with as great a quantity of Fish as they could possibly
procure, and distributing them among us; but behold on a sudden, some wicked
Devil possessing the Minds of the Spaniards, agitated them with so great fury,
that I being present, and without the least Pretense or Occasion offered, they
cut off in cold Blood above Three Thousand Men, Women and Children
promiscuously, such Inhumanities and Barbarisms were committed in my sight, as
no Age can parallel.

Some time after I dispatch Messengers to all the Rulers of the Province of
Havana, that they would by no means be terrified, or seek their refuge by
absence and flight, but to meet us, and that I would engage (for they
understood my Authority) that they should not receive the least of Injuries;
for the whole Country was extremely afflicted at the Evils and Mischiefs
already perpetrated; and this I did with the advice of their Captain. As soon
as we approacht the Province, Two and Twenty of their Noblemen came forth to
meet us, whom the Captain contrary to his Faith given, would have exposed to
the Flames, alleging that it was expedient they should be put to Death, who
were, at any time, capacitated to use any Stratagem against us; but with great
difficulty and much ado, I snatched them out of the fire.

These Islanders of Cuba, being reduced to the same Vassalage and Misery as the
Inhabitants of Hispaniola, seeing themselves perish and die without any redress,
fled to the Mountains for shelter, but other Desperado's, put a period to their
days with a Halter, and the Husband, together with his Wife and Children,
hanging himself, put an end to these Calamities.

By the ferocity of one Spanish Tyrant (whom I knew) above Two Hundred Indians
hanged themselves of their own accord; and a multitude of People perished by
this kind of Death.

A certain Person here in the same Isle constituted to exercise a kind of Royal
Power, happened to have Three Hundred Indians fall to his share, of which in
Three Months, through excessive labor, One Hundred and Sixty were destroyed,
insomuch that in a short space there remained but a tenth part alive, namely
Thirty, but when the Number was doubled, they all perished at the same rate, and
all that were bestowed upon him lost their lives, till at length he paid his
last Debt to Nature and the Devil.

In Three or Four Months time I being there present, Six Thousand Children and
upward were murdered, because they had lost their Parents who labored in the
Mines; nay I was a Witness of many other stupendous Villainies.

But afterward they consulted how to persecute those that lay hid in Mountains,
who were miserably massacred, and consequently this Isle made de solate, which
I saw not long after, and certainly it is a dreadful and deplorable sight to
behold it thus unpeopled and laid waste, like a Desert.

Of the CONTINENT.
IN the Year 1514, a certain unhappy Governor Landed on the firm Land or
Continent, a most bloody Tyrant, destitute of all Mercy and Prudence, the
Instrument of God's Wrath, with a Resolution to people these parts with
Spaniards; and although some Tyrants had touched here before him, and Cruelty
hurried them into the other. World by several ways of Slaughter, yet they came
no farther than to the Sea Coast, where they committed prodigious Thefts and
Robberies, but this Person exceeded all that ever dwelt in other Islands,
though execrable and profligate Villains: for he did not only ravage and
depopulate the Seacoast, but buried the largest Regions and most ample
Kingdoms in their own Ruins, sending Thousands to Hell by his Butcheries. He
made Incursions for many Miles continuance, that is to say, in those Countries
that are included in the Territories of Darien and the Provinces of Nicaraqua,
which are near Five Hundred Miles of the most Fertile Land in the World, very
well peopled, abounding with Villages, Cities and Towns, and the most opulent
for Gold of all the Regions hitherto discovered. And although Spain has bin
sufficiently furnished with the purest God, yet it was dig'd out of the Powels
and Mines of the said Countries by the Indians, where (as we have said) they
perished.

This Ruler, with his Accomplices found out new inventions to rack, torment,
force and extort Gold from the Indians. One of his Captains in a certain
Excursion undertaken by the Command of his Governor to make Depraedations,
destroyed Forty Thousand Persons and better exposing them to the edge of the
Sword, Fire, Dogs and veriety of Torments; of all which a Religious Man of the
Order of St Francis, Franciscus de S. Romano, who was then present, was an
Eyewitness.

Great and Injurious was the blindness of those praesided over the Indians, as
to the Conversion and Salvation of this People: for they denied in Effect what
they in their flourishing Discourse pretended to, and declared with their
Tongue what they contradicted in their Heart; for it came to this pass, that
the Indians should be commanded on the penalty of a bloody War, Death and
perpetual Bondage, to embrace the Christian Faith, and submit to the Obedience
of the Spanish King; as if the Son of God, who suffered Death for the
Redemption of all Mankind, had enacted a Law, when he pronounced these words,
Go and teach all Nations that Infidels, living peaceably and quietly in their
Haereditary Native Country, should be imposed upon pain of Confiscation of all
their Chattels, Lands, Liberty, Wives, Children, and Death it self, without any
praecedent instruction to Confess and Acknowledge the true God, and subject
themselves to a King, whom they never saw, or heard mentioned before; and whose
Messengers behaved themselves toward them with such Inhumanity and Cruelty as
they had done hitherto. Which is certainly a most foppish and absured way of
Proceeding, and merits nothing but Scandal, Derision, nay Hell it self. Now
suppose this Notorious and Profligate Governor had bin empowered to see the
Execution of these Edicts performed, to the end they might appear more Just and
Equitable thereby, for of themselves they were repugnant both to Law and
Equity; yet he commanded (or they who were to see the Execution thereof, did it
of their own Heads without Authority) that when they phansied or proposed to
themselves any place, that was well stored with Gold, to rob and feloniously
steal it away from the Indians living in their Cities and Houses, without the
least suspicion of any ill Act. These wicked Spaniards, like Thieves came to
any place by stealth, half a Mile off of any City, Town or Village, and there
in the Night published and proclaimed the Edict among themselves after this
manner: You Cacies and Indians of this Continent, the Inhabitants of such a
Place, Which they named; We declare, or be it known to you all, that there is
but one God, one Pope, and one King of Castile, who is Lord of these Countries;
appear forth without delay, and take the Oath of Allegiance to the Spanish
King, as his Vassals: So about the Fourth Watch of the Night, or Three in the
Morning these poor Innocents overwhelmed with heavy Sleep, ran violently on
that place they named, set Fire to their Hovels, which were all thatcht, and
so, without Notice, burnt Men, Women and Children; killed whom they pleased
upon the Spot; but those they reserved as Captives, were compelled through
Torments to confess where they had hid the Gold, when they found little or none
at their Houses; but they who lived being first stigmatized, were made Slaves;
yet after the Fire was extinguished, they came hastily in quest of the Gold.
Thus did this Wicked Man, devoted to all the Infernal Furies, behave himself
with the Assistance of Profligate Christians, whom he had listed in his Service
from the 14th to the 21. or 22. Year, together with his Domestic Servants and
Followers, from whom he received as many Portions, besides what he had from his
Salves in Gold, Pearls, and Jewels, as the Chief Governor would have taken,
and all that were constituted to execute any kind of Kingly Office followed in
the same Footsteps; every one sending as many of his Servants as he could
spare, to share in the spoil. Nay he that came hither as Bishop first of all
did the same also, And at the vory time (as I conjecture) the Spaniards did
depraedate or rob this Kingdom of above Ten Hundred Thousand Crowns of Gold:
Yet all these their Thefts and Felonies, we scarce find upon Record that Three
Hundred Thousand Castilian Crowns ever came into the Spanish King's Coffers;
yet there were above Eight Hundred Thousand Men slain: The other Tyrants who
governed this Kingdom afterward to the Three and Thirtieth year, deprived all
them of Life that remained among the Inhabitants.

Among all those flagitious Acts committed by this Governor while he ruled
this Kingdom, or by his Consent and Permission this must by no means be
omitted: A certain Cacic, bestowing on him a Gift, voluntarily, or (which is
more probable) induced thereunto by Fear, about the weight of Nine Thousand
Crowns, but the Spaniards not satisfied with so vast a Sum of Money, sieze him,
fix him to a Pole; extended his Feet, which being moved near the Fire, they
demanded a larger Sum; the Cacic overcome with Torments, sending home, procured
Three Thousand more to be brought and presented to them: But the Spaniards,
adding new Torments to new Rage and Fury, when they found he would confer no
more upon them, which was because he could not, or otherwise because he would
not, they exposed him so long to that Torture, till by degrees of heat the
Marrow gusht out of the Soles of his Feet, and so he dyed; Thus they often
murdered the Lords and Nobles with such Torments to Extort the Gold from them.

One time it happened that a Century or Party of One Hundred Spaniards making
Excursions, came to a Mountain, where many People shunning so horrid and
pernicious an Enemy concealed themselves, who immediately rushing on them,
putting all to the Sword they could meet with, and then secured Seventy or
Eighty Married Women as well as Virgins Captives; but a great Number of Indians
with a fervent desire of recovering their Wives and Daughters appeared in Arms
against the Spaniards, and when they drew near the Enemy, they unwilling to
lose the Prey, run the Wives and Maidens through with their Swords. The Indians
through Grief and Trouble, smiting their Breasts, brake out into these
Exclamations. O perverse Generation of Men! O Cruel Spaniards! What do you
Murder las Iras? (In their Language they call Women by the Name of las Iras) as
if they had said: To slay Women is an Act of bloody minded Men, worse than
Brutes and Wild Beasts.

There was the House of a Puissant Potentate situated about Ten or Fifteen
Miles from Panama, whose Name was Paris, very Rich in Gold; and the Spaniards
gave him a visit, who were entertained with Fraternal Kindness, and Courteously
received, and of his own accord, presented the Captain with a Gift of Fifteen
Thousand Crowns; who was of opinion, as well as the rest of the Spaniards, that
he who bestowed such a quantity of Money gratis, was the Master of vast
Treasure, their sole Aim and Design, and the Solace of their Labors; whereupon
they conterfeit a pretended Departure, but returning about the Fourth
Night-Watch, and entering the City privily upon a surprise, which they thought
was sufficiently secured, consecrated it with many Citizens to the Flames, and
robbed them of Fifty or Sixty Thousand Crowns. The Dynast or Prince escaped
with Life, and gathering together as great a Number of Men as he could possibly
at that instant of time, and Three or Four Days being elapsed, pursued the
Spaniards, who had deprived him also by Violence and Rapine of a Hundred and
Thirty or Forty Thousand Crowns, and pouring in upon them, recovered all his
Gold with the destruction of Fifty Spaniards, but the remainder of them having
received many Wounds in that Rencounter betook them to their Heels and saved
themselves by flight: but in few days after the Spaniards return, and fall upon
the said Cacic well-arm'd and overthrow him and all his Forces, and they who
outlived the Combat, to their great Misfortune, were exposed to the usual and
frequently mentioned Bondage.

Of the Province of NICARAQUA.
THE said Tyrant An. Dom. 1522. proceeded farther very unfortunately to the
Subjugation or Conquest of this Province. In truth no Person can satisfactorily
or sufficiently express the Fertility, Temperateness of the Climate, or the
Multitude of the Inhabitants of Nicaraqua, which was almost infinite and
admirable; for this Region contained some Cities that were Four Miles long; and
the abundance of Fruits of the Earth (which was the cause of such a Concourse
of People) was highly commendable. The People of this place, because the
Country was Level and plain, destitute of Mountains, so very delightful and
pleasant, that they could not leave it without great grief, and much
dissatisfaction, they were therefore tormented with the greater Vexations and
Persecutions, and forced to bear the Spanish Tyranny and Servitude, with as
much Patience as they were Masters of: Add farther that they were peaceable and
meek-spirited. This Tyrant with these Accomplices of his Cruelty did afflict this
Nation (whose advice he made use of in destroying the other Kingdoms) with such
and so many great Damages, Slaughters, Injustice, Slavery, and Barbarism,
that a Tongue, though of Iron, could not express them all fully. He sent into
this Province (which is larger than the County of Ruscinia) Fifty Horsemen,
who put all the People to the Edge of the Sword, sparing neither Age nor Sex
upon the most trivial and inconsiderable occasion: As for Example, if they did
not come to them with all possible speed, when called; and bring the imposed
burden of Mahid (which signifies Corn in their Dialect) or if they did not
bring the Number of Indians required to his own, and the Service, or rather
Servitude of his Associates. And the Country being all Campaign or Level, no
Person was able to withstand the Hellish Fury of their Horses.

He commanded the Spaniards to make Excursions, that is, to rob other
Provinces, permitting and granting these Thieving Rogues leave to take away by
force as many of these peaceable People as they could, who being iron'd, (that
they might not sink under the Burden of Sixty or Eighty Pound weight) it
frequently happened, that of Four Thousand Indians, Six only returned home, and
so they dyed by the way; but if any of them chanced to faint, being tired with
over-weighty Burdens, or through great Hunger and Thirst should be siezed with
a Distemper, or too much Debility and Weakness, that they might not spend time
in taking off their Fetters, they beheaded them, so the Head fell one way, and
the Body another: The Indians when they spied the Spaniards making preparations
for such Journeys, knowing very well, that few, or none returned home alive,
just upon their setting out with Sighs and Tears, burst out into these or the
like Expressions. Those were Journeys, which we traveled frequently in the
service of Christians, and in some tract of time we returned to our
Habitations, Wives and Children: But now there being no hope of a return, we
are for ever deprived of their Sight and Conversation.

It happened also, that the said President would dissipate or disperse the
Indians de novo at his own pleasure, to the end (as it was reported) he might
violently force the Indians away from such as did infest or molest him; and
dispose of them to others; upon which it fell out, that for the space of a Year
complete, there was no sowing or planting: And when they wanted Bread, the
Spaniards did by force plunder the Indians of the whole stock of Corn that they
had laid up for the support of their Families, and by these indirect Courses
above Thirty Thousand perished with Hunger. Nay it fortuned at one time, that a
Woman oppressed with insufferable Hunger, deprived her own Son of his Life to
preserve her own.

In this Province also they brought many to an untimely End, loading their
Shoulders with heavy planks and pieces of Timber, which they were compelled to
carry to a Haven Forty Miles distant, in order to their building of Ships;
sending them likewise unto the Mountains to find out Honey and Wax, where they
were devoured by Tigers; nay they loaded Women impregnated with Carriage and
Burdens fit for beasts.

But no greater pest was there that could unpeople this Province, than the
License granted the Spaniards by this Governor, to demand Captives from the
Cacics and Potentates of this Region; for at the Expiration of Four or Five
Months, or as often as they obtained leave of the Governor to demand them,
they delivered them up Fifty Servants, and the Spaniards terrified them with
Menaces, that if they did not obey them in answering their unreasonable
Demands, they should be burnt alive, or baited to Death by Dogs. Now the
Indians are but slenderly stored with Servants; for it is much if a Cacic has
Three or Four in his Retinue, therefore they have recourse to the Subjects; and
when they had, in the first place, seized the Orphans, they required earnestly
and instantly one Son of the Parent, who had but Two, and Two of him that had
but Three, and so the Lord of the place satisfied the desires of the Tyrant,
not without the Effusion of Tears and Groans of the People, who (as it seems)
were very careful of their Children. And this being frequently repeated in the
space between the Year 1523, and 1533, the Kingdom lost all their Inhabitants,
for in Six or Seven Years time there were constantly Five or Six Ships made
ready to be fraighted with Indians that were sold in the Regions of Panania and
Perusium, where they all dyed; for it is by daily Experience proved and known,
that the Indians when Transported out of their Native Country into any other,
soon dye; because they are shortened in their allowance of Food, and the Task
imposed on them no ways diminished, they being only bought for Labor. And by
this means, there have been taken out of this Province Five Hundred Thousand
Inhabitants and upward, who before were Freemen, and made Slaves, and in the
Wars made on them, and the horrid Bondage they were reduced unto Fifty or Sixty
Thousand more have perished, and to this day very many still are destroyed. Now
all these Slaughters have been committed within the space of Fourteen years
inclusively, possibly in this Province of Nicaraqua there remains Four or Five
Thousand Men, who are put to Death by ordinary and personal Oppressions,
whereas (according to what is said already) it did exceed the other Countries
of the World in multitude of People.

Of New SPAIN.
NEW Spain was discovered Anno Dom. 1517. and in the detection there was no
first or second Attempt, but all were exposed to slaughter: The year ensuing
those Spaniards (who style themselves Christians) came thither to rob, kill and
slay, though they pretend they undertook this Voyage to people the Country.
From this year to the present, viz. 1542. the Injustice, Violence and Tyranny
of the Spaniards came to the highest degree of extremity: for they had shook
hands with and bid adieu to all fear of God and the King, unmindful of
themselves in this sad and deplorable condition, for the Destructions,
Cruelties, Butcheries, Devastations, the Demolishing of Cities, Depredations,
etc. which they perpetrated in so many and such ample Kingdoms, are such and so
great, and strike the minds of Men with so great horror, that all we have
related before are inconsiderable comparatively to those which have been acted
from the year 1518 to 1542, and to this very month of September that we now
live to see the most heavy, grievous and detestable things are committed, that
the Rule we laid down before as a Maxim might be indisputably verified, to wit,
that from the beginning they ran headlong from bad to worse, and were overcome
in their Diabolical acts and wickedness only by themselves.

Thus from the first entrance of the Spaniards into New Spain, which happened on
the 18th. day of April in the said month of the year 1518, to 1530, the space
of ten whole years, there was no end or period put to the Destruction and
Slaughters committed by there merciless hands of the Sanguinary and
Blood-thirsty Spaniard in the Continent, or space of 450 Miles round about
Mexico, and the adjacent or neighboring parts, which might contain four or
five spacious Kingdoms, that neither for magnitude or fertility would give
Spain her self the pre-eminence. This entire Region was more populous then
Toledo, Sevil, Valedolid, Saragoza, and Faventia; and there is not at this day
in all of them so many people, nor when they flourisht in their greatest height
and splendour was there such a number, as inhabited that Region, which embraces
in its Circumference, four hundred and eighty Miles. Within these twelve years
the Spaniards have destroyed in the said Continent, by Spears, Fire and Sword,
computing Men, Women, Youth and Children above four Millions of people in these
their Acquests or Conquests (for under that word they mask their Cruel Actions)
or rather those of the Turk himself, which are reported of them, tending to the
ruin of the Catholic Cause, together with their Invasions and Unjust Wars,
contrary to and condemned by Divine as well as Human Laws; nor are they
reckoned in this number who perished by their more then Egyptian Bondage and
usual Oppressions.

There is no Tongue, Art, or Human knowledge can recite the horrid Impieties,
which these Capital Enemies to Government and all Mankind have been guilty of
at several times and in several Nations; nor can the circumstantial
Aggravations of some of their wicked Acts be unfolded or displayed by any
manner of Industry, time or writing, but yet I will say somewhat of every
individual particular thing, with this protestation and Oath, that I conceive I
am not able to comprehend one of a Thousand.

Of New Spain in Particular.
AMong other Slaughters this also they perpetrated in the most spacious City of
Cholula, which consisted of Thirty Thousand Families; all the Chief Rulers of
that Region and Neighboring places, but first the Priests with their High
Priest going to meet the Spaniards in Pomp and State, and to the end they might
give them a more reverential and honorable reception appointed them to be in
the middle of the Solemnity, that so being entertained in the Appartments of
the most powerful and principal Noblemen, they might be lodged in the City. The
Spaniards presently consult about their slaughter or castigation (as they term
it) that they might fill every corner of this Region by their Cruelties and
wicked Deeds with terror and consternation; for in all the Countries that they
came they took this course, that immediately at their first arrival they
committed some notorious ^utcheries, which made those Innocent Sheep tremble
for fear. To this purpose therefore they sent to the Governors and Nobles of
the Cities, and all Places subject unto them, together with their supreme Lord,
that they should appear before them, and no sooner did they attend in
expectation of some Capitulation or discourse with the Spanish Commander, but
they were presently seized upon and detained Prisoners before any one could
advertise or give them notice of their Captivity. They demanded of them six
thousand Indians to drudge for them in the carriage of their bag and baggage;
and as soon as they came the Spaniards clapped them into the Yards belonging to
their Houses and there enclosed them all. It was a thing worthy of pity and
compassion to behold this wretched people in what a condition they were when
they prepared themselves to receive the burdens laid on them by the Spaniards.
They came to them naked, their Privities only veiled, their Shoulders laden
with food, only covered with a Net, they laid themselves quietly on the ground,
and shrinking in their Bodies like poor Wretches, exposed themselves to their
Swords: Thus being all gathered together in their Yards, some of the Spaniards
Armed held the doors to drive them away if attempting to approach, and others
with Lances and Swords Butcher these Innocents so that not one of them escaped,
but two or three days after some of them, who hid themselves among the dead
bodies, being all over besprinkled with blood and gore, presented themselves to
the Spaniards, imploring their mercy and the prolongation of their Lives with
tears in their Eyes and all imaginable submission, yet they, not in the least
moved with pity or compassion, tore them impieces: but all the Chief Governors
who were above one hundred in number, were kept bound, whom the Captain
commanded to be affixed to posts and burnt; yet the King of the whole Country
escaped, and betook himself with a Train of thirty or forty Gentlemen, to a
Temple (called in their Tongue Quu) which he made use of as a Castle or Place
of Defense, and there defended himself a great part of the day, but the
Spaniards who suffer none to escape out of their clutches, especially
Soldiers, setting fire to the Temple, burnt all those that were there
enclosed, who brake out into these dying words and exclamations. O profligate
Men, what injury have we done you to occasion our death! Go, go to Mexico,
where our supreme Lord Montencuma will revenge our cause upon your persons. And
it is reported, while the Spaniards were engaged in this Tragedy destroying six
or seven thousand Men, that their Commander with great rejoicing sang this
following Air; Mira Nero de Tarpeia, Roma como se ardia,
Gritos de Ninos y Vieyot, y el de nadase dolia.
From the Tarpeian still Nero espies
Rome all in Flames with unrelenting Eyes,
And hears of young and old the dreadful Cries.


They also committed a very great Butchery in the City Tepeara. which was
larger and better stored with Houses then the former; and here they Massacred
an incredible number with the point of the Sword,

Setting sail from Cholula, they steered their course to Mexico, whose King
sent his Nobles and Peers with abundance of Presents to meet them by the way,
testifying by diverse sorts of Recreations how grateful their arrival was and
acceptable to him: but when they came to a steep Hill, his brother went forward
to meet them accompanied with many Noblemen who brought them many gifts in
Gold, Silver, and Robes Embroidered with Gold and at their entrance into the
City, the King himself carried in a golden Litter, together (with the whole
Court) attended them to the Palace prepared for their reception; and that very
day as I was informed by some persons then and there present by a grand piece
of Treachery, they took the great King Motencuma, never so much as dreaming of
any such surprise, and put him into the custody of eighty Soldiers, and
afterward loaded his Legs with irons; but all these things being passed over
with a light pencil of which much might be said, one thing I will discover
acted by them, that may merit your observation. When the Captain arrived at the
Haven, to fight with a Spanish Officer, who made War against him, and left
another with an hundred Soldiers, more or less as a Guard to King Motencuma, it
came into their heads, that to act somewhat worth remembrance, that the dread
of their Cruelty might be more and more apprehended, and greatly increased.

In the interim all the Nobility and Commonalty of the City thought of nothing
else, but how to exhilarate the Spirit of their Captive King, and solace him
during his Confinement with variety of diversions and Recreations; and among
the rest this was one, viz. Revellings and Dances which they celebrated in all
Streets and Highways, by night and they in their Idiom term Mirotes, as the
Islanders do Arcytos; to these Masks and nocturnal Jigs they usually go with
all their Riches, Costly Vestments and Robes, together with any thing that is
precious and glorious, being wholly addicted to this humor, nor is there any
greater token among them then this of their extraordinary exultation and
rejoicing. The Nobles in like manner, and Princes of the Blood Royal every one
according to his degree exercise these Masks and Dances, in some place
adjoining to the House where their King and Lord is detained Prisoner. Now
there were not far from the Palace about 2000 Young Noblemen who were the issue
of the greatest Potentates of the Kingdom, and indeed the flower of the whole
Nobility of King Motencuma, and a Spanish Captain went to visit them with some
Soldiers, and sent others to the rest of the places in the City where these
Revellings were kept, under pretense only of being spectators of the solemnity.
Now the Captain had commanded, that, at a certain hour appointed they should
fall upon these Revellers, and he himself approaching the Indians very busy at
their Dancing, said, San Jago (that is St. James it seems that was the Word)
Let us rush in upon them, which was no sooner heard, but they all began with
their naked Swords in hand to pierce their tender and naked Bodies, and spil
their generous and Noble blood, till not one of them was left alive on the
place, and the rest following his example in other parts, (to their
inexpressible stupefaction and grief) seized on all these Provinces. Nor will
the Inhabitants till the General conflagration ever discontinue the Celebration
of these Festivals, and the Lamentation and Singing with certain kind of
Rhythmes in their Arcytos, the doleful ditty of the Calamity and Ruin of this
Seminary of the ancient Nobility of the whole Kingdom, which was their frequent
Pride and Glory.

The Indians seeing this not to be exampled cruelty and iniquity executed
against such a number of guiltless persons, and also bearing with incredible
patience the unjust Imprisonment of their King, from whom they had an absolute
Command not to take up Arms against the Spaniard, the whole City was suddenly
up in Arms fell on the Spaniards and wounded many of them, the rest hardly
escaping; but they presenting the point of a Sword to the Kings Breast,
threatened him with death unless he out of the Window commanded them to desist;
but the Indians for the present disobeying the Kings Mandate, proceeded to the
Election of a Generalissimo, or Commander in Chief over all their Forces; and
because that the Captain, who went to the Port returned Victor, and brought
away a far greater number of Spaniards then he took along with him, there was a
Cessation of Arms for three or four days, till he re-entred the City, and then
the Indians having gathered together and made up a great Army, fought so long
and so strenuously, that the Spaniards despairing of their safety, called a
Council of War and therein resolved to retreat in the dead time of night and so
draw off their Forces from the City: which coming to the knowledge of the
Indians they destroyed a great number Retreating on the Bridges made over their
Lakes in this just and Holy War, for the causes abovementioned, deserving the
approbation of every upright Judge. But afterward the Spaniards having
recruited and got together in a Body, they resolved to take the City and
carried it at last, wherein most detestable Butcheries were acted, a vast
number of the people slain, and their Rulers perished in the Flames.

All these horrid Murders being committed in Mexico and other Cities ten,
fifteen and twenty miles distant. This same Tyranny and Plague in the abstract
proceeded to infest and lay desolate Panuco; A Region abounding with
Inhabitants even to admiration, nor were the slaughters therein perpetrated
less stupendous and wonderful. In the same manner they utterly laid waste the
Provinces of Futepeca, Ipilcingonium and Columa, every one of them being as
large as the Kingdoms of Leon, and Castile. It would be very difficult or
rather impossible to relate the Cruelties and Destruction there made and
committed, and prove very nauseous and offensive to the Reader.

It Is observable, that they entered upon these Dominions, and laid waste the
Indian Territories, so populous, that it would have rejoiced the hearts of all
true Christians to see their number upon no other title or pretense, but only
to enslave them; for at their first arrival they compelled them to swear the
Oath of Obedience and Fealty to the King of Spain, and if they did not
condescend to it, they menaced them with death and Vassalage, and they who did
not forthwith appear to satisfy the unequitable Mandates, and submit to the
will and pleasure of such unjust and Cruel Men were declared Rebels, and
accused of that Crime before our Lord the King; the blindness or ignorance of
those who were set over the Indians as Rulers did so darken their understanding
that they did not apprehend that known and incontrovertible Maxim in Law, That
no Man can be called a Rebel, who is not first proved to be a subject. I omit
the injuries and prejudice they do to the King himself, when they spoil and
ravage his Kingdoms, and as much as in them lies, diminish and impair all his
Right and Title to the Indies, nay in plain English invalidate and make it null
and void. And these are the worthy Services which the Spaniards do for our
Kings in those Countries, by the injust and colorable pretenses aforesaid.

This Tyrant upon the same pretext sent two other Captains, who exceeded him in
impiety and cruelty, if possible to the most flourishing and Fertile (in Fruits
and Men) Kingdoms of Guatimala, Situate toward the South, who had also received
Orders to go to the Kingdoms of Naco, Honderae, and Guaymura, verging upon the
North, and are Borderers on Mexico three hundred miles together. The one was
sent by Land the other by Sea, and both well furnished with Horse and Foot.

This I declare for a Truth, that the outrages committed by these two,
particularly by him that went to Guatimala (for the other not long after his
departure died a violent Death) would afford matter sufficient for an entire
Volume, and when completed be so crowded with slaughters, injuries, butcheries
and inhuman Desolations, so horrid and detestable as would Ague-shake the
present as well as future ages with terror.

He that put out to Sea vexed all the Maritime Coasts with his cruel
Incursions; now some Inhabitants of the Kingdom of Jucatan which is seated in
the way to the Kingdoms of Naco and Naymura, to which places he steered his
course, came to meet him with burdens of Presents and Gifts: and as soon as he
approacht them, sent his Captians with a party of Soldiers to depopulate their
Land, who committed great spoils and made cruel slaughters among them; and in
particular a Seditious and Rebellious Officer who with three hundred Soldiers
entered a Neighboring Country to Guatimala, and there firing the Cities and
Murdering all the Inhabitants, violently deprived them of all their Goods,
which he did designedly, for the space of an hundred and twenty miles; to the
e^d that if his Companions should follow them, they might find the Country
laid wast, and so be destroyed by the Indians in revenge for the damage they
had received by him and his Forces which happened accordingly: for the Chief
Commander whose order the abovesaid Captain had disobeyed and so became a Rebel
to him, was there slain. But many other bloody Tyrants succeeded him, who from
the year 1524 to 1535. did unpeople and make a Desert of the Provinces of Naco
and Hondurae (as well as other places) which were looked upon as the Paradise of
delights, and better peopled then other Regions; insomuch that within the Term
of these eleven years there fell in those Countries above two Millions of Men,
and now there are hardly remaining Two Thousand, who daily dye by the severity
of their Slavery.

But to return to that great Tyrant, who outdid the former in cruelty (as is
hinted above) and is equal to those that Tyrannize there at present, who
traveled to Guatimala; he from the Provinces adjoining to Mexico, which
according to his prosecuted journey (as he himself Writes and testifies with
his own hand in Letters to the Prince of Tyrants) are distant from Guatimala
four hundred miles, did make it his urgent and daily business to procure Ruin
and Destruction by slaughter, Fire and Depopulations, compelling all to submit
to the Spanish King, whom they looked upon to be more unjust and cruel then his
inhumane and bloodthirsty Ministers.

Of the Kingdom and Province of GUATIMALA.
THIS Tyrant at his first entrance here acted and commanded prodigious
Slaughters to be perpetrated: Notwithstanding which, The Chief Lord in his
Chair or Sedan attended by many Nobles of the City of Vltlatana, the Emporium
of the whole Kingdom, together with Trumpets, Drums and great Exultation, went
out to meet him, and brought with them all sorts of Food in great abundance,
with such things as he stood in most need of. That Night the Spaniards spent
without the City, for they did not judge themselves secure in such a
well-fortified place. The next day he commanded the said Lord with many of his
Peers to come before him, from whom they imperiously challenged a certain
quantity of Gold; to whom the Indians returned this modest Answer, that they
could not satisfy his Demands, and indeed this Region yielded no Golden Mines;
but they all, by his command, without any other Crime laid to their Charge, or
any Legal Form of Proceeding were burnt alive. The rest of the Nobles belonging
to other Provinces, when they found their Chief Lords, who had the Supreme
Power were exposed to the Merciless Element of Fire Kindled by a more merciless
Enemy; for this Reafon only, because they bestowed not what they could not upon
them, viz. Gold, they fled to the Mountains, (their usual Refuge) for shelter,
commanding their Subjects to obey the Spaniards, as Lords, but withal strictly
and expressly prohibiting and forbidding them, to inform the Spaniards of their
Flight, or the Places of their Concealment. And behold a great many of the
Indians addressed themselves to them, earnestly requesting, they would admit them
as Subjects, being very willing and ready to serve them: The Captain replied
that he would not entertain them in such a Capacity, but instead of so doing
would put every individual Person to Death, if they would not discover the
Receptacles of their Fugitive Governors. The Indians made answer that they
were wholly ignorant of the matter, yet that they themselves, their Wives and
Children should serve them; that they were at home, they might come to them and
put them to Death, or deal with them as they pleased. But the Spaniards, O
wonderful! went to the Towns and Villages, and destroyed with their Lances
these poor Men, their Wives and Children, intent upon their Labor, and as they
thought themselves, secure and free from danger. Another large Village they
made desolate in the space of two hours, sparing neither Age, nor Sex, putting
all to the Sword, without Mercy.

The Indians perceiving that this Barbarous and Hard-hearted People would not
be pacified with Humility, large Gifts, or unexampled Patience, but that they
were butchered without any Cause, upon serious Consultation took up a
Resolution of getting together in a Body, and fighting for their Lives and
Liberty; for they conceived it was far better, (since Death to them was a
necessary Evil) with Sword in Hand to be killed by taking Revenge of the Enemy,
then be destroyed by them without satisfaction. But when they grew sensible of
their want of Arms, Nakedness and Debility, and that they were altogether
incapable of the management of Horses, so as to prevail against such a furious
Adversary, recollecting themselves, they contrived this Stratagem, to dig
Ditches and Holes in the Highway into which the Horses might fall in their
passage, and fixing therein purposely sharp and burnt Posts, and covering them
with loose Earth, so that they could not be discerned by their Riders, they
might be transfixed gored by them. The Horses fell twice or thrice into those
holes, but afterward the Spaniards took this Course to prevent them for the
future; and made this a Law, that as many of the Indians of what Age or Sex
soever as were taken, should be cast into these Ditches that they had made. Nay
they threw into them Women with Child, and as many Aged Men as they laid hold
of, till they were all filled up with Carcasses. It was a sight deserving
Commiseration, to behold Women and Children gauncht or run through with these
Posts, some were taken off by Spears and Swords, and the remainder exposed to
hungry Dogs, kept short of Food for that purpose, to be devoured by them and
torn in pieces. They burnt a Potent Nobleman in a very great Fire, saying, That
he was the more Honored by this kind of Death. All which Butcheries continued
Seven Years, from 1524, to 1531. I leave the Reader to judge how many might be
Massacred during that time.

Among the Innumerable, Flagitious Acts done by this Tyrant and his Copartners
(for they were as Barbarous as their Principal) in this Kingdom, this also
occurs worthy of an Asterism in the Margin. In the Province of Cuzcatan in
which S. Savior's City is seated, which Country with the Neighboring
Seacoasts extends in Length Forty or Fifty Miles, as also in the very City of
Cuzcatan, the Metropolis of the whole Province, he was entertained with great
Applause: For about Twenty or Thirty Thousand Indians brought with them Hens
and other necessary Provisions, expecting his coming. He, accepting their
Gifts, commanded every single Spaniara to make choice of as many of these
People, as he had a mind to, that during their stay there, they might use them
as Servants, and forced to undergo the most servile Offices they should impose
on them. Every one culled out a Hundred, or Fifty, according as he thought
convenient for his peculiar service, and these wretched Indians did serve the
Spaniards with their utmost strength and endeavor; so that there could be
nothing wanting in them but Adoration. In the mean time this Captain requird a
great Sum of Gold from their Lords (for that was the Lodestone attracted him
thither) who answered, they were content to deliver him up all the Gold they
had in possession; and in order thereunto, the Indians gathered together a
great Number of Spears gilded with Orichalcum, (which had the appearance of
Gold, and in truth some Gold in them intermixed) and they were prefented to him.
The Captain ordered them to be touched, and when he found them to be Orichalcum
or mixed Metal, he spoke to the Spaniards as follows. Let that Nation that is
without Gold be accursed to the Pit of Hell. Let every Man detain those
Servants he Elected, let them be clapped in Irons, and stigmatized with the Brand
of Slavery,. which was accordingly done; for they were all burnt, who did not
escape with the King's Mark. I my self saw the Impression made on the Son of
the Chiefest Person in the City. Those that escaped, with other Indians,
engaged the Spaniards by Force of Arms, but with such ill success, that
abundance of them lost their Lives in the Attempt. After this they returned to
Guatimala, where they built a City, which God in his just Judgments with Three
Deluges, the First of Water, the Second of Earth, the Third of Stones, as big
as half a score Oxen, all concurring at one and the same time, laid Level with
its own Ashes. Now all being slain who were capable of bearing Arms against
them, the rest were enslaved, paying so much per Head for Men and Women as a
Ransom; for they use no other servitude here, and then they were sent into
Pecusium to be sold, by which means together with their slaughters committed
upon the Inhabitants, they destroyed and made a Desert of this Kingdom, which
in Breadth as well as Length contains One Hundred Miles; and with his
Associates and Brethren in Iniquity, Four Millions at least in Fifteen or
Sixteen Years, that is, from 1524, to 1540 were murdered, and daily continues
destroying the small residue of that People with his Cruelties and Brutishness.

It was the usual Custom of this Tyrant, when he made War with any City or
Province, to take along with him as many of those Indians he had subjugated as
he could, that they might fight with their Countrymen; and when he had in his
Army Twenty, or sometimes Thirty Thousand of them, and could not afford them
sustenance, he permitted them to feed on the Flesh of other Indians taken
Prisoners in War; and so kept a Shambles of Man's Flesh in his Army, suffered
Children to be killed and roasted before his Face. They butchered the Men for
their Feet and Hands only; for these Members were accounted by them Dainties,
most delicious Food.

He was the Death of many by the intolerable Labor of carrying Ships by Land,
causing them to Transport those Vessels with Anchors of a vast weight from the
Septentrional to the Mediterranean Sea, which are One Hundred and Thirty Miles
distant; as also abundance of great Guns of the largest sort, which they
carried on their bare, naked shoulders, so that oppressed with many great and
ponderous Burdens, (I say no more than what I saw) they dyed by the way: He
separated and divided Families, forcing Married Men from their Wives, and Maids
from their Parents, which he bestowed upon his Mariners and Soldiers, to
gratify their burning Lust. All his Ships he freighted with Indians, where
Hunger and Thirst discharged them of their Servitude and his Cruelty by a
welcome Death. He had two Companies of Soldiers who hackt and tore them in
pieces, like Thunder from Heaven speedily. O how many Parents has he robbed of
their Children, how many Wives of their Husbands, and Children of their
Parents? How many Adulteries, Rapes, and what Libidinous Acts has he been
guilty of? How many has he enslaved and oppressed with insufferable Anguish and
unspeakable Calamities? How many Tears, Sighs and Groans has he occasioned? To
how many has he bin the Author of Desolation, during their Peregrination in
this, and of Damnation in the World to come, not only to Indians, whose Number
is numberless, but even to Spaniards themselves, by whose help and assistance
he committed such detestable Butcheries and flagitious Crimes? I supplicate
Almighty God, that he would please to have Mercy on his Soul, and require no
other satisfaction than the violent Death, which turned him out of this World.

A farther Discourse of New Spain: And some Account of Panuco and Xalisco.
AFter the perpetration of all the Cruelties rehearsed in New Spain and other
places, there came another Rabid and Cruel Tyrant to Panuco, who acted the part
of a bloody Tragedian as well as the rest, and sent away many Ships laden with
these Barbarians to be sold for Slaves, made this Province almost a Wilderness,
and which was deplorable, Eight Hundred Indians, that had Rational Souls were
given in Exchange for a Burthen-bearing-Beast, a Mule, or Camel. Well, He was
made Governor of the City of Mexico, and all New Spain, and with him many
other Tyrants had the Office of Auditors conferred upon them: Now they had
already made such a progress toward the Desolation of this Region, that if the
Franciscans had not vigorously opposed them, and that by (the King's Council,
the best and greatest Encourager of Virtue) it had not speedily bin prevented,
that which happened to Hispaniola in Two Years, had bin the Fate of Hispania
nova, namely to be unpeopled, deserted, and entombed in its own Ruins. A
Companion of this Governor employed Eight Thousand Indians in Erecting a Wall
to enclose his Garden, but they all dyed, having no Supplies, nor Wages from
him, to support themselves, at whose Death he was not in the least concerned.

After the first Captain before spoken of had absolutely profligated and ruined
the Panuconians, Fifteen Thousand whereof perished by carrying their Bag and
Baggage: At length he arrived at the Province of Machuacan, which a Forty Miles
Journey from Mexico, and as Fertile and Populous: The King to honor him in the
Rencounter, with a Multitude of People, marches toward him, from whom he had
received One Thousand Services and Civilities very considerable, who gratefully
requited him with Captivity, because Fame had noised it abroad, that he was a
most Opulent Prince in Gold and Silver; and to the end he might extort from,
and purge him of his Gold, he was cruciated with Torments after this manner;
his Body was extended, Hands bound to a Post, and his Feet put into a pair of
Stocks, they all the while applying buring Coals to his Feet at a tormenting
distance, where a Boy attended, who by little and little sprinkled them with
Oil that his Flesh might roast the better: Before him there stood a Wicked
Fellow, presenting a Bow to his Breast charged with a Mortal Arrow, (if let
fly) behind him, another with Dogs held in with Chains, which he threatened to
let loose at him, which if done, he had bin torn to pieces in a moment; and
with these kind of Torments they racked him to extort a Confession, where his
Treasures lay; till a Franciscan Monk came and delivered him from his Torments,
but not from Death, for he departed this miserable Life not long after: And
this was the severe Fate of many Cacics and Indian Lords, who dyed with the
same Torments which they were exposed to by the Spaniards, in order to the
engrossing of their Gold and Silver to themselves.

At this very time, A certain Visiter of Purses rather than Souls happened to be
here present, who (finding some Indian Idols which were hid; for they were no
better instructed in the Knowledge of the true God by reason of the Wicked
Documents and Dealings of the Spaniards) detained Grandees as Slaves, till they
had delivered him all their Idols, for he phancied they were made of Gold or
Silver, but his Expectation being frustrated, he chastised them with no less
Cruelty than Injustice; and that he might not depart bubbled out of all his
hopes, constrained them to redeem their Idols with Money, that so they might,
according to their Custom, Adore them. These are the Fruits of the Spanish
Artifices and Juggling Tricks among the Indians, and thus they promoted the
Honor and Worship of God.

This Tyrant from Mechuacam arrives at Xalisco, a Country abounding with People
very fruitful, and the Glory of the Indians in this respect, that it had some
Towns Seven Miles long; and among other Barbarisms equal to what you have read,
which they acted here, this is not to be forgotten, that Women big with Child,
were burdened with the Luggage of Wicked Christians, and being unable to go
out their usual time, through extremity of Toil and Hunger, were necessitated
to bring them forth in the Highways, which was the Death of many Infants.

At a certain time a profligate Christian attempted to devirginate a Maid, but
the Mother being present, resisted him, and endeavoring to free her from his
intended Rape, whereat the Spaniard enraged, cut off her Hand with a short
Sword, and stabbed the Virgin in several places, till she Expired, because she
obstinately opposed and disappointed his inordinate Appetite.

In this Kingdom of Xalisco (according to report) they burnt Eight Hundred
Towns to Ashes, and for this Reason the Indians growing desperate, beholding
the daily destruction of the Remainders of their matchless Cruelty, made an
Insurrection against the Spaniards, slew several of them justly and deservedly,
and afterward fled to the insensible Rocks and Mountains (yet more tender and
kind than the stony-hearted Enemy) for Sanctuary; where they were miserably
Massacred by those Tyrants who succeeded, and there are now few, or none of the
Inhabitants to be found. Thus the Spaniards being blinded with the Luster of
their Gold, deserted by God, and given over to a Reprobate Sense, not
understanding (or at least not willing to do so) that the Cause of the Indians
is most Just, as well by the Law of Nature, as the Divine and Humane, they by
Force of Arms, destroying them, hacking them in pieces, and turning them out of
their own Confines and Dominions, nor considering how unjust those Violencies
and Tyrannies are, wherewith they have afflicted these poor Creatures, they
still contrive to raise new Wars against them: Nay they conceive, and by Word
and Writing testify, that those Victories they have obtained against these
Innocents to their ruin, are granted them by God himself, as if their unjust
Wars were promoted and managed by a just Right and Title to what they pretend;
and with boasting Joy return Thanks to God for their Tyranny, in imitation of
those Tyrants and Robbers, of whom the Prophet Zechariah part of the Fourth and
Fifth Verses. Feed the Sheep of the slaughter, whose Possessors slay them, and
hold themselves not guilty, and they that sell them say, Blessed be the Lord,
for ye are rich.

Of the Kingdom of JUCATAN.
AN Impious Wretch by his Fabulous Stories and Relations to the King of Spain
was made Prefect of the Kingdom of Jucatan, in the Year of our Lord 1526; And
the other Tyrants to this very day have taken the same indirect Measures to
obtain Offices, and screw or wheedle themselves into public Charges or
Employments, for by this Praetext, and Authority, they had the greater
opportunity to commit Theft and Rapine. This Kingdom was very well peopled, and
both for Temperature of Air, and the Plenty of Food and Fruits, in which
respect it is more Fertile than Mexico, but chiefly for Honey and Wax, it
exceeds all the Indian Countries that has hitherto bin discovered. It is Three
Hundred Miles in Compass. The Inhabitants of this place do much excel all other
Indians, either in Polity or Prudence, or in leading a Regular Life and
Morality, truly deserving to be instructed in the Knowledge of the true God.
Here the Spaniards might have Erected many fair Cities, and lived as it were in
a Garden of Delights, if they had not, through Covetousness, Stupidity, and the
weight of Enormous Crimes rendered themselves unworthy of so great a Benefit.
This Tyrant, with Three Hundred Men began to make War with these Innocent
People, living peaceably at home, and doing injury to none, which was the ruin
of a great Number of them: Now because this Region affords no Gold; and if it
did the Inhabitants would soon have wrought away their lives by hard working in
the Mines, that so he might accumulate Gold by their bodies and Souls, for
which Christ was Crucified: For the generality he made slaves of those whose
lives he spared, and sent away such Ships as were driven thither by the Wind of
report, laden with them, exchanging them for Wine, Oil, Vinegar, Salt Pork,
Garments, Pack Horses and other Commodities, which he thought most necessary
and fit for his use. He proposed to them the choice of Fifty Virgins, and she
that was the fairest or best complexioned he bartered for a small Cask of Wine,
Oil, Vinegar or some inconsiderable quantity of salt Pork, the same exchange he
proffered of Two or Three Hundred well-disposed Yound Boys, and one of them who
had the Mind or presence of a Princes Son, was given up to them for a Cheese,
and One Hundred more for a Horse. Thus he continued his flagitious courses from
1526 to 1533, inclusively, till there was news brought of the Wealth and
Opulence of the Region of Perusia, whither the Spaniards marched, and so for
some time there was a Cessation of this Tyranny; but in few days after they
returned and acted enormous Crimes, robbed and imprisoned them and committed
higher offenses against the God of Heaven; nor have they yet done, so that now
these Three Hundred Miles of Land so populous (as I said before) lies now
uncultivated and almost deserted.

No Solifidian can believe the particular Narrations of their Barbarism, and
Cruelty in those Countries. I will only relate two or three Stories which are
fresh in my memory. The Spaniards used to trace the steps of Indians, both Men
and Women with cursed Currs, furious Dogs; an Indian Woman that was sick happened
to be in the way in sight, who perceiving that she was not able to avoid being
torn in pieces by the Dogs, takes a Cord that she had and hangs her self upon a
Beam, tying her Child (which she unfortunately had with her) to her foot; and
no sooner had she done, yet the Dogs were at her, tearing the Child; but a
Priest coming that way Baptized it before quite dead.

When the Spaniards left this Kingdom, one of them invited the Son of some
Indian Governor of a City or Province, to go along with him, who told him he
would not leave or desert his Native Country, whereupon he threatened to cut
off his ears, if he refused to follow him: But the Youth persisting resolutely,
that he would continue in the place of his Nativity, he drawing his Sword cut
off each Ear, notwithstanding which he persever'd in his first opinion, and
then as if he had only pincht him, smilingly cut off his Nose and Lips.

This Rogue did lasciviously boast before a Priest, and as if he had merited
the greatest applause, commended himself to the very Heavens, saying, He had
made it his chief Trade or Business to impregnate Indian Women, that when they
were sold afterward, he might gain the more Money by them.

In this Kingdom or (I Am certain) in some Province of New Spain, A Spaniard
Hunting and intent on his game, phancyed that his Beagles wanted food; and to
supply their hunger snatched a young little Babe from the Mothers breast,
cutting off his Arms and Legs, cast a part of them to every Dog, which they
having devoured, he threw the remainder of the Body to them. Thus it is plainly
manifest how they value these poor Creatures, created after the image of God,
to cast them to their Canibal-Curs. But that which follows is (if possible) a
sin of a deeper dye.

I pretermit their unparalled Impieties, etc. and only close all with this
one Story that follows. Those haughty obdurate and execrable Tyrants, who
departed from this Country to Fish for Riches in Perusia, and four Monks of
the Order of St. Francis, with Father James who Traveled thither also to keep
the Country in Peace, and attract or mildly persuade by their Preaching the
remnant of Inhabitants, that had outlived a septenisial Tyranny, to embrace the
knowledge of Christ. I conceive these are the persons who in the year 1534,
Traveling by Mexico were solicited by several Messengers from the Indians, to
come into their Country, and inform them in the knowledge of one God, the true
God, and Lord of the whole World: to this end they appointed Assemblies and
Councils to examine and understand what Men they were, who called themselves
Fathers and Friars, what they intended and what difference there was between
them and the Spaniards, by whom they had been so molested and tormented: but
they received them at length upon this condition that they should be admitted
alone, without any Spaniards, which the Fathers promised; for they had
permission, nay an express Mandate from the President of New Spain to make that
promise, and that the Spaniards should not do them the least detriment or
injury. Then they began, to Preach the Gospel of Christ, and to explicate and
declare the pious intention of the King of Castile, of all which they had
notice by the Spaniards for seven years together, that they had no King nor no
other but him, who oppressed them with so much Tyranny. The Priests continued
there but forty days, but behold they bring forth all their Idols to be
committed to the flames; and then their Children which they tendered as the
apple of the Eye, that they might be instructed. They also erected Temples and
Houses for them and they were desired to come to other Provinces and Preach the
Gospel, and introduce them into the knowledge of God, and the Great (as they
stilled him) King of Castile: And the Priests persuasions wrought so
effectually on them, that they condescended to that which was never done in
India before (for whatsoever those Tyrants who wasted and consumed these large
Kingdoms and Provinces, did misrepresent and falsify, was only done to bring
an odium and disgrace upon the Indians). For Twelve or Fifteen Princes of
spacious and well-peopled Regions assembled, every one distinct and separate
from the rest, with his own subjects, and by their unanimous consent upon
Council and Advice, of their own accord submitted themselves to the Government
of the Castilian Kings and accepted of them as their Prince and Protector,
obliging themselves to obey and serve them as subjects to their Lawful Liege
Lord.

In Witness whereof I have in my custody, a certain Instrument Signed and
Attested by the aforesaid Religioso's.

Thus to the great joy and hope of these Priests reducing them to the knowledge
of Christ they were received by the Inhabitants of this Kingdom, that survived
the hear and rage of the Spanish Cruelties: but behold eighteen Horse and
Twelve Footmen by another way crept in among them, bringing with them many
Idols, which were of great weight, and taken out of other Regions by Force. The
Commander in chief of these Spaniards summoned one of the Dynasta's or Rulers
of that Province which they entered into, to appear before him, and commanded
him to take these Idols with him, distribute them through his Country and
exchange every single Idol for an Indian Man or Woman, otherwise he would make
War against him. The abovesaid Lord compelled to it by fear did so accordingly
with a command, that his Subjects should adore Worship and Honor them, and in
compensation send Indians Male and Female into servitude. The terrified People
delivered up their Children, and by this means there was an end made of this
Sacrilegious Merchandise, and thus the Cacic satisfied the greedy desires of
the (I dare not say Christian) Spaniards. One of these Sacrilegious Robbers was
John Garcia by name, who being very sick and at the point of death, had several
Idols hid under his Bed, and calling his Indians that waited on him, as a
Nurse, commanded her not to part with those Idols at a small rate for they were
of the better sort, and that she should not dispose of them without one Indian,
for each Idol by way of Barter. Thus by this his private and Nuncupative last
Will and Testament distracted with these carking cares, he gave up the Ghost:
And who is it that will not fear his being tormented in the darkest and lowest
Hell? Let us now consider what progress in Religion the Spaniards made, and
what examples of Christianism they gave, at their first arrival in America, how
devoutly they honored God, and what expense of sweat and toil they were at to
promote his Worship and Adoration among these Infidels. Let it be also taken
into serious consideration, whose sin is the greater, either Joroboam's, who
made all Israel to sin, and caused two Golden Claves to be erected, or the
Spaniards who traffic and Trade in Idols like Judas, who was the occasion of
such great scandals. These are the good Deeds of the Spanish Dons, who often,
nay very often to feed their Avarice, and accumulate Gold have sold and still
do sell, denied and still do deny Jesus Christ our Redeemer.

The Indians now finding the Promises of the Religious, that the Spaniards
should not enter into this Country, null and void; nay that the Spaniards
brought Idols from other places to be put off there; when as they had delivered
up their own to the Priests to be burnt, that there might be one only Worship
of the true God established among them; they were highly incensed against these
Friars, and addressed themselves to them in these Words following. Why have you
deceived us, binding your promises with false protestations, that the Spaniards
should not be admitted to come hither? And why have you burnt our Gods, when
others are brought from other Regions by the Spaniards? Are the Gods of other
Provinces more sacred than ours? The Friars as well as they could (though they
had little to return in answer) endeavored by soft Language to appease them;
and went to these Thirty Spaniards, declaring the evil actions they were guilty
of, humbly supplicating them to withdraw themselves from that place. Which they
would by no means condescend to, and what is most flagitious and wicked
persuaded the Indians, that they were introduced by those Priests; Which being
made known to them, These Indians resolved to be the death of these Monks, but
having notice thereof by some courteous Indians, they stole away from thence by
night, and fled; but after their departure the truth of the matter and the
Spanish Malice being understood; they sent several Messengers who followed them
fifty Miles distant beseeching them in the name of the Indians, to return and
begging pardon for that ignorant mistake.

The Priests relying on their words, returned, and were caressed like Angels
sent from Heaven; and continued with them, (from whom they received a Thousand
kindnesses) four or five months. But when the Spaniards persisted in their
resolution not to quit the place, although the Viceroy did use all endeavors
and fair means to recall them, they were Proclaimed Traitors, guilty of High
Treason; and because they continued still exercising Tyranny and perpetrating
nefandous Crimes, the Priests were sensible they would study revenge, though it
might be some considerable time before they put it in execution, fearing that
it might fall upon their own heads, and since they could not exercise the
function of their Ministry securely and undisturbed by reason of the continual
Incursions and Assaults made by the Spaniards, they consulted about their
departure, and did leave this Kingdom accordingly which remained destitute of
all Christian Doctrine and these poor Souls are at this day involved in the
obscurity of their former Misery and Ignorance, they being deprived by these
accursed Spaniards, of all hopes of remedy, and the irrigation of Divine
knowledge, just like young withering Plants for want of Water: For in that very
juncture of time, when these Religioso's took leave, they embraced the Doctrine
of our Faith with the greatest Fervency and Eagerness imaginable.

Of the Province of St. MARTHA.
THE Province of St. Martha was rich in the Neighboring Golden Mines, and a
fruitful Soil, nay the People were very expert and industrious in those
Mine-works: Upon this Account, or Temptation it was, that from the Year 1540,
to 1542, abundance of Tyrants sailed thither, laying waste the whole Country by
their Depredations, slaughtering the Inhabitants at a prodigious and bloody
rate; and robbing them of all their Gold, who daily fled to their Ships for
Refuge, moving sometime to one place, and sometime to another. And thus these
Provinces were laid waste, the greatest Outrages being committed on the
Seashore, which lasted till the Year 1523, whither the Spaniards then came to
seat themselves, and fix their intended Habitation. And because it is a
plentiful Region and Opulent withal; it was subjected to several Rulers, who
like Infernal Fiends contended who should obtain the Palm, by out-staining the
Sword of his Predecessor in Innocent Blood; insomuch, that from the Year 1529
to this very day, they have wasted and spoiled as much good ground as extended
Five Hundred Miles, and unpeopled the Country.

If I designed to enumerate all the Impieties, Butcheries, Desolations,
Iniquities, Violences, Destructions and other the Piacula and black Enormities
committed and perpetrated by the Spaniards in this Province, against God, the
King, and these harmless Nations; I might compile a Voluminous History, and
that shall be completed, if God permit my Glass to run longer, in his good
time. It may suffice for the present to relate some passages written in a
Letter to our King and Lord by a Reverend Bishop of these Provinces, Dated the
20th of May. An. Dom. 1541. wherein among other matters he thus words it. I
must acquaint your Sacred Majesty, that the only way to succor and support
this tottering Region is to free it from the Power of a Father in Law, and
marry it to a Husband who will treat her as she ought to be, and lovingly
entertain her, and that must be done with all possible Expedition too, if not,
I am certain that she will suddenly decay and come to nothing by the covetous
and fordid Deportment of the Governors, etc. And a little after he writes
thus, By this Means your Majesty will plainly know and understand how to depose
the Prefects or Governors of of those Regions from their Office if they
deserve it, that so they may be alleviated and eased of such Burdens; which if
not performed, in my Opinion, the Body Politic will never recover its Health.
And this I will make appear to your Majesty that they are not Christians, but
Devils; not Servants of God and the King, but Traitors to the King and Laws,
who are Conversant in those Regions. And in reality nothing can be more
obstructive to the preservation of peace, and the Conversion of those that live
peaceably, then Inhumane and Barbarous Usage, which they, who lead a quiet and
peaceable Life, too frequently undergo, and this is so fastidious and nauseous
to them, that there can be nothing in the World so odious and detestable among
them, as the Name of a Christian: For they term the Christians in their
Language Yares, that is, Devils; and in truth not without reason; for the
Actions of those that reside in these Regions, are not such as speak them to be
Christians or Men, gifted with Reason, but absolute Devils; hence it is, that
the Indians perceiving these Actions committed by the Heads as well as Members,
who are void of all Compassion and Humanity, do judge the Christian Laws to be
of the same strain and temper, and that their God and King are the Authors of
such Enormities: Now to endeavor to work upon them a contrary persuasion is to
no purpose; for this would afford them a greater Latitude and Liberty to deride
Jesus Christ and his Laws. Now the Indians who protect and defend themselves by
force of Arms, think it more eligible, and far better to dye once, than suffer
several and many Deaths under the Spanish Power. This I know experimentally,
Most Invincible Caesar, etc. And he adds farther, Your Majesty is more Powerful
in Subjects and Servants, who frequent these Kingdoms, then you can imagine. Nor
is there one Soldier among them all, who does not publicly and openly profess,
if he robs, steals, spoils, kills, burns His Majesty's Subjects, it is to
purchase Gold: He will not say that he therein does your Majesty great Service,
for they affirm they do it to obtain their own Share and Dividend. Wherefore,
Most Invincible Caesar, it would be a very prudential Act for Your Majesty to
testify by a rigid Correction and severe Punishment of some Malefactors, that
it is disservice to you for your Subjects to commit such Evil Acts, as tend to
the Disobedience and Dishonor of the Almighty.

What you have read hitherto is the Relation of the said Bishop of St. Martha,
Epitomized and Extracted from his Letters, whereby it is manifest, how Savagely
they handle these mild and affable People. They term them Warlike Indians, who
betake themselves to the Mountains to secure themselves from Spanish Cruelty;
and call them Country Indians, or Inhabitants, who by a dreadful Massacre are
delivered up to a Tyrannical and Horrible Servitude, whereby at length they are
become depopulated, made desolate, and utterly destroyed; as appears by the
Epistle of the praemention'd Bishop, who only gives us a slight Account or
Essay of their Persecutions and Sufferings. The Indians of this Country use to
break out into such Words as these, when they are driven, loaded like Brutes
through the uncouth ways in their Journeys over the Mountains, if they happen
to faint through Weakness, and miscarry through extremity of Labor, (for then
they are kicked and cudgel'd, their Teeth dashed out with the Pummels of their
Swords to raise them up again, when tired and fallen under weighty Burdens,
and force them to go on without Respiration, or Time to take Breath, and all
this with the following increpation, or upbraiding and taunting words, O what a
wicked Villain art thou?) I say they burst out into these Expressions, I am
absolutely tired, kill me, I desire to dye, being weary of my Life as well as
my Burden and Journey: And this not without deep Heartbreaking Sighs, they
being scarce able to draw or breathe out their words, which are the
Characteristical Notes, and infallible of the Mind drowned in Anguish and
Sorrow. May it please our Merciful God to order the discovery of these Crimes
to be manifested to those Persons, who are able and obliged to redress them.

Of the Province of CARTHAGENA.
THIS Province is distant Fifty Miles from the Isle of St. Martha Westward, and
situated on the Confines of the Country of Cenusia, from whence it extends One
Hundred Miles to the Bay of Vraba, and contains a very long Tract of Land
Southward. These Provinces from the Year 1498 to this present time were most
barbarously used, and made desert by Murder and Slaughter, but that I may the
sooner conclude this brief summary, I will not handle the particulars, to the
end I may the better give an Account of the detestable Villainies that ruined
other Regions.

Of the Pearl-Coast, PARIA, and TRINITY-ISLE.
THE Spaniards made great Spoils and Havoc from the Parian coast to the Bay of
Venecuola, exclusively, which is about Two Hundred Miles. It can hardly be
expressed by Tongue or Pen how many, and how great Injuries and Injustices, the
Inhabitants of this Seashore have endured from the year 1510, to this day. I
will only relate Two or Three Piacular and Criminal Acts of the First
Magnitude, capable of comprehending all other Enormities that deserve the
sharpest Torments, Wit and Malice can invent, and so make way for a deserved
Judgment upon them.

A Nameless Pirate in the Year 1510, accompanied with a parcel of Sixty or
Seventy, arrived at Trinity-Island, which exceeds Sicile, both in Amplitude and
Fertility, and is contiguous to the Continent on that side where it touches
upon Paria, whose Inhabitants, according to their Quality, are more addicted to
Probity and Virtue, than the rest of the Indians; who immediately published an
Edict, that all the Inhabitants should come and cohabit with them. The Indian
Lords and Subjects gave them a Debonair and Brotherly Reception, serving them
with wonderful Alacrity, furnishing them with daily Provisions in so plentiful
a manner, that they might have sufficed a more numerous Company; For it is the
Mode among Indians of this New World, to supply the Spaniards very bountifully
with all manner of Necessaries. A short time after the Spaniards built a
stately House, which was an Appartment for the Indians, that they might
accomplish their praemeditated Designs, which was thus effected. When they were
to thatch it, and had raised it two Men's height, they enclosed several of them
there, to expedite the Work, as they pretended, but in truth that they who were
within, might not see those without; thus part of them surrounded the House
with Sword in Hand that no one should stir out, and part of them entered it, and
bound the Indians, menacing them with Death, if they offered to move a Foot;
and if any one endeavored to escape, he was presently hackt in pieces; but
some of them partly wounded, and partly unwounded getting away, with others who
went not into the House, about One Hundred or Two Hundred, betook themselves to
another House with Bows and Arrows; and when they were all there, the Spaniards
secured the Doors, throwing in Fire at another place, and so they all perished.
From hence they set Sail to the Island of St. John with near upon One Hundred
and Eighty Slaves, whom they had bound, where they sold one half of them, and
thence to Hispaniola, where they disposed of the rest. Now when I taxed this
Captain with Wickedness and Treachery in the very Isle of St. John, he dismissed
me with this Answer; Forbear good Sir. I had this in commission from those who
sent me hither, that I should surprise them by the spetious pretense of Peace,
whom I could not sieze by open Force; and in truth this same Captain told me
with his own Mouth, that in Trinity-Isle alone, he had met with a Father and
Mother in Civil usage, which he uttered to his greater Confusion and the
aggravation of his Sins. The Monks of our Order of St. Dominic on a certain
time held a Consult about sending one of their Fraternity into this Island,
that by their Preaching they might instruct them in the Christian Faith, and
teach them the way to be saved, of which they were wholly Ignorant. And to this
end they sent thither a Religious and Licentiate in Theolgie, (or Doctor in
Divinity, as we term it among us) a Man Famous for his Virtue and Holiness with
a Laic his Associate, to visit the Country, converse with the Inhabitants, and
find out the most convenient places for the Erection of Monasteries. As soon as
they were arrived according to custom, they were entertained like Celestial
Messengers, with great Affection, Joy and Respect, as well as they could, for
they were ignorant of their Tongue, and so made use of signs, for the present.
It happened that after the departure of that Vessel that brought these Religious
Men, another came into the Port, whose Crew according to their Hellish Custom,
fraudulently, and unknown to the Religious brought away a Prince of that
Province as Captive, who was called Alsonsus, (for they are ambitious of a
Christian Name,) and forthwith desire without farther Information, that he
would Baptize him: But the said Lord Alphonsus was deceitfully overperswaded to
go on board of them with his Wife and about Seventeen more, pretending that
they would give him a Collation; which the Prince and they did, for he was
confident, that the Religious would by no means suffer him to be abused, for he
had no so much Confidence in the Spaniards; but as soon as they were upon Deck,
the perfidious Rogues, set Sail for Hispaniola, where they were sold as Slaves.
The whole Country being extremely discomposed, and understanding that their
Prince and Princess were violently carried away, addressed themselves to these
Religioso's, who were in great danger of losing their Lives: But they being
made to understand this unjust Action, were extraordinarily afflicted, and it is
probable would have suffered Death, rather than permit the Indians to be so
injuriously dealt with, which might prove an Obstruction to their receiving of,
and believing in God's Word. Yet the Indians were sedated by the promises of
the Religious; for they told them, they would send Letters by the first Ship
that was bound for Hispaniola, whereby they would procure the Restitution and
Return of their Lord and his Retinue. It pleased God to send a Ship thither
forthwith, to the greater confirming of the Governors Damnation, where in the
Letters they sent to the Religious of Hispaniola, Letters containing repeated
Exclamations and Protestations, and protest against such Actions, but those
that received them denied them Justice, for that they were partakers of that
Prey, made of those Indians so injustly and impiously captivated. But when the
Religious, who had engaged to the Inhabitants, that their Lord Alphonsus should
be restored within Four Months, and found that neither in Four, nor Eight
Months he was returned, they prepared themselves for Death, and to deliver up
their Life to Christ, to whom they had offered it before their departure from
Spain: Thus the Innocent Indians were revenged on the Innocent Priests; for
they were of Opinion, that the Religious had a hand in the Plot, partly,
because they found their Promises that their Lord should return within Four
Months, ineffectual, and partly because the Inhabitants make no difference
between a Religious Friar and a Spanish Rogue. At another time it fell out
likewise, through the Rampant Tyranny and Cruel Deeds of evil-minded
Christians, that the Indians put to Death two Dominican Friars, of which I am a
faithful Witness, escaping my self, not without a very great Miracle, which
Transaction I resolve silently to pass over, lest I should terrify the Reader
with the Horror of the Fact.

In these Provinces, there was a City seated on the Bay of Codera, whose Lord
was called Higueroto, a Name, either proper to Persons, or common to the Rulers
of that Place. A Cacic of such signal Clemency, and his Subjects of such noted
Virtue, that the Spaniards who came thither, were extraordinary welcome,
furnished with Provisions, enjoying Peace and Comfort, and no Refreshment
wanting: But a perfidious Wretch got many of them on board, and sold them to
the Islanders of St. John. At the same time I landed upon that Island, where I
obtained a sight of this Tyrant, and heard the Relation of his Actions. He
utterly destroyed that Land, which the rest of the Spaniards took very unkindly
at his Hands, who frequently played the Pirate, and robbed on that shore,
detesting it as a wicked thing, because they had lost that place, where they
use to be treated with as great Hospitality and Freedom, as if they had been
under their own Roof: Nay they transported from this place, among them, to the
Isles of Hispaniola and St. John Two Millions of Men and upward, and made the
Coast a Desert.

It is most certainly true, that they never ship off a Vessel freighted with
Indians, but they pay a third part as Tribute to the Sea, besides those who are
slaughtered, when found in their own Houses. Now the Soarce and Original of all
this is the ends they have proposed to themselves. For there is a necessity of
taking with them a great number of Indians, that they may gain a great sum of
Money by their Sale, now the Ships are very slenderly furnished with Provisions
and Water in small Quantity, to satisfy few, lest the Tyrants, who are termed
Owners or Proprietors of Ships should be at too great expense in Victualling
their Vessels, nay they scarce carry Food enough with them to maintain the
Spaniards that manage the Vessel, which is the reason so many Indians dye with
Hunger and Thirst, and of necessity they must be thrown overboard: Nay one of
them told me this for a Truth, that there being such a Multitude of Men thus
destroyed, a Ship may sail from the Isle of Lucaya to Hispaniola, which is a
Voyage of Twenty Leagues and upward, without Chart or Compass, by the sole
Direction on Observation of dead fluctuating Carcasses.

But afterward, when arrived, and driven up into the Isle whither they are
brought to be sold, there is no Person that is in some small measure
compassionate, but would be extremely moved and discomposed at the sight; viz.
to spy old Men and Women, together with Naked Children half starved. Then they
separate Parents from Children, Wives from their Husbands, about Ten or Twenty
in a Company, and cast lots for them, that the Detestable Owners of the Ships
may have their share; who prepare Two or Three Ships, and equip them as a Fleet
of Pirates, going ashore ravaging and forcing Men out of their Houses, and then
robbing them: But when the lot of any one of them falls upon a parcel, that
has an aged or diseased Man; the Tyrant, whose Allotment he is, usually bursts
out, as follows. Let this old Fellow be Damm'd, why do you bestow him upon
me; must I, think you, be at the charge of his Burial? And this sickly Wretch,
how comes he to be one of my allotted portion must I take care for his cure?
Not I. Hence you may guess what estimate and value the Spaniards put upon
Indians, and whether they practice and fulfill that Divine and Heavenly precept
injoyning mutual Love and Society.

There can be nothing more cruel and detestable then the Tyrannical usage of
the Spaniards toward Indians in their Pearl-Fishing; for the Torments
undergone in the unnatural Exenteration and tearing out with Paracidal hands
the richer bowels of our common Mother, or the inward cruciating racks of the
most profligate, Heaven daring Desperado can admit of no comparison with these,
although the extracting or digging for Gold is one of the sharpese subterranean
Drudgeries, they plunge them down four or five else deep under Water, where
swimming about without breathing, they eradicate and pull up Oisters, wherein
the Pearls are engendered. Sometimes they rise up to the superficies of the
Water with Nets full of Oisters for respiration and Air, but if these miserable
Creatures stay but a little more then is Ordinary to rest themselves the
Hangman is immediately upon them in a Canow or small Boat, who beating them
with many stripes drag them by the hair of the head under Water, that they may
drudge again at their expi^cation or Pearl Fishing. Their Food is Fish, and the
same which contains the Pearls and Cassabus made of Roots with a few Mahids,
the Bread of that Country; in the former there is little or no nutriment or
substance, and the other is not made without great trouble, nor for all this
have they a sufficient allowance thereof to support nature. Their Lodging or
Bed is the Earth confined to a pair of Stocks, for fear they should run away:
And it frequently happens that they are drowned with the toil of this kind of
Fishing and never more seen, for the Tuberoms and Maroxi (certain Marine
Monsters that devour a complete proportioned Man wholly at once) prey upon them
under Water. You must consider withal, that it is impossible for the strongest
constitution to continue long under Water without breathing, and they
ordinarily dye through the extreme rigor of the Cold, spitting Blood which is
occasioned by the too great compression of the Breast, procreated by a
continued holding breath under Water, for by too much cold a profluvium of
blood follows. Their hair naturally black is changed into a combust, burnt or
Sun-colour like that of the Sea Wolves, their shoulders and backs covered, or
overspread with a saltish humor that they appear rather like Monsters in humane
shape then Men.

They have destroyed all the Lucayans by this intolerable or rather Diabolical
exercise, for the accustomary emolument or gain of lucre, and by this means
gained to the value of fifty, sometime one hundred Crownsof every individual
Indian. They sell them (though it was prohibited) publicly; for the Lucayans
were excellent Swimmers, and several perished in this Isle that came from other
Provinces.

Of the River Yuya Pari.
THis River washes the Province arising from its head or fountain in another
Region, Two Hundred miles off and better, By this a wretched Tyrant entered it
and laid waste the Land for the space of many miles, and murdered abundance of
them by Fire and Sword, etc. At length he died violently, and all his Forces
moldred away of themselves, many succeeded him in his iniquity and cruelty and
(...) daily destroy them, sending to Hell the Souls redeemed by the blood of
the Son of God.

Of the Kingdom of Venecuela.
OUR Sovereign Lord the King in the Year 1526, over-perswaded by fallacious
appearances (for the Spaniards use to conceal from His Majesty's knowledge the
damages and detriments, which God himself, the Souls and state of the Indians
did suffer) entrusted the Kingdom of Venecuela longer and larger then the
Spanish Dominions, with its Government and absolute Jurisdiction to some German
Merchants, with power to make certain Capitulations and Conventions, who came
into this Kingdom with Three Hundred Men, and there found a benign mild and
peaceable people, as they were throughout the Indies till injured by the
Spaniards. These more cruel then the rest beyond comparison, behaved themselves
more inhumanely then rapacious Tygres Wolves and Lions, for they had the
jurisdiction of this Kingdom, and therefore possessing it with the greater
freedom from control; lay in wait and were the more vigilant with greater care
and avarice to understand the practical part of heaping up Wealth, and robbing
the Inhabitants of their Gold and Silver, surpassing all their Predecessors in
those indirect ways, rejecting wholly both the fear of their God and King, nay
forgetting that they were born men with reasonable Faculties.

These incarnate Devils laid waste and desolate Four Hundred miles of most
Fertile Land, containing vast and wonderful Provinces, most spacious and large
Valleys surrounded with Hills, forty Miles in length, and many Towns richly
abounding in Gold and Silver. They destroyed so many and such considerable
Regions, that there is not one supernumerary witness left to relate the Story,
unless perchance some that lurkt in the Caverns and Womb of the Earth to evade
death by their inhumane Swords embrew'd in Innocent Indian blood, escaped. I
judge that they by new invented and unusual Torments ruinated four or five
Millions of Souls and sent them all to Hell. I will give a taste of two or
three of their Transactions, that hereby you may guess at the rest.

They made the supreme Lord of the Province a Slave, to squeeze his Gold from
him, racking him to extort his confession who escaping fled into the Mountains,
their common Sanctuary, and his Subjects lying absconded in the Thickets of the
Woods, were stirred up to Sedition and Tumult or Mutiny. The Spaniards follow
and destroy many of them, but those that were taken alive and in their power
were all publicly sold for Slaves by the Common Crier.

They were in all Provinces they came into entertained and welcomed by the
Indians with Songs, Dances and Rich Presents but Rewarded very ungratefully
with bloodshed and Slaughter. The German Captain and Tyrant caused several of
them to be clapped into a Thatcht House, and there cut in pieces; but some of
them to avoid falling by their bloody and merciless Swords, climbed up to the
beams and Rafters of the House, and the Governor, hearing it (O cruel Brute?)
commanded Fire to be put to it and burnt them all alive, leaving the Region
desert and desolate.

They also came to another stately Province, bordering on St. Martha; whose
inhabitants did them many egregious and notable services, bestowing on them
innumerable quantities of Gold besides many other gifts, but when they were
upon departure, in retribution of their Civil Treating and Deportment the
German Tyrant, commanded that all the Indians, with their Wives and Children if
possible, should be taken into Custody: enclosed in some large capacious place,
and that there it should be signified unto them, whosoever desired to be set at
Liberty should redeem himself at the Will and Pleasure (as to price;) of the
unjust Governor, or at a certain rate imposed upon himself, his wife and every
Child's head; and to expedite the business prohibited the administration or
allowance of any food to them, till the Gold required for Redemption was paid
down to the utmost grain. Several of them sent home to discharge the demanded
price of their Redemption, and procured their Freedom, as well as they could by
one means or other, that so they might return to their Livelihood and
profession, but not long after he sent other Rogues and Robbers among them to
re-enslave those that were Redeemed.

To the same Gaol they are brought a second time, being instigated or rather
constrained to a speedy Redemption by hunger and thirst; Thus many of them were
twice or thrice taken, captived and Redeemed; but some who were not capable of
Depositing such a sum, perished there. Farthermore this Tyrant was big with an
itching desire after the discovery of the Perusian Mines, which he did
accomplish. Nay should I enumerate the particular Cruelties, Slaughters, etc.
committed by him though my discourse would not in the least be contrarint to
the Truth, yet it would not be believed and only stupifie and amaze the Reader.

This course the other Tyrants took who set sail from Venecuela and St. Martha
(with the same Resolution of detecting the Perusian Golden, Consecrated Houses
as them they esteemed) who found the fruitful Region so desolate, deserted, and
wasted by Fire and Sword, that those Cruel Tyrants themselves were smitten with
wonder and astonishment at the traces and ruins of such prodigious Devastations.

All these things and many more were proved by Witnesses in the Indian
Exchequer, and the Records of their Testimony were entered in that Court, though
these execrable Tyrants burnt many of them that there might be little or
nothing proved as a cause of those great Devastations and Evils perpetrated by
them. For the Minister of Justice who have hitherto lived in India, through
their obscure and damnable blindness, were not much sollicitous about the
punishment of the Crimes and Butcheries which have been and are still committed
by these Tyrants, only they may say possibly because such a one, and such a one
has wickedly and barbarously dealt with the Indians, that is the reason so
great a sum of Crowns in Money is diminished already or retrenched from His
Majesty's Annual Revenue, and this general and confused proof is sufficient (as
they worthily conceive) to purge or repress such great and heinous Crimes. And
though they are but few, are not verified as they ought to be, nor do they
attribute and lay upon them that stress and weight as they ought to do, for if
they did perform their Duty to God and the King; it could not be made apparent
as it may be, that these German Tyrants have cheated and robbed the King of
Three Millions of Gold and upward; and thus these Enemies to God and the King
began to depopulate these Regions and destroy them, cheating his Majesty of Two
Millions of Gold per Annum, nor can it be expected, that the Detriment done to
his Majesty can possibly be retrieved, as long as the Sun and Moon endures,
unless God by a Miracle should raise as many Thousands from Death to Life, as
have bin destroyed. And these are the Temporal Damages the King suffers. It
would be also a Work worthy the inquiry into, to consider how many cursed
Sacriledges and Indignities God himself has been affronted with to the
dishonor of his Name. And what Recompense can be made for the loss of so many
Souls as are now tormented in Hell by the Cruelty and Covetousness of these
Brutish German Tyrants. But I will conclude all their Impiety and Barbarism
with one Example, viz. That from the time they entered upon this Country to this
very day, that is, Seventeen Years, they have remitted many Ships fraighted
with Indians to be sold as Slaves to the Isles of St. Martha, Hispaniola,
Jamaica, and St. John, selling a Million of Persons at the least, I speak
modestly, and still do expose to Sale to this very Year of our Lord 1542, the
King's Council in this Island seeing and knowing it, yet what they find to be
manifest and apparent they connive at, permit and countenance, and wink at the
horrid Impieties and Devastations innumerable which are committed on the Coasts
of this Continent, extending Four Hundred Miles in Length, and continues still
together with Venecuela and St. Martha under their Jurisdiction, which they
might easily have remedied and timely prevented.

Of the Provinces of FLORIDA.
THree Tyrants at several times made their entrance into these Provinces since
the Year 1510, or 1511, to act those Crimes which others, and two of these
Three made it their sole business to do in other Regions, to the end, that they
might advance themselves to higher Dignities and Promotions than they could
deserve, by the Effusion of Blood and Destruction of these People; but at
length they all were cut off by a violent Death, and the Houses which they
formerly built and erected with the cement of Humane Blood, (which I can
sufficiently testify of these three) perished with them, and their memory
rotten, and as absolutely washed away from off the Face of the Earth, as if
they had never had a being. These Men deserted these Regions, leaving them in
great distraction and confusion, nor were they branded with less notes of
Infamy, by the certain Slaughters they perpetrated, though they were but few in
number than the rest. For the Just God cut them off before they did much
Mischief, and reserved the Castigation and Revenge of those Evils which I know,
and was an Eyewitness of, to this very Time and Place. As to the Fourth
Tyrant, who lately, that is, in the Year 1538, came hither well-furnished with
Men and Ammunition, we have received no account these Three Years last past;
but we are very confident, that he, at his first Arrival, acted like a bloody
Tyrant, even to ecstasy and madness, if he be still alive with his Followers,
and did injure, destroy, and consume a vast Number of Men (for he was branded
with infamous Cruelty above all those who with their Assistants committed
Crimes and Enormities of the first Magnitude in these Kingdoms and Provinces) I
conceive, God has punished him with the same Violent Death, as he did other
Tyrants: But because my Pen is wearied with relating such Execrable and
Sanguinary Deeds (not of Men but Beasts) I will trouble my self no longer with
the dismal and fatal Consequences thereof.

These People were found by them to be Wise, Grave, and well disposed, though
their usual Butcheries and Cruelties in oppressing them like Brutes, with heavy
Burdens, did rack their minds with great Terror and Anguish. At their Entry
into a certain Village, they were welcomed with great Joy and Exultation,
replenished them with Victuals, till they were all satisfied, yielding up to
them above Six Hundred Men to carry their Bag and Baggage, and like Grooms to
look after their Horses: The Spaniards departing thence, a Captain related to
the Superior Tyrant returned thither to rob this (no ways diffident or
mistrustful) People, and pierced their King through with a Lance, of which
Wound he dyed upon the Spot, and committed several other Cruelties into the
bargain. In another Neighboring Town, whose Inhabitants as they thought, were
more vigilant and watchful, having had the News of their horrid Acts and Deeds,
they barbarously murdered them all with their Lances and Swords, destroying
all, Young and Old, Great and Small, Lords and Subjects without exception.

The Chief Tyrant caused many Indians (above Two Hundred as it is noised abroad)
whom he summoned to appear before him out of another Town, or else, who came
voluntarily to pay their Respects to him, to have their Noses and Lips to the
very Beard, cut off; and thus in this grievous and wretched Condition, the
Blood gushing out of their Wounds, returned them back, to give an Infallible
Testimony of the Works and Miracles wrought by these Preachers and Ministers
baptized in the Catholic Faith.

Now let all Men judge what Affection and love they bear to Christianity; to
what purpose, or upon what account they believe there is a God, whom they
preach and boast of to be Good and Just, and that his Law which they profess
(and indeed only profess) to be pure and immaculate. The Mischiefs acted by
these profligate Wretches and Sons of Perdition were of the deepest die. At
last this Captain devoted to Perdition dyed impenitent, nor do we in the least
question, but that he is overwhelmed and buried in Darkness Infernal, unless
God according to his Infinite Mercy and boundless Clemency, not his own Merits,
(he being contaminated and poisoned with Execrable Deeds,) be pleased to
compassionate and have Mercy upon him.

Of the Plate-River, that is, the Silver-River.
SOme Captains since the Year 1502 or 1503 undertook Four or Five Voyages to
the River of Plate, which embraces within its own Arms great Kingdoms and
Provinces, and is peopled by rational and well-tempered Inhabitants. In the
general we are certified, that they were very injurious and bloody to them; but
they being far distant from those Indians, we frequently discourse of, we are
not able to give you a particular account of their Transactions. Yet beyond all
Controversy, they did, and still do go the same way to work, as others in
several Regions to this present time do, and have done; for they are the same,
(and many in number too) Spaniards who went thither, that were the wicked
Instruments of other Executions, and all of them aim at one and the same thing,
namely to grow Rich and Wealthy, which they can never be, unless they steer the
same Course which others have followed, and tread the same paths in Murdering,
Robbing and Destroying poor Indians.

After I had committed to Writing what I have prementioned, it was told me for
a great Truth, that they had laid waste in those Countries great Kingdoms and
Provinces, dealing Cruelly and Bloodily with these harmless People, at a horrid
rate, having a greater Opportunity and Convenience to be more Infamous and
Rigid to them, then others, they being very remote from Spain, living
inordinately, like Debauches, laying aside, and bidding farewell to all manner
of Justice, which is indeed a Stranger in all the American Regions, as is
manifest by what has been said already. But among the other Numerous Wicked
Acts following this is one that may be read in the Indian Courts. One of the
Governors commanded his Soldiers to go to a certain Village, and if they
denied them Provisions, to put all the Inhabitants to the Sword: By Virtue of
this Authority away they march, and because they would not yield to them above
Five Thousand Men as Enemies, fearing rather to be seen, then guilty of
Illiberality, were cut off by the Sword. Also a certain number of Men living in
Peace and Tranquillity proffered their services to him; who, as it fell out,
were called before the Governor, but deferring their appearance a little
longer than ordinary, that he might infix their minds with a remark of horrible
Tyranny, he commanded, they should be delivered up, as Prisoners to their
Mortal Indian Enemies, who begged with loud Clamours and a Deluge of Tears, that
they might be dispatched out of this World by their own Hands, rather than given
up as a prey to the Enemy; yet being resolute, they would not depart out of the
House wherein they were, so the Spaniards hackt them in pieces Limb by Limb,
who exclaimed and cried aloud, We came to visit and serve you peaceably and
quietly, and you Murder us; our Blood with which these Walls are moistened and
sprinkled will remain as an Everlasting Testimony of our Unjust Slaughter, and
your Barbarous Cruelty. And really this Piaculum or horrid Crime deserves a
Commemoration, or rather speak more properly, the Commiseration of all Persons.

Of the vast Kingdoms and spacious Provinces of PERUSIA.
A Notorious Tyrant in the Year 1531, entered the Kingdoms of Perusia with his
Accomplices, upon the same Account, and with the same pretenses, and beginning at
the same Rate as others did; he indeed being one of those who were exercised,
and highly concerned in the Slaughters and Cruelties committed on the Continent
ever since the Year 1510, he increased and heightened the Cruelties, Butcheries
and Rapine; destroying and laying waste (being a False-hearted Faithless
Person) the Towns and Villages, and Murdering the Inhabitants, which occasioned
all those Evils, that succeeded in those Regions afterward! Now to undertake
the Writing of a Narrative of them, and represent them lively and Naturally to
the Readers view, and perusal, is a work altogether impossible, but must lie
concealed and unknown until they shall more openly and clearly appear, and be
made visible to every Eye, at the day of Judgment. As for my part, if I should
presume to unravel, in some, measure the Deformity, Quality and Circumstances
of those Enormities, I must ingenuously confess I could by no means perform so
burthensom a Task, and render it complete and as it ought to be.

At his first admission into these parts, he had laid waste some Towns, and
robbed them of a great quantity of Gold, this he did in the Infancy of his
Tyrannical Attempts, when he arrived at Pugna a Neighboring Isle so called, he
had the Reception of an Angel; but about Six Months after, when the Spaniards
had spent all their Provisions, they discovered and opened the Indians Stores
and Granaries, which were laid up for the sustenance of themselves, Wives and
Children against a time of Death and Scarcity, brought them forth with Tears
and Weeping, to dispose of at pleasure: But they rewarded them with Slaughter,
Slavery and Depopulation as formerly.

Thence they betook themselves to the Isle Tumbala, situate on the firm Land,
where they put to Death all they met with. And because the People terrified
with their abominable Sins of Commission, fled from their Cruelty, they were
accused of Rebellion against the Spanish King, This Tyrant made use of this
Artifice, he commanded all that he took, or that had bestowed Gold, Silver and
other rich Gifts on him, still to load him with other Presents, till he found
they had exhausted their Treasures, and were grown naked and incapable of
affording him farther supplies, and then he declared them to be the Vassals and
Subjects of the King of Spain, ^^attening them, and proclaiming twice by sound
of Trumpet, that for the future he would not captivate or molest them any more,
looking upon it as lawful to rob, and terrify them with such Messages as he
had done, before he admitted them under the King's protection, as if from that
very time, he had never robbed, destroyed or oppressed them with Tyrannical Usage.

Not long after Atu^^ba the King and Supreme Emperor of all these Kingdoms,
leading a great Number of Naked Men, he himself being at the Head of them,
armed with ridiculous Weapons, and wholly ignorant of the goodness of the
Spaniards Bilbo-Blades, the Mortal Dartings of their Lances, and the Strength
of their Horse, whose Use and Service was to him altogether unknown, and never
so much as heard of before, and that the Spaniards were sufficiently weapon'd
to rob the Devils themselves of Gold, if they had any, came to the place where
they then were; saying, Where are these Spaniards? Let them appear, I will not
stir a foot from hence till they give me satisfaction for my Subjects whom they
have slain, my Towns they have reduced to Ashes, and my Riches they have stolen
from me. The Spaniards meet him, make a great Slaughter of his Men, and seize
on the Person of the King Himself, who was carried in a Chair or Sedan on Men's
Shoulders. There was a Treaty had about his Redemption, the King engaged to lay
down Four Millions of Crowns, as the purchase of his Freedom, but Fifteen were
paid down upon the Nail: They promise to set him at Liberty, but contrary to
all Faith and Truth according to their common Custom (for they always violated
their promises with the Indians) they falsely imposed this upon him, that his
People were got together in a Body by his Command; but the King made answer,
That throughout his Dominions, not so much as a Leaf upon a Tree durst move
without his Authority and Pleasure, and if any were assembled together, they
must of necessity believe that it was done without his Order, he being a
Captive, it being in their power to deprive him of his Life, if any such thing
should be ordered by him: Notwithstanding which, they entered into a
Consultation to have him burnt alive, and a little while after the Sentence was
agreed upon; but the Captain at the entreaty of some Persons commanded him
first to be strangled, and afterward thrown into the fire. The King
understanding the sentence of Death past upon him, said; Why do you burn me?
What Fact have I committed deserving Death? Did you not promise to set me free
for a Sum of Gold. And did I not give you a far larger quantity than I
promised? But if it is your pleasure so to do, send me to your King of Spain,
and thus using many words to the fame purpose, tending to the Confusion and
Detestation of the Spanish Injustice, he was burnt to Death. And here let us
take into serious Consideration the Right and Title they had to make this War,
the Captivity, Sentence, and Execution of this Prince, and the Conscience
wherewith these Tyrants have possessed themselves of vast Treasures, which they
have surreptitiously and fraudulently taken away from this King, and a great
many more of the Rulers of these Kingdoms. But as to the great number of their
Enormities committed by those who style themselves Christians in order to the
Extirpation of this People, I will here repeat some of them, which in the very
beginning were seen by a Franciscan, confirmed by his own Letters, and signed
with his Hand and Seal, sending some of them to the Perusian Provinces, and
others to the Kingdom of Castile: A Copy whereof I have in my Custody, Signed
with his Hand, as I said before; the Contents whereof follow.

I Friar Marcus de Xlicia, of the Franciscan Order, and Prefect of the whole
Fraternity residing in the Perusian Provinces, one of the first among the
Religious, who arrived with the Spaniards in these parts. I declare with
incontrovertible and undeniable Testimony, those Transactions, which I saw with
my own Eyes, and particularly such as relate to the usage of the Inhabitants of
this Region. In the first place I was an Eyewitness, and am certainly assured,
that these Perusians are a People, who transcend all other Indians in Meekness,
Clemency, and Love to Spaniards; and I have seen the Indians bestow very
liberally on them Gold, Silver, and Jewels, being very serviceable to them many
other ways. Nor did the Indians ever betake themselves to their Arms in an
Hostile manner, till by infinite Injuries and Cruelties they were compelled
thereunto: For on the contrary, they gave the Spaniards an amicable and
honorable Reception in all their Towns, and furnished them with Provisions,
and as many Male and Female Servants as they required.

I can also farther testify, that the Spaniards, without the least provocation
on their part, as soon as they entered upon these Territories, did burn at the
Stake their most Potent Cacic Ataliba, Prince of the whole Country, after they
had extorted from him above Two Millions of Gold, and possessed themselves of
his Province, without the least Opposition; and Cochilimaca, his Captain
General, who with other Rulers came peaceably into them, followed him by the
same fiery Trial and Death. As also some few days after, the Ruler of the
Province of Quitonia, who was burnt, without any Cause given, or Crime laid to
his Charge. They likewise put Schapera, Prince of the Canaries to the same
Death, and in like manner, burnt the Feet of Alvidis, the greatest of all the
Quitonian Lords, and rackt him with other Torments to Extract from him a
discovery of Ataliba's Treasure, whereof as appeared after, he was totally
ignorant. Thus they treated Cocopaganga, Governor of all the Provinces of
Quitonia, who being overcome with the Entreaties of Sebastian Bernalcarus, the
Governors Captain, went peaceably to pay them a Visit; but because he could
not give them as much Gold as they demanded, they burnt him with many other
Cacics and Chief Persons of Quality. And as I understand, did it with this evil
Intention, that they might not leave one surviving Lord or Peer in the whole
Country.

I also affirm that I saw with these Eyes of mine the Spaniards for no other
reason, but only to gratify their bloody mindedness, cut off the Hands, Noses,
and Ears, both of Indians and Indianesses, and that in so many places and
parts, that it would be too prolix and tedious to relate them. Nay, I have seen
the Spaniards let loose their Dogs upon the Indians to bair and tear them in
pieces, and such a Number of Villages burnt by them, as cannot well be
discovered: Farther this is a certain Truth, that they snatched Babes from the
Mothers Embraces, and taking hold of their Arms threw them away as far as they
would from them: (a pretty kind of barr-tossing Recreation.) They committed
many other Cruelties, which struck me with Terror at the very sight of them,
and would take up too much time in the Relation.

I likewise aver, That the Spaniards gathered together as many Indians as
filled Three Houses, to which, for no cause, (or a very inconsiderable one)
they set fire, and burnt every one of them: But a Presbyter, Ocana by Name,
chanced to snatch a little Boy out of the Fire, which being observed by a
Spaniard, he tore him out of his Arms, and threw him into the midst of the
Flames, where he was with the rest, soon burnt to Ashes, which Spaniard the
same day he committed that Fact, returning to his Quarters, dyed suddenly by
the way, and I advised them not to give him Christian Burial.

Farthermore I saw them send to several Cacics and Principal Indians, promising
them a protecting Passeport to travel peaceably and securely to them, who, no
sooner came, but they were burnt; Two of them before my Face, one at Andonia,
and the other at Tnmbala, nor could I with all my persuasions and preaching to
them prevail so far as to save them from the Fire. And this I do maintain
according to God and my own Conscience, as far as I could possibly learn, that
the Inhabitants of Perusia never promoted or raised any Commotion or Rebellion,
though as it is manifest to all Men, they were afflicted with Evil Dealings and
Cruel Torments: And they, not without Cause, the Spaniards breaking their Faith
and Word, betraying the Truth, and Tyrannically contrary to all Law and
Justice, destroying them and the whole Country, inflicting on them great
Injuries and Losses, were more ready to prepare themselves for Death, than
still to fall at once into such great and irrecoverable Miseries.

Nay I do declare, according to Information from the Indians themselves, that
there are to this day far greater Quantities of Gold kept hid and concealed
than ever were yet detected or brought to light, which by means of the Spanish
Injustice and Cruelty, they would not then, nor ever will discover so long as
they are so barbarously treated, but will rather chose to dye with the Herd.
Whereat the Lord God is highly offended and the King has very ill Offices done
him, for he is hereby defrauded of this Region, which was sufficiently able to
furnish all Castile with Necessaries, the Recovery whereof can never be
expected without great difficulty and vast expenses.

Thus far I have acquainted you with the very words of this Religious
Franciscan, ratified by the Bishop of Mexico, who testifies that the srid
Ftier Marc did affirm and maintain what is abovementioned.

Here is to be observed what this said Friar was an Eyewitness of; for he
traveled up in this Country Fifty or a Hundred Miles, for the space of Nine
or Ten Years, when as yet, few Spaniards had got footing there, but afterward,
at the noise of Gold to be had there in great plenty, Four or Five Thousand
came thither, who spread themselves through those Kingdoms and Provinces the
space of Five or Six Hundred Miles, which they made wholly desolate, committing
the same, or greater Cruelties than are before recited; for in reality they
destroyed from that time to these very days, above an Hundred Thousand poor
Souls more than he gives an Account of, and with less fear of God and the King,
nay, with less Mercy have they destroyed the greatest part of Mankind in these
Kingdoms, above Four Millions suffering by violent Death.

A few days after they darted to Death with Arrows made of Reeds a Puissant
Queen, the Wife of a Potentate, who still sways the Imperial Scepter of that
Kingdom, whom the Spaniards had a design to take, which instigated him to raise
a Rebellion, and he still continues a Rebel. They seized the Queen his Consort,
and contrary to all Law and Equity murdered her, as is said before, who was
then, as reported, big with Child, only for this Reason, that they might and
fresh Affliction and Grief to her Husband.

Of the New Kingdom of Granda.
MANY Tyrants there were, who set Sail from Venecuela, St. Martha, and
Carthagena, hastening to the Conquest of Perusia, Anno Dom. 1539. and they
accompanied with many more going farther from this Region, endeavored to
penetrate into the Heart of this Country, where they found about Three Hundred
Miles from Carthagena and St. Martha, many admirable Provinces and most
fruitful Land, furnished with an even-tempered or meek-spirited People, as they
are in other parts of India; very rich in Gold and those sorts of precious
Stones known by the name of Emralds: To which Province they gave the Name of
Granada, upon this Account, because the Tyrant who first arrived in these
Regions, was born in the Kingdom of Granada belonging to these parts; now they
that spoiled these Provinces with their rapine being wicked, cruel, infamous
Butchers, and delighting in the essusion of Humane Hood, having practically
experimented the piacular and grand Enormities perpetrated among the Indians;
and upon this account their Diabolical Actions are so great, so many in number,
and represented so grievously horrid by circumstantial aggravations, that they
exceed all the villainies committed by others, nay by themselves in other
Regions, I will only select and cull out a few out of so great a number, which
have been transacted by them within these three years, for my present purpose.

A certain Governor, because he that went to commit depredations and spoils in
the Kingdom of Granada, would not admit him, as a Companion in his Robberies
and Cruelties, set up an Inquisition, and produced proofs confirmed by great
evidence, whereby he palpably lays open, and proves the Slaughters and
Homicides he committed, and persists in to this very day, which were read in
the Indian Courts of Judicature, and are there now Recorded.

In this Inquisition the Witnesses depose, that when all these Kingdoms enjoyed
Peace and Tranquillity, the Indians served the Spaniards, and got their living
by constant day-labour in Tilling and Manuring the Ground, bringing them much
Gold, and many Gems, particularly Emeralds, and what other Commodities they
could, and possessed, their Cities and Dominions being divided among the
Spaniards, to procure which is the chiefest of their care and pains; and these
are the proper measures they take to obtain their proposed ends, to wit,
heaping and treasuring up of Gold and Riches.

Now when all the Indians were under their accustomed Tyranny: A certain
Tyrant, and Chief Commander, took the King and Lord of the whole Country, and
detained him Captive for six or seven months, demanding of him, without any
reason, store of Gold and Emeralds. The said King, whose name was Bogota,
through fear, promised him a House of Gold, hoping, in time, to escape out of
his clutches, who thus plagued him, and sent some Indians for Gold, who
frequently, and at several times, brought him a great quantity of Gold, and
many Jewels; but because the King did not, according to promise, bestow upon
him an Appartment made of pure Gold, he must therefore forfeit his Life. The
Tyrant commanded him to be brought to Trial before himself, and so they cite
and summon to a Trial the greatest King in the whole Region; and the Tyrant
pronounced this Sentence, that unless he did perform his Golden Promise he
should be exposed to severe Torments. They rackt him, poured boiling Soap into
his Bowels, chained his Legs to one post, and fastened his Neck to another, two
men holding his Hands, and so applied the scorching heat of the Fire to his
Feet; the Tyrant himself often casting his Eye upon him, and threatening him
with death, if he did not give him the promised Gold; and thus with these kind
of horrid torments, the said Lord was destroyed; which while they were doing,
God being willing to manifest how displeasing these Cruelties are to His Divine
Majesty, the whole City, that was the Stage on which they were acted, was
consumed by Fire; and the rest of the Captains following his example, destroyed
all the Lords of that Region by Fire and Faggot.

Once it fell out, that many Indians addressed themselves to the Spaniards with
all Humility and Simplicity, as they use to do, who thinking themselves safe
and secure, behold the Captain comes into the City, where they were to do their
work, and commands all these Indians, sleeping and taking their rest, after
Supper, being wearied with the heavy drudgery of the day, to be slain by the
Sword: And this stratagem he put in practice, to make a greater impression of
fear on all the minds of the Inhabitants; and another time a certain Captain
commanded the Spaniards to declare upon Oath, how many Cacics and Indians every
individual person had in his Family at home, who were presently lead to a
public place, and lost their Heads; so there perished, that bout, four or five
hundred Men. The Witnesses depose this of a particular Tyrant, that by beating,
cutting off the Hands and Noses of many Women as well as Men, and destroying
several persons in great numbers, he exercised horrid Cruelties.

Then one of the Captains sent this bloody Tyrant into the Province of Bogota,
to inquire who succeeded that Prince there, whom he so barbarously and
inhumanely Murdered, who traveling many miles in this Country, took as many
Indians as he could get, some of which, because they did not tell him who was
Successor of this Deceased Prince, had their Hands cut off, and others were
exposed to hunger-starved Currs, to be devoured by them, and thus many of them
perished miserably.

Another time about the fourth Watch, early in the morning he fell upon several
Cacics, Noblemen and other Indians, who looked upon themselves to be safe
enough, (for they had their faith and security given, that none of them should
receive any damage or injury) relying upon this, they left the Mountains their
lurking places, without any suspicion or fear, and returned to their Cities,
but he seized on them all, and commanding them to extend their hands on the
ground, cut them off with his own Sword, saying, that he punished them after
this manner, because they would not inform him what Lord it was, that succeeded
in that Kingdom.

The Inhabitants of one of these Provinces, perceiving that four or five of
their Governors were sent to the other World in a fiery Vehicle or Chariot,
being terrified therewith, took to the Mountains for Sanctuary, there being
four or five thousand in number, as appears by good Evidence; and the aforesaid
Captain sends a Tyrant, more cruel than any of the rest after them. The
Spaniards ascend the Mountain by force (for the Indians were naked and unarmed)
Proclaiming Peace, if they would desist and lay down their Arms, which the
Indians no sooner heard, but quitted their Childish Weapons; and this was no
sooner done but this Sanguinary Spaniard sent some to possess themselves of the
Fortifications, and they being secured, to attaque the Indians. Thus they, like
Wolves and Lions, did rush upon this flock of Sheep, and were so tired with
slaughter, that they were forced to desist for a while and take breath, which
done, the Captain commands them to fall to it again at the same bloody rate,
and precipitate all that survived the Butchery, from the top of the Mountain,
which was of a prodigious height; and that was performed accordingly. And the
Witnesses farther declare upon Oath, that they saw the bodies of about seven
hundred Indians falling from the Mount at one time, like a Cloud obscuring the
Air, who were all broken to pieces.

This very Tyrant came once to the City Cota, where he surprised abundance of
Men, together with fifteen or twenty Cacics of the highest rank and quality,
whom he cast to the Dogs to be torn Limb-meal in pieces, and cut off the Hands
of several Men and Women, which being run through with a pole, were exposed to
be viewed and gazed upon by the Indians, where you might see at once seventy
pair of hands, transfixed with Poles; nor is it to be forgotten, that he cut
off the Noses of many Women and Children.

The Witnesses farther depose, that the Cruelties and great Slaughters
committed in the aforesaid new Kingdom of Granada, by this Captain, and other
Tyrants, the Destroyers of Mankind, who accompany him, and have power still
given them by him to exercise the same, are such and so heinous, that if his
Majesty does not opportunely apply some remedy, for the redress and prevention
of such mischiess for the future, (since the Indians are daily slaughtered to
accumulate and enrich themselves with Gold, which the Inhabitants have been so
robbed of, that they are now grown bare, for what they had, they have disposed
to the Spaniards already) this Kingdom will soon decay and be made desolate,
and consequently the Land being destitute of Indians, who should manure it,
will lie fallow and incultivated.

And here is to be noted, how pestilential and inhumane the cruelty of these
Tyrants has been, and how violently exercised, when as in two or three years
space, they were all slain, and the Country wholly desolate and deserted, as
those that have been Eyewitnesses can testify; they having acted like
Merciless Men, not having the fear of God and the King before their Eyes, but
by the instigation of the Devil; so that it may well be said and affirmed, not
one Person will be left alive, unless his Majesty does retard, and put a stop
to the full career of their Cruelties, which I am very apt to believe, for I
have seen with these very eyes of mine, many Kingdom laid waste and depopulated
in a small time. There are other stately Provinces on the Confines of the New
Kingdom of Granada, as Popayan and Cali, together with three or four more above
five hundred miles in length, which they destroyed, in the same manner, as they
have done other places, and laid them absolutely waste by the prementioned
Slaughters, who were very Populous, and the Soil very Fruitful. They who came
among us from those Regions report, that nothing can be more deplorable or
worthy of pity and commiseration, then to behold such large and great Cities
totally ruinated, and intombed in their own Ashes, and that in a City adorned
with 1000 or 2000 Fabrics, there are hardly now to be seen 50 standing, the
rest being utterly demolished, or consumed and levelled to the ground by Fire
and in some parts Regions of 100 miles length, (containing spacious Cities) are
found absolutely destroyed and consumed by Fire.

Finally many great Tyrants who came out of the Perusian Kingdoms by the
Quuonians Traveled to the said new Kingdom of Granada and Popayan, and by
Carthagena and the Vrabae, they directed their course to Calisium, and several
other Tyrants of Carthagena assault Quito, who joined themselves in an entire
Body and wholly depopulated and laid waste that Region for the space of 600
miles and upward, with the loss of a prodigious number of poor Souls; nor as
yet do they treat the small remnant of so. great and innocent a people with
more humanity then formerly.

I desire therefore that the Readers who have or shall peruse these passages,
would please seriously to consider whether or no, such Barbarous, Cruel and
Inhumane Acts as these do not transcend and exceed all the impiety and tyranny,
which can enter into the thoughts or imagination of Man, and whether these
Spaniards deserve not the name of Devils. For which of these two things is more
eligible or desirable whether the Indians should be delivered up to the Devils
themselves to be tormented or the Spaniards? That is still a question.

Nor can I here omit one piece of Villainy, (whether it ought to be postpon'd or
come behind the cruelty of Brute Animals, that I leave to decision). The
Spaniards who are conversant among the Indians bred up cursed Curs, who are so
well instructed and taught that they at first sight, fly upon the Inhabitants
tearing them limb by limb, and so presently devour them. Now let all persons
whether Christians or not consider, if ever such a thing as this reached the
ears of any Man, they carry these Dogs with them as Companions where ever they
go, and kill the fettered Indians in multitudes like Hogs for their Food; thus
sharing with them in the Butchery. Nay they frequently call one to the other,
saying, lend me the fourth part of one of your Slaves to feed my Dogs, and when
I kill one, I will repay you, as if they had only borrowed a quarter of a Hog
or Sheep. Others, when they go a Hunting early in the morning, upon their
return, if you ask them what sport had you to day at the Game? They will
answer, enough, enough, for my Dogs have killed and worried 15 or 20 Indian
Vassals. Now all these things are plainly proved upon those Inquisitions and
Examinations made by one Tyrant against another. What I beseech you, can be
more horrid or barbarous?

But I will desist from Writing any longer at this time, till some Messenger
brings an account of greater and blacker Impieties (if greater can be
committed) or else till we come to behold them again, as we have done for the
space of forty two years with our own Eyes. I will only make this small
addition to what I have said that the Spaniards, from the beginning of their
first entrance upon America to this present day, were no more sollicitous of
promoting the Preaching of the Gospel of Christ to these Nations, then if they
had been Dogs or Beasts, but which is worst of all, they expressly prohibited
their addresses to the Religious, laying many heavy Impositions upon them,
daily afflicting and persecuting them, that they might not have so much time
and leisure at their own disposal, as to attend their Preaching and Divine
Service; for they looked upon that to be an impediment to their getting Gold,
and raking up riches which their Avarice stimulated them so boundlesly to
prosecute. Nor do they understand any more of a God, whether he be made of
Wood, Brass or Clay, then they did above an hundred years ago, New Spain only
exempted, which is a small part of America, and was visited and instructed by
the Religious. Thus they did formerly and still do perish without true Faith,
or the knowledge and benefit of our Religious Sacraments.

I Friar Bartholomeas de las Casas or Casaus of the Order of St. Dominick, who
through they mercy of God am Arrived at the Spanish Court, Cordially wishing
the expulsion of Hell or these Hellish Acts out of the Indies; fearing least
those Souls redeemed by the precious Blood of Christ, should perish eternally,
but heartily desiring that they may acknowledge their Creator and be saved; as
also for the care and compassion that I ever had for my Native Country
Castile, dreading least God should destroy it for the many sins committed by
the Natives her Children, against Faith, Honor and their Neighbors: I have at
length upon the request of some Persons of great Quality in this Court, who are
servently zealous of the Houour of God, and moved with pity at the Calamities
and Afflictions of their Neighbors (though I long since proposed it within my
self, and resolved to accomplish it, but could not, being distracted with the
avocations of multiplicity of constant Business and Employment, have leisure to
effect it) I say I have at length finished this Treatise and Summary at
Valencia, Deceinb. 8. An. Dom. 1542, when they were arrived at the Height, and
utmost Degree of executing Violences, Oppressions, Tyranny, Desolations,
Torments, and Calamities in all the aforesaid Regions, Inhabited by the
Spaniards (though they are more Cruel in some places than other) yet Mexico
with its Confines were more favorably treated than the rest of the Provinces.

And indeed no Man durst openly and publicly do any injury to the Inhabitants;
for there some Justice, (which is no where else in India) though very little is
done and practiced; yet they are grievously oppressed with intolerable Taxes. But
I do really believe, and am fully persuaded that our Sovereign Lord Charles the
Fifth, Emperor and King of Spain, our Lord and Prince, who begins to be
sensible of the Wickedness and Treacheries, which have been, and still are
committed against this Miserable Nation, and distressed Countries contrary to
the Will and Pleasure of God, as well as His Majesty's that he will in time,
(for hitherto the Truth has been concealed and kept from his Knowledge, with
as great Craft, as Fraud and Malice) totally extirpate and root up all these
Evils and Mischiefs, and apply such proper Medicines an may purge the Morbifick
and peccant Humors in the Body Politic of this New World, committed to his
Care and Government as a Lover and Promoter of Peace and Tranquillity. God
preserve and bless him with Renown and a happy Life in his Imperial State, and
prosper him in all his Attempts, that he may remedy the Distempers of the
Christian Church, and Crown him at last with Eternal Felicity, Amen.

After I had published this Treatise, certain Laws and Constitutions, enacted
by his Majesty then at Baraclona in the Month of December, An. Dom. 1542,
promulgated and published the Year ensuing in the City of Madera, whereby it is
provided, (as the present Necessities required) that a period be put to such
great Enomrities and Sins, as were committed against God and our Neighbors,
and tended to the utter Ruin and Perdition of this New World. These Laws were
published by his Majesty's Order, several Persons of highest Authority,
Counselors, Learned, and Conscientious Men, being assembled together for that
purpose, and many Debates made at Valedolid about this weighty Affair, at
lenght by the unanimous Consent and Advice of all those who had committed their
Opinions to Writing, they were made public who traced more closely therein the
Laws of Christ and Christianity, and were judged Persons pure, free from and
innocent of that stain and blemish of depriving the Indians of their Treasures
by Theft and Rapine, which Riches had contaminated and fullied the Hands, but
much more the Souls of those who were enslaved by those heaps of Wealth and
Covetousness, now this obstinate and hot pursuit after Wealth was the Original
of all those Evils committed without the least Remorse or Check of Conscience.

These Laws being thus promulgated, the Courtiers who promoted these Tyrants,
took care that several Copies should be transcribed, (though they were
extremely afflicted to see, that there was no farther hopes or means to promote
the former Depredations and Extortions by the Tyranny aforesaid) and sent them
to several Indian Provinces. They, who took upon them the Trouble and Care of
Extirpating, and Oppressing by different ways of Cruelty, as they never
observed by Method or. Order, but behaved themselves most inordinately and
irregularly, having perused these Diplomata or Constitutions, before the new
made Judges, appointed to put them in Execution, could Arrive or be Landed,
they by the assistance of those (as it is credibly rumored, nor is it repugnant
to truth) who hitherto favored their Criminal and Violent Actions, knowing
well that these Laws and Proclamations must necessarily take effect, began to
grow mutinous, and rebel, and when the Judges were Landed, who were to Execute
these Mandates, laying aside all manner of Love and Fear of God, were so
audacious as to contemn and set at naught all the ^^verence and Obedience due
to their King, and so became Traitors, demeaning themselves like Blood-Thirsty
Tyrants, costitute and void of all Humanity.

More particularly this appeared in the Perusian Kingdoms, where An. Dom. 1542,
they acted such Horrid and Stuendous Enormities, that the like were never known
or heard in America, or throughout the whole World before that time. Nor were
they only practiced upon the Indians, who were mostly destroyed, but upon
themselves also, God permitting them by his just Judgment to be their own
Executioners, and sheath their Swords in one another Bowels. In like manner
the other parts of this New World being moved by the Example of these Rebels,
refused to yield Obedience to those Laws. The rest pretending to petition his
Majesty turn Rebellious themselves; for they would not voluntarily resign those
Estates, Goods and Chattels they have already usurped, nor willingly manumit
those Indians, who were doomed to be their Slaves, during Life; and where they
restrained the Murdering Sword from doing Execution, they oppressed them
gradually with personal Vassalage, injust and intolerable Burdens; which his
Majesty could not possibly hitherto avert or hinder, because they are all
universally, as well those of high, as low degrees; some more, some less, some
publicly and openly, others clancularly and secretly, so naturally addicted to
Rob, Thieve and Steal; and thus under pretext of serving the King, they
dishonor God, and defraud his Imperial Majesty.

Here the Author having finished the matter of Fact in this Compendious
History, for Confirmation of what he has here written, quotes a tedious and
imperfect Epistle (as he styles it) beginning and ending abruptly and anonymous
withal, contanining the Cruelties committed by the Spaniards, the same in
effect as our Author has prementioned, now in regard that I judge such
reiterated Cruelties and repeated Barbarisms are Offensive to the Reader, he
having sailed already too long, and too far in an Ocean of Innocent Indian
Blood: I have omitted all but Two or Three Stories not taken notice of by the
Author. One of the Tyrants, (who followed the steps of John Ampudia, a
notorious Villain) gave way to a great Slaughter of Sheep the chief Food and
Support of the Spaniards as well as Indians, permitting them to kill Two or
Three Hundred at a time, only for their Brains, Fat, or Suet, whose Flesh was
then altogether useless, and not fit to be eaten; but many Indians, the
Spaniards Friends and Confederates followed them, desiring they might have the
hearts to feed upon, whereupon they butchered a great many of them, for this
only Reason, because they would not eat the other parts of the Body. Two of
their gang in the Province of Peru killed Twenty Five Sheep, who were sold among
the Spaniards for Twenty Five Crowns, merely to get the Fat and Brains out of
them: Thus by the frequent and extraordinary Slaughter of their Sheep above a
Hundred Thousand Head of Cattle were destroyed. And upon this Account the
Region was reduced to great penury and want, and at length perished with
Hunger. Nay the Province of Quito, which abounded with Corn beyond Expression,
by such proceedings as these, was brought to that Extremity that a Sextarie or
small Measure of Wheat was sold for Ten Crowns, and a Sheep at as dear a rate.

This Captain taking leave of Quito was followed by a poor Indianess with loud
Cries and Clamours, begging and beseeching him not to carry away her Husband;
for she had the charge of Three Children, and could not possibly supply them
with Victuals, but they must inevitably dye with hunger, and though the Captain
repulsed her with an angry brow at the first; yet she approacht him a second
time with repeated Cries, saying, that her Children must perish for want of
Food; but finding the Captain inexorable and altogether unmoved with her
Complaints, and her Husband not restored, through a piquant necessity wedded to
despair; she cut off the Heads of her Children with sharp Stones, and so
dispatched them into the other World.

Then he proceeded farther to another City, and sent some Spaniards that very
Night, to take the Indians of the City of Tulilicui, who next day brought with
them above a Hundred Persons; some of which (whom he looked upon to be able to
carry burdens) he reserved for his own and his Soldiers service, and others
were chained, and perished in their Fetters: But the little Infants he gave to
the Cacic of Tulilicui, abovesaid to be eaten up and devoured, whose skins are
stuffed with Ashes and hang up in his House to be seen at this very day. And in
the close of this Letter he shuts up all with these words, it is here very
remarkable and never to be forgotten, that this Tyrant (being not ignorant of
the Mischiefs and Enormities executed by him) boastingly said of himself, They
who shall travel in these Countries Fifty years hence, and hear the things
related of me, will have cause to say and declare, that never such a Tyrant as
I am marched through these Regions, and committed the like Enormities.

Now not to quit the Stage without one Comical Scene or Action whereon such
Cruelties have been lively personated, give me leave to acquaint you with a
Comical piece of Grammatical Learning in a Reverend Religioso of these parts,
sent thither to convert the West-Indian Pagans, which the Author mentions among
his Reasons and Replications, and all those I pass by as immaterial to our
purpose, many of them being repeated in the Narrative before.

The weight and burden of initiating the Indians into the Christian Faith lay
solely on the Spaniards at first; and therefore Joannes Colmenero in Sancta
Martha, a Fantastic, Ignorant, and Foppish Fellow, was under Examination before
us (and he had one of the most spacious Cities committed to his Charge as well
as the Care and Cure of the Souls of the Inhabitants) whether he understood how
to fortify himself with the sign of the Cross against the Wicked and Impious,
and being interrogated what he taught, and how he instructed the Indians, whose
Souls were instrusted to his Care and Conduct; he returned this Answer, That if
he damned them to the Devils and Furies of Holl, it was sufficient to retrieve
them, if he pronounced these Words, Per Signin Sanctin Cruces. A Fellow fitter
to be a Hogherd than a Shepherd of Souls.

This Deep, Bloody American Tragedy is now concluded, and my Pen choakt up with
Indian Blood and Gore: I have no more to say, but pronounce the Epilogue made
by the Author, and leave the Reader to judge whether it deserves a Plaudite.

The Spaniards first set Sail to America, not for the Honor of God, or as
Persons moved and incited thereunto by fervent Zeal to the True Faith, nor to
promote the Salvation of their Neighbors, nor to serve the King, as they
falsely boast and pretend to do, but in truth, only stimulated and goaded on by
insatiable Avarice and Ambition, that they might for ever Domineer, Command,
and Tyrannize over the West-Indians, whose Kingdoms they hoped to divide and
distribute among themselves. Which to deal heartily is no more nor less
intentionally, than by all these indirect ways to disappoint and expel the
Kings of Castile out of those Dominions and Territories, that they themselves
having Usurped the Supreme and Regal Empire, might first challenge it as their
Right, and men possess and enjoy it.

FINIS.

